THE CODE OF THE CITY OF LAKE CITY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2015 by Order of the Mayor and Council  Adopted May 11, 2015 
____________ 

CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Willie Oswalt 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dwight Ginn 
John Sowell 
Bobby Williams 
City Council 
____________ 
Joel Lanken 
City Manager 
____________ 
Steve Fincher 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Eric Beckman 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1994 Code, as updated through Ord. No. 2014-2, adopted April 14, 2014, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1994 Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Joel Lanken, City Manager, and Mr. Eric Beckman, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lake City, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lake City, Georgia. 2015. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2015-01 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the Code of Ordinances of Lake City, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and this Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Whereas, the governing authority of the City of Lake City, Georgia (the "City") are the Mayor and Council thereof; and 
Whereas, the City has determined that it is within the best interests of its citizenry to utilize the services of Municode to provide access to its Charter and Code of Ordinances; and 
Whereas, the City has determined that taking such action will benefit the general welfare of its citizenry; and 
Now therefore, be it and it is hereby ordained by the mayor and council of the City of Lake City, and by the authority thereof: 
Section 1. The Code entitled the "Code of Ordinances of Lake City, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 42, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. The adoption of provisions of the Code regarding zoning decisions complies with the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1. et seq. 
Section 3. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 14, 2014, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 4. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 5. (a) It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Council that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Ordinance are or were, upon their enactment, believed by the Mayor and Council to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, no section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is mutually dependent upon any other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance. 
(c)  In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Ordinance shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the Mayor and Council that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Ordinance and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Ordinance shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
Section 6. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 7. Ordinances adopted after April 14, 2014 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 8. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed. 
Section 9. This ordinance shall become effective on the date of its adoption unless otherwise expressly stated herein. 
Ordained this 11th day of May, 2015. 
CITY OF LAKE CITY, GEORGIA         ATTEST: 
Wille Oswalt                    Eric Beckman 
  Mayor                    City Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's Charter as adopted and set forth in 1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 794), page 4227. Section 7.15 of this Act repealed the former Charter, §§ 1—12, 13.1—13.12, and 14, which derived from 1951 Ga. Laws (Act No. 112), page 2351, as amended. Amendments to the Act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
The City of Lake City, in Clayton County, Georgia, is reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Lake City, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Editor's note— The City of Lake City was incorporated February 12, 1951. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the earliest effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Lake City, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(c)  The corporate boundaries of the city shall also include the following described property: 
[There have been numerous annexations to the boundaries of the City of Lake City since the enactment of Act 794. The documents pertaining to these annexations and the current map depicting these boundaries are available for public review in the office of the city clerk.] 
(1998 Ga. Laws (Act No. 794), page 4271) 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams or bodies of water within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this Charter; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city regulatory fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire districts and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire-fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage and refuse; disposal; fees and taxes; liens. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, solid waste, yard trimmings, recyclable materials, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of the same by others; to require use of city solid waste services; to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such materials; to levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services contemplated herein as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefitting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees, failure to pay constituting a lien against the applicable property; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges, taxes, and fees, including but not limited to the filing of liens against properties for which fees are not paid for services provided; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Penalties; jail sentences. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; to provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares or other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp, county jail, or municipal jail by agreement with the appropriate county or municipal officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(23)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(24)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(25)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public transportation, public housing, terminals, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to provide for urban redevelopment; to provide for public transportation; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(26)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(27)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(28)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(29)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(30)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(31)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(32)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of any intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(33)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(34)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(35)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(36)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(37)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to execute all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. The city council established in this Charter shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the city governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this Charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city immediately prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the city council for a period of time as provided in Code Section 45-2-1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1]; each shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter. 
(b)  Suspension. Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining may appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Holding other office; voting when personally interested. 
(a)  Except as authorized by law, no councilmember nor the mayor shall hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which that person was elected. 
(b)  The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that person shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.17. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the second Monday in January following a general election. The meeting shall be called to order by the presiding officer and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America." 
Sec. 2.18. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
Sec. 2.19. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.20. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Two councilmembers plus the mayor or other presiding officer shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers present and voting shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Sec. 2.21. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. The enacting clause shall be in substantially the following form: "Be it and it is hereby ordained by the mayor and council of the City of Lake City, and by the authority thereof …" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2.22. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.23. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 2.24. - Codes of technical regulations. 
The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.21 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to Section 2.25 of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.25. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Lake City, Georgia." 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 2.26. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and shall serve for a term of four years and until the mayor's successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city immediately preceding the mayor's election for a period of time as provided in Code Section 45-2-1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1]. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of the mayor's service. The mayor shall forfeit the office of mayor on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
Sec. 2.27. - Powers and duties of mayor and city council. 
(a)  The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all approved ordinances, resolutions and other instruments approved by the city council; 
(5)  Set the agenda for meetings of the city council after receiving input from members of the city council, the city manager, and the public; provided, however, that an additional item shall be added to the agenda upon the written request of any member of the city council; 
(6)  Vote on matters before the city council and be counted toward a quorum as any other councilmember; 
(7)  Sign all orders, checks, and warrants for payment of money within a level of authorization as established by the city council; 
(8)  Execute all contracts, deeds, and other obligations of the city within a level of authorization as established by the city council; 
(9)  Serve in a part-time capacity and be compensated as provided by law; and 
(10)  Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties and exercise any other powers required by state or federal law or authorized by a duly adopted ordinance that is not in conflict with this Charter. 
(b)  The mayor and city council shall make all appointments of city officer as provided by this Charter. 
(d)  The mayor shall have all of the powers specifically granted to the mayor elsewhere in this Charter regardless of whether such powers are enumerated in this Section 2.27. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 2.28. - Mayor pro tempore. 
By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 2.29. - City manager; appointment; qualifications. 
(a)  The city council may appoint a city manager to serve at its pleasure for an indefinite term, or a term as set by contract, and shall fix the city manager's compensation. A city manager so appointed shall perform such duties provided by this Charter and as assigned by the mayor and city council. The city manager shall be appointed without regard to political beliefs and solely on the basis of his or her education and experience in the accepted competencies and practices of local government management. 
(b)  The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the government of the city. The city manager must devote all of his or her working time and attention to the affairs of the city and shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the city over which said officer has jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 2, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 2.30. - City manager; powers and duties enumerated. 
If appointed, the city manager shall have the power, and it shall be his or her duty to: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(2)  Appoint and employ all necessary employees of the city, provided that the power of this appointment shall not include directors and officers who, by this Charter, are appointed by the mayor and the city council; 
(3)  Remove employees appointed and employed under subsection 2.30(2) without the consent of the city council and without assigning any reason therefor; 
(4)  Exercise supervision and control of all departments and all divisions created in this Charter or that may hereafter be created by the city council except as otherwise provided in this Charter; 
(5)  Attend all meetings of the city council, without a right to vote, but with a right to take part in the discussions as seen fit by the chair; provided, however, that regardless of the decision of the meeting chair, the city manager may take part in any discussion and report on any matter requested and approved by city council at such meeting. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings; 
(6)  Recommend to the city council, after prior review and comment by the mayor, for adoption such measures as the city manager may deem necessary or expedient; 
(7)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the same to the attention of the city attorney, whose duty it shall be forthwith to take such steps as are necessary to protect and enforce the same; 
(8)  Make and execute all lawful contracts on behalf of the city as to matters within the city manager's level of authorization as established by the city council to the extent that such contracts are funded in the city's budget, except such as may be otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that no contract purchase or obligation requiring a budget amendment shall be valid and binding until after approval of the city council and the city attorney; 
(9)  Sign all orders, checks and warrants for payment of money within the city manager's level of authorization as established by the city council to the extent that such orders, checks and warrants are funded in the city's budget, except as may be otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that no such order, check, or warrant requiring a budget amendment shall be valid and binding until after approval of the city council; 
(10)  Act as budget officer to prepare and submit to the city council, after review and comment by the mayor, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the amounts allotted to each department of the city government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures; 
(11)  Keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(12)  Make a full written report to the city council at the beginning of each quarter of the fiscal year showing the operations and expenditures of each department of the city government for the preceding month, and a synopsis of such reports shall be published by the city clerk; 
(13)  Fix all salaries and compensation of city employees, except those appointed by mayor and city council, in accordance with the city budget and the city pay and classification plan; 
(14)  To transfer appropriations within a department; and 
(15)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 3, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 2.31. - City council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.15 of this Charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction or supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 3, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 2.32. - City manager removal. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by contract with the city manager: 
(1)  The city manager may be removed immediately and without cause by a majority vote of the mayor and city council with a 90 day severance to be paid to the city manager on a regular compensation schedule after the official date of removal; 
(2)  The mayor and city council may remove the city manager from office for cause in accordance with the following procedures: 
(i)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of the majority of all its members a preliminary resolution removing the city manager and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; 
(ii)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, he or she may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a city council meeting not earlier than 15 days nor later than 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the city council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(iii)  The city council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of a majority of its members, but no less than three, at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the city manager, if he or she has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he or she has requested one. 
(iv)  The city manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of his or her removal. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall not be subject to review by any court or agency. 
(b)  If the city manager is suspended or removed in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, or becomes disabled or is unable to carry out the duties of the office or if the city manager dies, the acting city manager shall perform the duties of the city manager until the city manager's disability is removed or until the city manager is replaced. Removal of the city manager because of disability shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 3, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 2.33. - Acting city manager. 
(a)  The mayor and city council may appoint any person to exercise all powers, duties, functions of the city manager during the city manager's suspension under Section 2.32, temporary absence from the city, or during the city manager's disability. 
(b)  In the event of a vacancy in the office of city manager, the city council may designate a person as acting city manager, who shall exercise all powers, duties, and functions of the city manager until a city manager is appointed. If such acting city manager is not appointed by council, the mayor shall have the power of the city manager as provided by this Charter and the City Code until a city manager is appointed by city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 3, 6-11-2018) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager if a manager is appointed or to the mayor in the absence of any manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(e)  All directors shall be appointed and removed by the city council. The city manager if a manager is appointed, or the mayor in the absence of any manager, may suspend or remove directors under his or her supervision for a period not to exceed ten days; provided, however, that the city council may override the city manager's or mayor's action by a vote of three councilmembers. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 5, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this Charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of the city attorney by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal; maintain city council's records required by this Charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. The city manager, if one is appointed, may concurrently serve as city clerk at the discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 5, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 3.14. - City treasurer. 
The city council shall appoint a city treasurer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes by the city. The city treasurer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. The city manager, if one is appointed, or the city clerk may concurrently serve as city treasurer at the discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 5, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 3.15. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager or, in the absence of any administrator, the mayor, shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 5, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 3.16. - Personnel policies. 
The mayor and city council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be affected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all employees of the city, whether appointed by mayor and council or city manager shall be subject to removal, with or without cause, at any time by the appointing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 4, 6-11-2018) 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Lake City. 
Sec. 4.11. - Municipal judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or acting judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she has met all requirements imposed by state law. 
(c)  All judges shall be appointed by mayor and city council pursuant to the method of selection established by ordinance. 
(d)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance or resolution of mayor and city council. 
(e)  The appointment of any judge to the municipal court shall be of a term of no less than one (1) year. The length of such term shall be established by ordinance, resolution, or written agreement between the judge, and the mayor and/or city council. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the duration of the term of the judge, he or she may be removed from office. Such removal shall occur as authorized by state law. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the duration of the term of the judge, unless he or she is removed from office or he or she has resigned, he or she shall serve until mayor and city council appoint a successor. 
(h)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.19 of this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 6-12-2017) 
State Law reference— Qualifications of municipal court judges, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1.1; terms of municipal judges, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing, as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operations and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served and executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state with respect to offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Clayton County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
The judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the judge may adopt in part or into the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with [state law]. 
Sec. 5.11. - Election of the city council (and mayor). 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election [at a time and date pursuant to state law]. 
(b)  There shall be elected two councilmembers at one election and at every other election thereafter. The remaining city council seats and the office of mayor shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created as provided for in the initial election held under this Charter pursuant to Section 7.12. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designation. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by plurality vote. 
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
State Law reference— Municipal charter provision existing or amended subsequent to September 1, 1968, providing for public office candidate nomination or election by plurality of votes cast shall prevail over majority vote requirement of other state law, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-501(b). 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with [state law]. 
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under [state law]. 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  A councilmember, the mayor, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating any express prohibition of this Charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of any officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of three councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Clayton County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Clayton County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Lake City. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling in this city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling in this city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges and taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and taxes for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this chapter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.23. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council may provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.24. - Operating budget. 
The city manager, or in the absence of any administrator, the mayor, is designated as budget officer of the city. On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the budget officer shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the budget officer containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the budget officer may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 5, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 6.25. - Adoption. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the budget officer, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council shall by ordinance adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than last day of the then current fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.26. - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.27. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.28. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  The budget officer may submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with his or her recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section [2.23] of this Charter. 
(b)  Where a capital improvements budget is adopted by the city council for the ensuing fiscal year, no appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the budget officer may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by the budget officer's recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.29. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.30. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city for an amount exceeding $2,500.00 shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section [2.19] of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.31. - Purchasing. 
The city council may by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.32. - Sale of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager or mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 5, 6-11-2018) 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - First election under this Charter. 
Those persons serving as mayor and councilmembers on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter shall serve out the remainder of their respective terms of office and until respective successors are elected and qualified. The first municipal election shall be on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1997, at which successors to councilmembers whose terms expire December 31, 1997, shall be elected for an initial term of four years and until respective successors are elected and qualified such that a continuing body is created. Successors to the mayor and councilmembers whose terms expire December 31, 1999, shall be elected in the municipal general election held in 1999 for an initial term of four years and until respective successors are elected and qualified. Each mayor and councilmember elected thereafter shall serve a full term as provided in Section 2.11 of this Charter. 
Sec. 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.14. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.15. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Lake City in the County of Clayton, approved February 12, 1951 (Ga. L. 1951, p. 2351), as amended, is repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 7.16. - Submission for approval. 
It shall be the duty of the governing authority of the City of Lake City to require the attorney therefor to submit this Act for approval pursuant to Section 5 of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended. 
Sec. 7.17. - Effective date. 
This section and Section 7.16 of this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. The remaining sections of this Act shall become effective July 1, 1996. 
Sec. 7.18. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Charter of those ordinances which are included herein. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Lake City, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Lake City Code" or the "city Code." 
(Code 1972, § 1-1; Code 1994, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the rules of construction as contained in O.C.G.A. §§ 1-3-1 and 1-3-3 shall prevail, except that the following shall take precedence if in conflict with O.C.G.A. §§ 1-3-1 and 1-3-3: 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the term "of Lake City" followed the term "city" and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
City clerk. The term "city clerk" means the city clerk of the City of Lake City. 
Code. The term "Code" means "The Code of the City of Lake City, Georgia," or the "Lake City Code." 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time, except hours, is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the person having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday provided for in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the person having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases the terms "or" and "and" are interchangeable: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Clayton in the State of Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a section appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize him to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act, unless the terms of the section designate otherwise. 
Employee. The term "employee" means an employee of the city. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the mayor and city council of the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All terms giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the City of Lake City. 
Mayor and council. The term "mayor and council" means the mayor and council of the City of Lake City. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials and officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only (i.e., "city clerk," "chief of police," etc.), the reference shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the City of Lake City. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way. 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1972, § 1-2; Code 1994, § 1-2; Ord. No. 05-01, § 1, 6-13-2005) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and reference notes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1972, § 1-3; Code 1994, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(c)  An ordinance which is in conflict in its entirety with a subsequent ordinance shall be deemed to be repealed in its entirety, even if no specific repealer is stated. If an ordinance is only partially in conflict with a subsequent ordinance, only the portion of the previous ordinance in conflict with the subsequent ordinance shall be deemed to have been repealed, even if a specific repealer is not stated. 
(Code 1972, § 1-4; Code 1994, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are or were, upon their enactment, believed by the mayor and council to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, no section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is mutually dependent upon any other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code. 
(c)  In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the mayor and council that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
(Code 1972, § 1-5; Code 1994, § 1-5; Ord. No. 00-06, § 1, 9-11-2000) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. If chapters, sections or subsections or any parts thereof are repealed by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Amendments to any section of this Code shall be made by amending such section by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of the City of Lake City, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, language substantially similar to the following shall be used: "That The Code of the City of Lake City, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, article or chapter shall then be set out in full. 
(Code 1972, § 1-6; Code 1994, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1972, § 1-7; Code 1994, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
(a)  In this section the phrase "violation of this Code" or "violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section the phrase "violation of this Code" or "violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Unless a higher penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city or county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Violations of this Code may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(e)  The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the city's Charter or this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 1-8; Code 1994, § 1-8; Ord. of 9-28-1972) 
State Law reference— Maximum sentences and fines which may be imposed for violation of municipal ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-9. - Right of entry. 
Whenever any officer or employee is required or authorized by any state law, any section of this Code or any ordinance or resolution or rule or order issued thereunder to enter any premises or vehicle for the purpose of making an inspection of the premises or vehicle or of anything contained in the premises or vehicle for the purpose of carrying out his duties, such officer or employee shall have the right to enter any such premises or vehicle at any reasonable time in pursuance of such duties, provided that such entry and inspection shall be made in a lawful manner. 
(Code 1972, § 1-8; Code 1994, § 1-9; Ord. of 9-28-1972) 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances or resolutions existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or section thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Rates, charges, and fees established. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city pursuant to the regulations or requirements established in this Code may be changed from time to time by the mayor and council, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the mayor and council by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
Sec. 1-13. - Miscellaneous ordinances, resolutions and actions not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract, established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council to any person. 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city. 
(5)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(6)  Ordinances prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, bus stops, taxi stands, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones, consistent with this Code. 
(7)  Any specific rezoning ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless superseded. 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures. 
(14)  Any right of franchise granted by the city to any person, firm, or corporation. 
(15)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(16)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(17)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city or annexing property to the city. 
(18)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(19)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision. 
(20)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)  Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances, resolutions and actions are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1994, § 1-10; Ord. of 6-8-1972, § 3) 
Sec. 1-14. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-15. - Default time limit. 
Whenever this Code provides for the performance of any official act or decision by any person or entity, but fails specifically to provide a time limit for performance of the official act or the rendering of the decision, the act shall be performed or the decision rendered within 30 days of the event rendering the performance of the act necessary or possible. If the final day for performance of the act or rendering of the decision falls on a weekend or a legal holiday on which the government offices of the city are closed, then the final day shall be extended to the next weekday on which the government offices of the city are open. 
(Ord. No. 00-05, § 1, 9-11-2000) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Books and records. 
All books and records of the city of every nature shall be kept at the city hall. The original of any book or record shall not be removed from city hall without the permission of the mayor or upon response to a court directive or subpoena. The city clerk shall be the official custodian of the city records, and every citizen shall have the right to inspect and copy city records. If the city is requested to provide copies, the city clerk shall furnish the copies for a fee of $1.00 per page. 
(Code 1972, § 2-13; Code 1994, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Ordinances and resolutions. 
All ordinances and resolutions shall be approved as to form by the city attorney, shall be signed by the mayor or, in the absence of the mayor, by the mayor pro tem and shall be attested by the city clerk. The clerk shall affix the seal of the city. The original of every ordinance and resolution shall be inserted into official books maintained for this purpose by the city clerk. 
(Code 1972, § 2-16; Code 1994, § 2-2) 
Secs. 2-3—2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-23. - Signatures on city checks. 
All checks written by and for the city shall contain two authorized signatures. 
(Code 1994, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-24. - Contracts. 
All contracts entered into by the city shall be in writing and reviewed by the city attorney. If within the spending authority of the city manager, they may be signed by the city manager. Anything outside the spending authority of the city manager, or contracts otherwise required to be approved by mayor and city council by the City Charter or applicable state law, shall be signed by the mayor or, in the absence of the mayor, by the mayor pro tem. The city shall have an executed copy of each contract, and the copy shall be inserted into an official book maintained for this purpose by the city clerk. 
(Code 1972, § 2-17; Code 1994, § 2-27; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 2-25—2-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-52. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To conduct city business in such an open manner that potential vendors will recognize the fairness of the system and thus be encouraged to compete which will ensure that the city will secure the best product at the lowest price at all times. 
(2)  To encourage competitive purchasing. 
(3)  To develop and maintain an adequate supply of materials, services and supplies as required. 
(4)  To give due consideration to ethical and quality standards and also to real value rather than price alone. 
(5)  To establish and build good relations with suppliers and departments. 
(6)  To purchase the highest quality in supplies, equipment and contractual services at the least expense. 
(Res. No. 98-01, exh. A, § I, 2-9-1998) 
Sec. 2-53. - Purchasing agent—Selection. 
The purchasing agent shall be selected by the city manager and shall be under the direct supervision of the finance department. 
(Res. No. 98-01, exh. A, § II, 2-9-1998; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 2-54. - Same—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The powers and duties of the purchasing agent shall be as follows: 
(1)  Observe and enforce the procedures outlined in this division. 
(2)  Procure for the city the highest quality in supplies and services at the least expense. 
(3)  Supervise and be held responsible for a decentralized purchasing system, where the purchasing agent and department heads have purchasing authority. 
(4)  Encourage competitive bidding at all possible times. 
(5)  Explore the possibilities of buying in bulk to take full advantage of discounts. 
(6)  Adopt as standards the minimum number of qualities, sizes and varieties of supplies consistent with the successful operation of the city. 
(7)  Prepare written specifications for supplies, equipment and services as required. Specifications shall be developed with information available through governmental and private sources and in cooperation with city departments. 
(8)  Prescribe and maintain such forms as necessary for the operation of the office of purchasing agent. 
(9)  Maintain such files as are necessary to the operation of the office of purchasing agent in an organized manner. 
(10)  Obtain all federal and state tax exemptions to which the city is entitled. 
(11)  Investigate and report any possibilities of collusion. 
(12)  Join with other governmental agencies in cooperative purchasing when it is for the best interest of the city. 
(13)  Keep abreast of current developments in the field of purchasing. 
(14)  Advise and assist in formulation of policies concerning purchasing. 
(15)  Be responsible for the disposal of city property declared surplus by the mayor and council. No city employee shall dispose of city property by trade in or otherwise without first consulting with the purchasing agent. Departments having property that is no longer needed should submit a description of such to purchasing. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Res. No. 98-01, exh. A, § III, 2-9-1998; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 2-55. - Functions of the departments. 
(a)  Departments should plan their work so that rush orders and emergencies will be held to a minimum. Requests should be forwarded to the office of purchasing agent far enough in advance to allow sufficient time for delivery. 
(b)  Departments should assist the office of purchasing agent by suggesting the names of vendors that have access to particular items being requested, especially items of a technical nature. However, the office of purchasing agent is in no way confined to the vendors suggested. The office of purchasing agent maintains a list of vendors and any responsible firm may be added to that list upon application by telephone or mail. 
(c)  The city is not obligated to purchase equipment or accessories that are delivered for use on a trial basis. 
(d)  No department has the authority to order directly from a vendor or negotiate purchases in excess of $500.00. 
(e)  No city employee shall purchase supplies, material or equipment of any kind for personal use. 
(f)  Department heads will be called upon to assist in writing specifications for bids. Specifications should not be written which are considered "closed" (written around one specific brand). Brand names, model numbers, etc., may be submitted as a guideline for bid and purchase specifications. Bids for equivalent substitute goods and services will be solicited. 
(Res. No. 98-01, exh. A, § IV, 2-9-1998) 
Sec. 2-56. - Purchasing principles. 
(a)  Generally. The following principles are to apply to the procurement of materials, services and supplies: 
(1)  Materials, services and supplies are to be purchased only when moneys for their cost have been appropriated in the annual budget for the city. 
(2)  Materials, supplies and equipment should be purchased through the state department of administrative services (DOAS) or under state contract when available. 
(3)  Materials, services and supplies not available through DOAS or under state contract are to be purchased according to the procedures in section 2-55. 
(4)  All other considerations being equal, bids shall be awarded on price, service and delivery. Bid items must meet specifications in all cases to qualify. The city has the right to accept or reject all bids. 
(5)  Whenever possible, long-term contracts or blanket purchase agreements should be obtained for supplying commodities such as gasoline or other items for which monthly or periodic requirements can be forecast. The office of purchasing agent shall make monthly checks to ensure that the party under contract is not escalating his delivery price beyond current market. 
(6)  Low bid quotation submitted in compliance with the specifications should be accepted unless rejected by a change in the requirements of the city or for other valid stated reasons and approved by mayor and council. Whenever this occurs the reason should be filed with bids. 
(7)  Request for quotation as well as sealed bids should have a set time, date and location given by the office of purchasing agent when tabulation of bids will be made and this shall be done at the time and date specified. 
(8)  Emergency purchases are the result of breakdown in equipment or other occurrences for which it is impossible to plan in advance. If the occasion arises during the hours of normal operation contact the purchasing agent and he may make the purchase or authorize the department head to do so. If an emergency arises after hours the department head will make the purchase and contact the purchasing agent the next working day and immediately send a memorandum explaining the emergency. 
(9)  Emergency purchases should apply to guidelines of section 2-55. 
(b)  Exceptions. These items are to be handled directly by the finance department: 
(1)  Travel expense reimbursement. 
(2)  Conference or schooling enrollment fees. 
(3)  Dues and memberships. 
(4)  Personal reimbursement of any nature. 
(5)  Petty cash. 
(Res. No. 98-01, exh. A, § V, 2-9-1998) 
Sec. 2-57. - Purchasing procedures. 
(a)  Authorized means of purchase. Purchases may be made either from state contracts administered by the state department of administrative services or through direct negotiation. 
(b)  Purchase methods. The purchasing procedures to be followed by the city are based on the dollar amount of the purchase and are as follows. These procedures apply on a per-item basis and purchases will not be divided or separated to avoid obtaining proper approval for purchasing. 
(1)  For purchases up to $500.00 and budgeted: direct purchase by the department head. 
(2)  For purchases $500.00 up to $5,000.00 and budgeted: quotations taken by the department head and submitted to the purchasing agent. 
(3)  For purchases $5,000.00 up to $10,000.00 and budgeted: written quotations taken by the department head and submitted to the purchasing agent. The purchasing agent and the department head make a recommendation to the city manager, who makes the decision on the vendor. The results of any written quotations and award are to be recorded and filed. 
(4)  For purchases above $10,000.00 and budgeted: requires solicitation of advertised formal sealed bids by the office of the purchasing agent. The purchasing agent and the department head make recommendation to the mayor and council. The mayor and council award the contract for purchase. The results of bids and award are to be recorded and filed. 
(5)  For budgeted vehicles: direct purchase from state contract, by department heads with purchasing agent and city manager approval. 
(6)  For non-budgeted items: 
a.  Five hundred dollars or less. Purchase by purchasing agent or department head (with purchasing agent approval). 
b.  Greater than $500.00. Budget amendment required. 
(c)  Purchase orders. All purchases and requests for purchase shall be memorialized and consummated through the use of purchase orders. 
(1)  Purchase orders shall be sequentially numbered and issued and accounted for by the purchasing agent. 
(2)  The purchase order is the vendor's authorization to invoice and ship the material specified. It is also designed to expedite and control buying for the city. 
(3)  Routing of the purchase order. The purchase order set contains the original and two copies. 
a.  White copy or original copy (marked vendor) is mailed or given directly to the vendor. 
b.  Pink copy (file) is retained in the office of purchasing agent to be encumbered until all items listed are received. The invoice is attached to the purchase order to be entered through accounts payable for payment. In case of back-ordered items a copy of the purchase order shall be made as needed after each invoice has been attached until all items are received. 
c.  Yellow copy (departmental) is for the ordering department for their records. 
It is imperative that the receiving department submits to the purchasing office a signed document that goods or services have been received; otherwise no payment will be made to the vendor. A signed document may be a packing slip or delivery ticket sent by the vendor or, if none is sent, the receiving department may simply list goods or services received or make a copy of the purchase order and note that all goods have been received. In all cases documents must be signed by the person receiving goods or services and the department head. In case of damaged goods, unsatisfactory service or the item was not what was ordered, the receiving department must notify the office of the purchasing agent immediately. 
(d)  Bond and insurance requirements. 
(1)  Public road projects contracts over $5,000.00 require performance bond and payment bond as well as public liability and property damage insurance bonds or policies, and bonds to maintain in good condition; such completed construction for a period of not less than five years, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-4-119. 
(2)  Public works contracts in excess of $40,000.00 require a bid bond, performance bond, and payment bond in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 13-10-1 and 13-10-2. 
(3)  Any contractor entering into contract for services with the city must carry worker's compensation insurance at the minimum statutory limit, unless exempt under O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq. 
(4)  Licensed professionals contracting with the city for services in an amount of $40,000.00 or greater must provide professional liability coverage of $1,000,000.00. 
(Res. No. 98-01, exh. A, § VI, 2-9-1998; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 2-58—2-87. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Purchases Requiring Bids 

Sec. 2-88. - Competitive bids. 
Subject to the provisions of section 2-57 of this Code, all purchases of supplies, equipment, goods and services shall be by competitive bids wherever possible. However, if there is only one supplier of the product or service needed, the product or service may be obtained by. If professional services are sought, such services shall not be subject to competitive bidding requirements. 
(Code 1994, § 2-42; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 3, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 2-89. - Purchases by city clerk. 
The city clerk may make purchases of up to $500.00 without approval by the mayor and council if there has been an appropriation for that purpose. 
(Code 1994, § 2-43) 
Sec. 2-90. - Notice inviting bids. 
(a)  A notice containing general specifications should be mailed to all known suppliers inviting bids pursuant to this subdivision. The mailing should take place at least ten days prior to the last day set for the receipt of bids. 
(b)  A similar notice should be published in the official legal organ of the county twice, the last publication being at least four days prior to the last day set for the receipt of bids. 
(c)  All notices required by this section should include a general description of the goods, equipment, supply or service to be purchased; state where bid blanks and specifications may be obtained; and clearly state the date, time and place when bids will be opened. 
(Code 1972, § 12-3; Code 1994, § 2-44) 
Sec. 2-91. - Bid deposits. 
When deemed prudent, the purchasing agent may require bid deposits pursuant to this subdivision. When bid deposits are required, the notice inviting bids shall so state. The city shall return the deposits of the unsuccessful bidders and release the surety, if any. A successful bidder who fails to enter into a contract within ten days of being awarded the bid shall forfeit his deposit and surety, if required to perform. 
(Code 1972, § 12-4; Code 1994, § 2-45; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 3, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 2-92. - Bid openings. 
Bids for purchases made under this subdivision shall be submitted sealed to the city clerk, and the envelope containing the bid shall clearly identify the contents as a bid. All bids shall be opened at the date, time and place specified in the notice and no other. Openings shall be open to the public. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted in the city hall for public inspection and a copy furnished to each member of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1972, § 12-5; Code 1994, § 2-46) 
Sec. 2-93. - Awarding of contracts. 
Under this subdivision, only the mayor and council shall have the power to award contracts based on bids. When the public interest is best served, all bids may be rejected. Tie bids shall be decided by the vote of the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall award a contract to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, the mayor and council, in addition to price, shall consider the following: 
(1)  The character, reputation, judgment, experience, efficiency, ability, capacity and skill of the bidder; 
(2)  The time involved in performance; 
(3)  Conditions attached to the bid; 
(4)  Prior experience in dealing with the bidder; 
(5)  The financial stability of the bidder; 
(6)  The bidder's ability to provide maintenance when needed; and 
(7)  The location of the bidder's business. 
(Code 1972, § 12-6; Code 1994, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-94. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  No purchase shall be made from a member of the mayor and council or from any city employee. No bid by any such member or employee shall be considered. No purchase shall be made from any firm, partnership or corporation in which any member of the mayor and council or any city employee has any financial interest. No bid from such firm, partnership or corporation shall be considered. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, employees may submit sealed competitive bids to the city for purchases by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-48; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 3, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 2-95—2-116. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISPOSITION OF CITY PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Sale of municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6. 

Sec. 2-117. - Sale of city property. 
When the mayor and council shall determine that it is in the best interest of the city to sell or otherwise dispose of any property of the city, the mayor and council shall declare such fact. If the value of the property is less than $500.00, it shall be sold or disposed of as the mayor and council direct. If its estimated value is $500.00 or more, the same procedure shall be followed as is outlined for purchases of similar value in division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 12-12; Code 1994, § 2-76) 
Sec. 2-118. - Conflict of interest. 
No city property shall be sold, traded or given away to any member of the mayor and council or any city employee; provided that, where sealed bids are solicited for the disposal of surplus city property, city employees may submit sealed bids which will be considered with all other bids and such surplus property may then be sold to the highest bidder, regardless of whether such person is a city employee. 
(Code 1994, § 2-77) 
Secs. 2-119—2-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-150. - Official governing body; meetings. 
(a)  The official governing body of the city shall be composed of the mayor and four council members, as set forth in the Charter. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall hold regular meetings in the city hall on the second Monday of each month commencing at 7:00 p.m. 
(c)  Special meetings of the mayor and council may be called by the mayor upon his own motion and shall be called by the mayor upon the request of any two members of the council. At least 12 hours' written notice shall be personally given each member of the mayor and council when a special meeting is contemplated, except that no such notice shall be necessary if all members of the mayor and council are present. Public notice of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
(Code 1972, § 2-1; Code 1994, § 2-101; Ord. of 9-25-1975, § 2-1; Ord. No. 98-05, § 1, 12-14-1998) 
Sec. 2-151. - Mayor pro tem. 
At the first regular meeting in January of each year, the four members of the city council shall select one of their number to serve as mayor pro tem. Once elected the mayor pro tem shall continue to serve until his successor is elected. The mayor pro tem shall in every instance be clothed with the power and the authority of the mayor in the disability or absence of the mayor. Every duty and obligation imposed by this Code or any ordinance of the city on the mayor shall, in the disability or absence of the mayor, be imposed on the mayor pro tem. 
(Code 1972, § 2-3; Code 1994, § 2-102) 
Sec. 2-152. - Time and date of regular meetings. 
At any regular meeting of the mayor and council, the time or date of the next regular meeting may be changed by action of the mayor and council when it is determined with a reasonable degree of certainty that a quorum will not be present at the next meeting. Any regular meeting that falls on a legal holiday shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the first workday following the holiday. However, no regular meeting shall be held on any day other than that day set forth in section 2-150(a), unless public notice has been given of the change in such meeting date or time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 2-1; Code 1994, § 2-103; Ord. No. 98-05, § 2, 12-14-1998) 
Sec. 2-153. - Officer presiding at meetings; rules of order. 
(a)  The mayor or, in his absence, the mayor pro tem or, in the absence of both the mayor and mayor pro tem, any member of the council who may be designated by the members present, a quorum being present, shall preside at all meetings of the mayor and council. 
(b)  The presiding officer shall enforce Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, relating to parliamentary procedure during all meetings of the mayor and council. However, if Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, conflict with this Code, this Code shall prevail. 
(Code 1972, § 2-2; Code 1994, § 2-104) 
Sec. 2-154. - Agenda. 
The mayor, after receiving input from the city manager and the council, and with the assistance of the city clerk, shall be responsible for preparing an agenda for all regular meetings of the mayor and council. A copy of the agenda shall be furnished to each member of the mayor and council at least 24 hours prior to the meeting. Matters may be added to the agenda at any council meeting upon the affirmative vote of three council members, subject to the requirements of the Georgia Open Meetings Act. 
(Code 1972, § 2-4; Code 1994, § 2-105; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 4, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 2-155. - Minutes of meetings. 
The city clerk shall be responsible for taking minutes of all meetings of the mayor and council. The city clerk shall note the names of those present and shall enter on the minutes at the request of any member the reasons for his vote or action in any matter. Minutes shall be taken in accordance with section 2-210(1) setting forth the duties of the city clerk. 
(Code 1972, § 2-5; Code 1994, § 2-106) 
Sec. 2-156. - Conflict of interest. 
It shall be unlawful for any member of the mayor and council to vote upon any question in which he is personally interested. 
(Code 1994, § 2-107) 
Sec. 2-157. - Salaries. 
The compensation paid to the mayor shall be $14,000.00 per year and to each councilmember shall be $8,400.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 97-02, § 1, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 6-28-2007; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 4, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 2-158—2-182. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-183. - Performance bonds. 
The mayor and council shall have the authority to set the amount of surety and performance bonds for officers and employees from time to time as is in the best interests of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 2-19; Code 1994, § 2-127) 
Sec. 2-184. - Official holidays. 
(a)  The city shall observe the following holidays: 
(1)  New Year's Day. 
(2)  Memorial Day. 
(3)  Independence Day. 
(4)  Labor Day. 
(5)  Thanksgiving Day and the day after. 
(6)  Christmas Day. 
(7)  Employee's birthday. 
(b)  Any employee may be required to work on a holiday when the best interests of the city will be served. Any employee required to work on an official holiday shall be, as soon as practicable thereafter, given a like amount of time off from work. 
(Code 1972, § 2-18; Code 1994, § 2-128) 
Sec. 2-185. - Social security. 
(a)  It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal Social Security Administration, to the employees and officials of the city and its instrumentalities not excluded by law or by this section, the benefits of the system of old-age and survivor's insurance as authorized by the federal Social Security Act, the state enabling act and amendments thereto. In pursuance of this policy and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by the applicable state or federal laws. 
(b)  The mayor or other chief executive is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments with the employees' retirement system of the state for coverage of city employees and officials as provided in subsection (a) of this section, not including any employees that are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner provided by such law. 
(c)  Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in subsection (a) of this section are authorized in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(d)  There shall be appropriated from general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws for employers' contributions, administrative expenses and a guaranty fund to ensure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in subsection (b) of this section. Such funds shall be paid over to the employees' retirement system of the state in accordance with the requirements established by such system. 
(e)  The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws. 
(f)  There is excluded from this section any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws. 
(Code 1972, § 2-21; Code 1994, § 2-129) 
State Law reference— Social security coverage for employees of political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-186—2-208. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-209. - Appointment; compensation; hours. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city clerk who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council and whose compensation and hours are fixed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-6; Code 1994, § 2-141) 
Sec. 2-210. - Duties. 
The city clerk shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Keep a minutes book in which shall be recorded accurately, legibly and in detail the proceedings of all meetings of the mayor and council, taking care to set forth therein all motions, resolutions and ordinances voted on; every report of every committee; every contract made; all funds expended; each act of the mayor and council; and such other information as may be pertinent and proper in keeping a permanent record of the city. 
(2)  Be the custodian of all city records and make such records available for inspection and examination by any citizen during working hours. 
(3)  Receive, protect and deposit all funds paid to or received by the city from any source, keeping an accurate record of such. 
(4)  See that all debts of the city are timely paid, taking care to see that the city receives the benefit of any discounts offered. 
(5)  Receive correspondence, petitions, claims and requests directed to the city and direct the attention of the mayor and council to such as soon as possible. 
(6)  Issue, in the name of the city, permits, certificates, warrants, summons, receipts, executions and processes when directed to do so by this Code or by the mayor and council. 
(7)  Do those acts required by chapter 36, article II, pertaining to ad valorem taxation. 
(8)  Attest to all ordinances, resolutions and documents of the city. 
(9)  Keep, file and preserve all papers in connection with all purchases by the city of goods, supplies and services. 
(10)  Do such other acts and perform such other services as may be directed by the mayor and council or required elsewhere in this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 2-6(A)—(J); Code 1994, § 2-142) 
Secs. 2-211—2-228. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 

Sec. 2-229. - Appointment. 
The city manager shall appoint or contract for a code enforcement officer who shall serve under the direct supervision of the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1972, § 2-7; Code 1994, § 2-156; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 5, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 2-230. - Duties. 
Duties of the code enforcement officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  Enforce the technical codes adopted by the city; 
(2)  Enforce chapter 42, pertaining to zoning; 
(3)  See to the lawful issuance of building, construction and occupancy permits; and 
(4)  Perform such other services and do such other acts as may be directed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-7; Code 1994, § 2-157) 
Secs. 2-231—2-253. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-254. - Appointment; qualifications; retainer. 
(a)  The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor and council and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
(b)  He shall be at least 25 years of age and shall have had at least three years of legal practice in the state. 
(c)  His retainer fee shall be fixed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-10; Code 1994, § 2-171) 
Sec. 2-255. - Duties. 
Duties of the city attorney shall be to: 
(1)  Prepare all ordinances and resolutions requested by the mayor and council; 
(2)  Review all contracts prior to their execution by the city; 
(3)  Represent the city in all threatened or pending litigation; and 
(4)  Perform such other duties and acts as directed by the mayor and council or as prescribed by this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 2-10; Code 1994, § 2-172) 
Secs. 2-256—2-273. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES, AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-274—2-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-296. - Statement of findings. 
It has been determined by the mayor and council that: 
(1)  There exists an urgent need to provide incentives for the investment of funds for the creation of a central business district of the city. 
(2)  Adequate financing for the creation of a central business district cannot be provided through the ordinary operation of private enterprise and a public agency as herein contemplated in such an undertaking would not be competitive with private enterprise. 
(3)  The Downtown Development Authorities Law (Georgia Laws 1981, p. 1744 et seq., codified as chapter 42 of title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, hereinafter referred to as the "Act") which was enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, creates for every municipal body in the state a public corporate and politic to be known as the downtown develop authority of such municipal corporation, which shall consist of a board of seven directors to be appointed by the governing body of such municipal corporation. 
(4)  The mayor and council have determined that there is a need for a downtown development authority to function in the city to aid in the financing of projects for the development of a central business district of the city which will promote for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities within the city and the state. 
(5)  The mayor and council, after a thorough study and investigation, have determined that it is desirable and necessary that a downtown development authority be activated immediately to function in the city with all the powers granted to such authorities under said Act to issue revenue bonds, notes and other obligations for the purpose of providing funds to finance the cost of vitalization and development of a central business district of the city, all as more fully set forth in said Act. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § 2, 4-8-2013) 
Sec. 2-297. - Declaration of need. 
There is a determined and declared to be a pressing and existing need for a downtown development authority to function in the city in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Downtown Development Authorities Law for the purpose of providing a means of financing of projects for the vitalization and development of a central business district of the city, thereby promoting the public good and general welfare of the residents of the city and the state. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § 3, 4-8-2013) 
Sec. 2-298. - Activation of authority. 
There is activated the public body corporate and politic to be known as the Downtown Development Authority of Lake City (hereinafter referred to as the "authority"), which authority was created pursuant to the Downtown Development Authorities Law, Georgia Laws 1981, p. 1744 et seq. A true and correct copy of the Act shall be attached to the ordinance from which this division is derived and by this reference thereto same is incorporated herein and made a part of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § 4, 4-8-2013) 
Sec. 2-299. - District designated. 
The central business district of the city is designated as the area which is geographically constituted as shown on Exhibit A, which is attached to the ordinance from which this division is derived, and available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk, and expressly incorporated herein and made a part of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § 5, 4-8-2013) 
Sec. 2-300. - Appointment of members. 
The members of the board of directors of the downtown development authority shall be appointed as provided by state law, and shall serve a four-year term; provided that if one director is a member of the city council, he shall only serve as a director while a member of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § 6, 4-8-2013) 
Sec. 2-301. - Term of members. 
The persons named as directors of the downtown development authority in section 2-300 shall serve in such capacity for the number of years set forth opposite their respective names, and if, at the end of any term of office of any director, a successor thereto shall not have been elected as hereinafter provided, then the director whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until his successor is elected, except as otherwise provided for in this section. No person shall receive any compensation for serving as director, but a director may be reimbursed for his actual expenses incurred in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § 7, 4-8-2013) 
Sec. 2-302. - Residency requirement of directors. 
In the event a director of the downtown development authority at any time ceases to be a taxpayer residing in the city, his eligibility to serve as a director shall cease and his appointment as a director shall end. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § 8, 4-8-2013) 
Sec. 2-303. - Organization; powers; duties. 
The board of directors of the downtown development authority hereinbefore elected shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities, and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Act as it now exists and as same may hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § 9, 4-8-2013) 
Secs. 2-304—2-324. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-325. - Law governing elections. 
All elections in the city shall be conducted in every respect as set forth in the Charter, the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), and this article. 
(Code 1972, § 6-1; Code 1994, § 30-1) 
Sec. 2-326. - Election officials. 
The following offices are created in connection with the conduct of elections for the city: 
(1)  Superintendent. The mayor and council shall appoint a municipal election superintendent who shall receive such compensation as provided by the mayor and council. The superintendent shall exercise those powers and duties as set forth under state law. 
(2)  Poll officers. 
a.  Chief manager. A chief manager shall be appointed by the mayor and council for each election. The chief manager shall receive such compensation as provided by the mayor and council and shall exercise those powers and duties as set forth under state law. 
b.  Assistant managers. Two assistant managers shall be appointed by the mayor and council for each election. The assistant managers shall receive such compensation as provided by the mayor and council and shall exercise those powers and duties as set forth under state law. 
c.  Clerks. Prior to the opening of the polls of each election, the mayor and council shall appoint a sufficient number of clerks to serve at such election. The clerks shall receive such compensation as provided by the mayor and council and shall exercise those powers and duties as set forth under state law. 
(Code 1972, § 6-3; Code 1994, § 30-2) 
Sec. 2-327. - Registrar. 
The election registrar shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council and until his successor is appointed and qualified, except for resignation or removal as provided in this section. The mayor and council shall have the right to remove one or more of such registrars at any time for cause after notice and hearing. Any registrar shall have the right to resign at any time by submitting a resignation to the mayor and council. If any such removal or resignation of a registrar occurs, his duties and authority as such shall terminate instanter. For the removal, death or resignation of a registrar, the mayor and council shall appoint a successor who shall serve the unexpired term if such term is specified. Each such appointment or change in designation shall be entered on the minutes of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1972, § 6-7; Code 1994, § 30-3) 
Sec. 2-328. - Expenses. 
The election superintendent is authorized to incur expenses in the preparation and conduct of an election, including the cost of purchasing identification badges for poll officers, the printing of ballots and voters certificates and the purchasing of all other supplies necessary for the conduct of an election. The superintendent is further authorized to incur all necessary expenses to provide voting booths for the proper conduct of all elections. 
(Code 1972, § 6-4; Code 1994, § 30-4) 
Sec. 2-329. - Election district and polling place. 
The entire area within the corporate limits shall constitute an election district. Those persons qualified to vote and living within the city shall vote at the city hall. The election superintendent shall cause the polling place to be provided with sufficient light and heat. 
(Code 1972, § 6-5; Code 1994, § 30-5) 
Sec. 2-330. - Qualifying period and fees. 
(a)  The qualifying period for a candidate seeking election in a special or general election shall be three days. The qualifying period shall otherwise be set as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall publish a qualifying fee which shall be three percent of the annual salary of the office and which shall be paid by candidates seeking election in a special or general election. The fee will be paid to the municipal elections superintendent at the time the candidate files his notice of candidacy. 
(Code 1972, § 6-9; Code 1994, § 30-7; Ord. No. 2015-7, § 1, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 2-331. - Nonpartisan elections. 
All elections held for the purpose of filling municipal offices in the city shall be nonpartisan, and no political party shall conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for such municipal elections. 
(Code 1972, § 6-10; Code 1994, § 30-8) 
Sec. 2-332. - Vote required for election. 
A candidate for municipal office may be elected in a general or special election by receiving a plurality of the votes cast to fill such office. The candidate for mayor who receives the most votes shall be declared elected, and the candidates for council who receive the most votes shall be declared elected. If a tie vote occurs, a runoff shall be held between the candidates receiving such tie vote. 
(Code 1972, § 6-12; Code 1994, § 30-9) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 ("Alcoholic Beverages—General Provisions—Definitions"), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used in this chapter, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means an individual applying for any license authorized by this chapter. 
Application means a form supplied by the city for the purpose of applying for any license authorized by this chapter. 
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Family includes any person related to the holder of a license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the civil law. 
Hotel means every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential. To meet the definition of "hotel" under this chapter, the facility must have 50 or more rooms used for sleeping accommodations of such guests and one or more public dining rooms, with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least 60 persons, where meals are regularly served to such guests. All sleeping accommodations and dining rooms must be conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge or restaurant in their premises, and the holder of such franchise shall be eligible for a license under the "hotel" classification. 
Interest in license exists if the person involved is the outright holder of the license, a co-holder of the license, a partner in a partnership which holds all or any part of a license, a stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which holds all or any part of a license, an owner, lessee, sublessee or stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain owning or leasing any real estate which is occupied by an alcoholic beverage establishment or shares in any of the income or corpus of any trust fund or estate having any interest in an alcoholic beverage establishment. Provided, however, a stockholder shall not be deemed to have an interest in an alcoholic beverage establishment where such stockholder owns stock in a motel or hotel having 200 or more rooms with an alcoholic beverage establishment located on the premises of such motel or hotel and owned by such motel or hotel. Provided, further, that a stockholder holding no more than five percent stock in a publicly held corporation shall not be considered to hold an interest in an alcoholic beverage license. 
License means authorization granted by the city to operate as a malt and vinous package beverage dealer or retail alcohol consumption dealer, retail dealer or wholesale dealer. 
Licensee means a person holding a license. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with, a part of, and adjacent to, a restaurant or a room located in hotels as defined herein, with all booths, stools and tables being open and unobstructed to the view of any other customers in such lounge, or the manager thereof. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 60 persons. A lounge located in other than a hotel, which is operated on a different floor than a restaurant in the premises, or in a separate building, or is not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant shall be considered a separate establishment and shall pay an additional license fee therefor. 
Metropolitan Atlanta area includes only the counties of Fulton, Clayton, Henry, Fayette, Walton, Douglas, Cobb, Paulding, Newton, Cherokee, Gwinnett, Forsyth, DeKalb, Rockdale, Bartow, Carroll and Pickens. 
Motel. See Hotel. 
Private club means a corporation or association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city at least eight years prior to the application for a license hereunder, having at least 200 members regularly paying dues, for at least five years prior to application for license, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of distilled spirits, wines, champagnes or malt beverages beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at an annual meeting, or by its governing body, out of the general revenue of the club. For the purpose of this definition, tips which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered as profits hereunder. A private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall not be licensed under this chapter, nor permitted to sell or serve such beverages at all. The restrictions contained in section 4-43 shall not apply to private clubs. All distance requirements as set forth in section 4-43 shall apply. 
Private residence means a house, dwelling or structure wherein not less than one, nor more than two, families reside and shall not include a mobile home court, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, nor a boardinghouse or roominghouse where there are five or more boarders or roomers. Any building occupied as a residence located within an area zoned for business shall not be construed as a private residence. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and a dining room seating capacity of at least 60 persons, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least two meals per day, each with a minimum serving time open to the public of two hours, shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of weeks including holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. As used in this definition, the term "seating capacity" shall mean that no more than 25 percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two individuals. As used in this definition, the term "principal business" shall mean that at least 51 percent of the receipts of such business shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring on the premises, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other non-employee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called to the premises from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this definition, the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 4-121. 
Retailer or retail dealer means any person who sells malt beverages or wine in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers for consumption at some location other than the licensed premises; retail sales are not for resale. 
Sales by the drink means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Seating capacity means the amount of individual seating which is located at tables for the purpose of serving the dining public, but not including any seating located in a lounge, bar or other area designed primarily for the serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1994, § 6-1; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-1), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of: 
(1)  Promoting the health and general welfare of the community; 
(2)  Establishing reasonable standards for the control of the licensing and sale of off-premises consumption package malt beverages and wine and on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Protecting and preserving schools and churches; 
(4)  Giving affect to land use. 
(Code 1994, § 6-2; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-2), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-3. - Drinking in public or public facilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to publicly drink, or publicly offer to any other persons within the city, any alcoholic beverage, or to drink or offer such beverage to any other person on any publicly owned property, or on any property open to the general public or open to members of the public by payment of admission charge, dues or other fees, unless such property is licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages; provided that this section shall not prohibit the drinking of such beverages by people legally entitled to drink the same privately in their homes with their guest or privately within their own place of business. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the serving of wine and/or champagne shall be permitted at the Lake City Community Center at supervised events authorized by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-3; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-3), 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 12-06, § 1(6-3), 12-10-2012) 
Sec. 4-4. - Carrying beverages upon city property prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry alcoholic beverages of any name or description into any building owned by the city or upon any recreational area owned by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-4; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-4), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-5. - Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession by underage persons of alcoholic beverages; proper identification for sale of alcoholic beverages; dispensing, serving, etc., of alcoholic beverages by underage persons in the course of employment. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Underage person means any person to whom the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by state law because of age. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this Code for any agent, officer or employee of a licensee to fail to check the identification of any patron when selling or otherwise providing any alcoholic beverage, which failure results in an underage person being sold or served, or to have in such underage person's possession while on the licensee's premises, any alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  The prohibitions contained in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in the state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; or 
(3)  In the home with parental consent. 
(d)  Any person convicted of or entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of this section in the city court shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine not to exceed $500.00 and in addition thereto by imprisonment in the city jail for no less than seven nor more than 90 days; or 
(2)  By a fine not exceeding $500.00 and in addition thereto by sentence to community service for no less than 60 nor more than 180 hours. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any criminal prosecution which may result from a violation of this section, any licensee employing any officer, agent or employee who fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, which failure results in an underage person being sold or served, or to have in such underage person's possession while on the licensee's premises, any alcoholic beverage, may have such licensee's license revoked. 
(f)  If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person between the ages of 18 and 21 years of age from: 
(1)  Dispensing, serving, selling, or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment; 
(2)  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or 
(3)  Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(g)  Testimony by any underage person, when given in an administrative or judicial proceeding against another person for violation of any provision of this section, shall not be used in any administrative or judicial proceeding brought against such testifying underage person. 
(h)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to modify, amend, or supersede chapter 11 of title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Code 1994, § 6-5; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-5), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-6. - Underage persons frequenting premises of lounge. 
No licensee hereunder shall allow any underage person to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises of a lounge, unaccompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Code 1994, § 6-6; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-6), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-7. - Underage persons misrepresenting age, drinking or possessing alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any underage person to falsely state or misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatsoever to a licensee hereunder or his agent. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any underage person to drink or possess any alcoholic beverage on any licensed premises. 
(Code 1994, § 6-7; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-7), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-8. - Deliveries of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler or distributor to make deliveries of alcoholic beverages except to a location licensed for the retail sale of such beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any retail dealer or person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink to make deliveries of such beverages to any location off the licensed premises, provided that caterers may deliver alcoholic beverages in accordance with the terms of their permits. 
(Code 1994, § 6-8; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-8), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-9. - Sunday sales. 
Retailers possessing a valid license from the city authorizing the package sale of malt beverages and/or wine shall be authorized to sell packages of malt beverages and/or wine on Sundays between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(Res. No. 11-01, § 2, 10-8-2011) 
Secs. 4-10—4-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 4-37. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the city without first having obtained a license therefor, provided that wholesalers and distributors maintaining no fixed place of business, warehouse or other facility in the city and possessing a valid state license may make sales and deliveries to licensed retailers and to persons licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises without obtaining a city license. 
(b)  Except as specifically authorized in this chapter, no person licensed for the sale of a particular class of alcoholic beverages may sell other classes of alcoholic beverages without obtaining the required license therefor. 
(c)  A person licensed to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall have the right to serve wine and malt beverages by the drink on the premises during the same hours as are permitted hereunder for the serving of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(Code 1994, § 6-21; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-21), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-38. - Qualifications of applicants. 
(a)  No license shall be granted under this chapter to any applicant who is not a citizen or resident legal alien of the United States and who does not permanently reside in the Metropolitan Atlanta area. 
(b)  Corporations shall apply for a license in the name of the corporation, and the license shall be issued to the corporation. Partnerships shall apply for a license in the name of one of the partners, and the license shall be issued in the name of the applicant. In the case of corporate applicants whose primary business is the operation of an alcoholic beverage store, the majority stockholder must meet the requirements of individual applicants under this subsection at the time application is made and at all times during which the license is in effect. Where the applicant is a corporation whose primary business is other than the operation of an alcoholic beverage store, an officer of such corporation, or in lieu of an officer, an agent involved in the active management of the business to be licensed, shall meet the requirements of individual applicants under this subsection at the time application is made and at all times during which the license is in effect. If the applicant is a partner in a partnership, the requirements of this section shall apply to all partners at the time of the application, and at all times during which the license is in effect. 
(c)  All applicants for licenses must attach to their applications evidence of their good character. No original license shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation organized for pecuniary gain where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, or stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, or such person's spouse shall have been convicted of or shall have taken a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, once, within five years immediately prior to filing, or twice, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of said application, of any felony or any violation of any law regulating the sale, manufacture or distribution of alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics. No original license shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation where any individual having an interest as owner, partner, or stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, once, within five years immediately prior to the filing of said application, or twice, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application of the offense of driving a motor vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs. The restrictions of this subsection as to stockholders shall apply only to stockholders of privately owned corporations and to stockholders of publicly owned corporations who hold in excess of ten percent of outstanding stock. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverages by the drink and consumption on the premises licenses shall be issued only to applicants who meet the definition of a hotel, restaurant, lounge, private club or private athletic club. 
(e)  Applicants for renewal licenses must meet all qualifications of applicants for original licenses. Loss of qualifications during the term of a license shall be grounds for revocation or for denial of renewal. 
(Code 1994, § 6-22; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-22), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-39. - Personal interests in licenses. 
(a)  No license holder or member of a license holder's family shall own, hold or control any interest whatsoever in more than one license to engage in the business of selling distilled spirits for on-premises consumption in the city. Not more than one license to engage in the sale of distilled spirits for on-premises consumption in the city shall be issued to any one license holder, which shall include all members of a license holder's family. 
(b)  No license holder or member of a license holder's family shall own, hold or control any interest whatsoever in more than two licenses to engage in the business of selling wine. Not more than two licenses to engage in the sale of wine in the city shall be issued to any one license holder, which shall include all members of a license holder's family. 
(c)  No license holder or member of a license holder's family shall own, hold or control any interest whatsoever in more than two licenses to engage in the business of selling malt beverages. Not more than two licenses to engage in the sale of malt beverages in the city shall be issued to any license holder, which shall include all members of a license holder's family. 
(d)  No person, firm or corporation shall hold a retail or consumption on the premises license who also has any direct financial interest in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any elected or appointed official or employee of the city, or such person's spouse or minor children, to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to operate alcoholic beverage establishments in the city. 
(f)  A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee personally does not receive directly any of the additional capital invested. Under this section an additional partner or stockholder must be approved by the city as in the case of new license issuance, and, if approved, the business must obtain a new license. 
(g)  The limitation of interests per holder shall not apply to licenses held in the name of corporations which are publicly owned. The phrase "member of a license holder's family" shall include all persons related within the second degree of consanguinity to an individual who holds a license, to any partner in a partnership which holds a license, or to any individual stockholder, officer or agent of a corporation required to meet the requirements for licensing under this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-23; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-23), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-40. - Maximum number of distilled spirits retail licenses permitted. 
(a)  The number of licenses for the by-the-drink sale of distilled spirits within the city shall not exceed one license for each 1,000 citizens or fraction thereof, according to the United States Census of 1990, or any future such census. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the transfer of location or the issuance of a license to a location which was licensed on May 1, 1996. However, in no event shall the total number of licenses exceed the limit imposed by this chapter or the number of licenses outstanding on May 1, 1996, whichever is greater. The transfer of location of an existing license or the sale of an existing licensed business shall not be considered a new license under this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-24; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-24), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-41. - Contents of application; change in relationship. 
(a)  All applications for license, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to all interests in alcoholic beverage licenses. This shall include the names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling alcoholic beverages, together with any interest each person or any member of such person's immediate family has in any other alcoholic beverage establishment; the ownership of the land and building where such business is operated; the amount of rental paid for the land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid; the names and addresses (by affidavit from the owner, lessee or sublessor and sublessee of such land and building) of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which said establishment is located; and any other information called for by the city. 
(b)  Any change in any interest herein declared must be filed with the city clerk when such change is made, and failure to so file within a period of 30 days after such change is made shall be grounds for revocation by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-25; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-25), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-42. - Property survey to accompany application. 
All applications for license shall include a certificate from a registered surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises and the distance, measured as provided in section 4-43, from the proposed premises to the building and property line of the nearest church, library, school, and residence, and the nearest five occupied commercial establishments. 
(Code 1994, § 6-26; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-26), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-43. - Business locations near school, church or alcoholic treatment center. 
For the purpose of determining location in this chapter the state minimum standards shall be applicable. 
(Code 1994, § 6-27; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-27), 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 00-04, § 1(6.27), 5-1-2000) 
Sec. 4-44. - Zoning requirements for business location. 
No license to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued within the areas described in this chapter unless the location has been zoned commercial or industrial under chapter 42, pertaining to zoning. 
(Code 1994, § 6-28; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-28), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-45. - Annexed areas; continuance of business. 
Where an alcoholic beverage establishment exists in an area outside the city limits, upon annexation of such area, the same may be continued and shall be subject to all remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-29; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-29), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-46. - Application fee. 
Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. Application fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed, and only refundable in the event that the applicant is denied a license by the state. 
Sec. 4-47. - Fraud and misrepresentation by applicant. 
(a)  Any person who acquires a license or a renewal of same in violation of this chapter by any misrepresentation or fraudulent statement shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 1-8. 
(b)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material omission left out of, an original, renewal or transfer application for a license shall be cause for the denial thereof and, if any license has been granted under these circumstances, there shall be cause for the revocation of the same. 
(Code 1994, § 6-30; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-30), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-48. - Investigation of application. 
(a)  All applications for new or renewal licenses shall be submitted to the city clerk who shall refer such applications to the police department for its review and recommendation. Upon receipt of the police department recommendation, the city clerk may request review by the city attorney. The city clerk shall consolidate all reports and recommendations of reviewing departments and make an independent comprehensive review of each application. 
(b)  All applicants for new or renewal licenses shall furnish to the police department and the city clerk all data, information and records requested of them by the police department or city clerk, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of the request shall automatically serve to dismiss with prejudice the application of any such applicant failing to furnish such data, information and records. 
(c)  Applicants, by filing for license to sell alcoholic beverages, agree to furnish the data, information and records as called for herein and also agree to submit under oath to interrogation by the police department and/or the city clerk as to any facts considered pertinent to such application. Applicants, by filing such application, also agree to produce for oral interrogation by the police department or the city clerk any persons requested by the police department or city clerk and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the license. Failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal with prejudice of any application for license. 
(d)  An applicant whose application is dismissed with prejudice may file a written notice of appeal no later than ten days from the date of dismissal. Failure to file such appeal within ten days from the date of dismissal shall result in the applicant's waiver of an appeal. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk who shall set a time for hearing before the mayor and council and notify the appellant thereof. Procedures governing the hearing shall be the same as those provided for denial of license in section 4-49(e). 
(Code 1994, § 6-31; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-31), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-49. - Issuance standards; denial; appeal. 
(a)  All complete applications for new licenses or transfers of locations shall be passed upon by the city clerk within 60 days from the date of filing of a completed application. 
(b)  Date of filing shall be the time and date that a properly completed and executed application form, along with the filing fee as required in section 4-54, is received by the city clerk. 
(c)  The city clerk shall not accept an application for an on-premises distilled spirits retail license for consideration when there is a previously filed and still pending application for a place of business for distilled spirits retail license within 1,000 feet of the applicant's proposed site. 
(d)  All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses meeting the standards of this chapter shall be granted by the city clerk, unless some specific cause regarding suitability of premises by reason of location or otherwise, character of related activities on premises, reasonable requirements of the neighborhood, traffic conditions or environmental conditions justifies a refusal. In such event the applicant shall be entitled to file a new application of like kind for a different location without the loss of any part of the application fee. 
(e)  In the event the city clerk denies an application for a license, the denial shall be transmitted to the applicant, in writing, with the reasons for that action specified. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial to the city manager. Such appeal shall be filed in writing no later than 14 days from the date of the city clerk's decision. Failure to file such appeal within 14 days from the city clerk's decision shall result in a waiver of the applicant's appeal rights. A hearing shall be held not more than 30 days from the date of the written notice of appeal. Upon the timely filing of an appeal, any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the city clerk shall be afforded a hearing before the city manager with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. Within 30 days from the date of the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager shall notify the applicant, in writing, of his decision on the appeal. 
(Code 1994, § 6-32; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-32), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-50. - Issuance of license; payment of fee. 
(a)  All licenses must be obtained and fees paid not later than two weeks from the date of the approval of the application by the city and, if not so obtained, the permit granted by the city shall be void. 
(b)  When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the city clerk the required fee, the fee shall be paid to the municipal revenue collector and a license issued. 
(Code 1994, § 6-33; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-33), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-51. - Procedure when license denied by state. 
In the event the applicant is denied a license by the state, upon the proof of such refusal, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the license fee, less the investigative fee, plus an additional charge to cover the clerical costs of granting the license. The additional charge will be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. Such refund may be made by the city clerk without the necessity of any further action by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-34; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-34), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-52. - Business opening within six months from license issuance required. 
All holders of licenses shall, within six months after the issuance of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license and begin the sale of the products authorized by the license. Failure to open the establishment and begin the sale as referred to in this section within the six-month period shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(Code 1994, § 6-35; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-35), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-53. - Effect of failure to operate business for six consecutive months. 
Any holder of a license who shall begin the operation of the business and sale of the products as authorized in the license, but who shall, for a period of six consecutive months thereafter, cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized in the license, shall upon completion of the six-month period automatically forfeit the license, which license shall, by virtue of that failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity of any further action of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-36; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-36), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-54. - Annual license fee schedules—Off-premises consumption. 
(a)  Wine. The annual license fee for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling wine at retail as described herein shall be the sum of $500.00 per annum. 
(b)  Malt beverages. The annual license fee for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling malt beverages shall be, for retail package, the sum of $500.00 per annum. 
(c)  Malt beverages and wine. The annual license fee for the privilege in engaging in the business of selling both wine and malt beverages at retail as described herein shall be the sum of $750.00 per annum. 
(Code 1994, § 6-37; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-37), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-55. - Same—Manufacturers and wholesalers. 
No alcoholic beverage wholesaler or manufacturer except one who maintains the fixed location in the city is subject to a license. The annual license fee for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits in the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  Malt beverages. 
a.  Wholesale, the maximum allowed by the state. 
b.  Manufacturer, the maximum allowed by the state. 
(2)  Wine. 
a.  Wholesale, $100.00 per annum. 
b.  Manufacturer, $100.00 per year. 
(3)  Distilled spirits. 
a.  Wholesale, $100.00 per annum. 
b.  Manufacturer, $100.00 per annum. 
(Code 1994, § 6-38; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-38), 8-12-1996) 
State Law reference— Payment of license fees for manufacture, sales, etc., of alcoholic beverages required; amount, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-50, 3-5-42, 3-5-43. 
Sec. 4-56. - Same—On-premises consumption. 
The annual license fee for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be as follows: 
(1)  Restaurant: the sum of $5,000.00. 
(2)  Restaurant: malt and wine beverages only, $2,000.00. 
(3)  Lounge: the sum of $3,000.00. 
(4)  Lounge within the same premises where a license fee for a restaurant of $3,000.00 has been paid: the second license fee shall be the sum of $1,000.00. 
(5)  Private club: the sum of $1,000.00. 
(6)  Hotel, including in-room service: the sum of $3,000.00 if no restaurant or lounge license is held, the sum of $1,000.00 if an existing restaurant or lounge license is held for a location within the hotel. 
(Code 1994, § 6-39; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-39), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-57. - Same—Caterer's licenses. 
The annual license fee for the privilege of engaging in business as an alcoholic beverage caterer shall be $500.00 for malt beverages and wine and $1,000.00 for distilled spirits. 
(Code 1994, § 6-40; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-40), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-58. - Same—Payment dates; proration. 
All license fees shall be paid between January 1 and January 20 each year. No proration of the license fee shall be made for initial licenses issued after January 1 of any year. License fees paid after January 20 shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of 25 percent of the license fee for each 30-day period the fee remains unpaid. 
(Code 1994, § 6-41; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-41), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-59. - Term of license. 
No license shall issue for less than the remainder of the calendar year. No license fees shall be prorated for less than the total annual license fee. In case of the revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar year period, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(Code 1994, § 6-42; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-42), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-60. - Transferability of licenses. 
(a)  Licenses to engage in the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall not be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of any individual holding such a license, or any interest therein, the same may, in the discretion of the city clerk, be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person. In the case of a corporation for which one or more stockholders, officers or agents are required to meet the requirements of this chapter for licensing, the death of any such person shall be treated as the death of an individual holding an interest in the license. 
(c)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(d)  Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee, and the new location shall be required to obtain a new license hereunder. 
(e)  All applications for transfer of locations shall comply with the provisions herein set forth governing new licenses. 
(Code 1994, § 6-43; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-43), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-61. - Notice of transfer of business. 
Should any alcoholic beverage license holder withdraw from, sell or otherwise transfer such holder's interest in any ongoing alcoholic beverage business, the city clerk shall be notified, in writing, of such withdrawal, sale or transfer within seven days. Conduct of the licensed business may be continued for a period of no more than 60 days following the sale of a license holder's interest therein, upon application of the purchaser for a new license and with approval of the city clerk, provided that the initial license holder is under management contract with the purchaser of the business to supervise and remain responsible for the conduct of such business during the time investigation of the new application is underway; and provided further, that no disciplinary proceedings are pending against the initial license holder or the licensed premises concerning established or alleged violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-44; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-44), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-62. - Display of license. 
Every person, firm or corporation issued a license pursuant to this chapter shall be required to display this license in a prominent place on the premises. 
(Code 1994, § 6-45; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-45), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-63. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license, the city license to deal in such products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the city or any municipal officer. 
(b)  No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause, after hearing and upon ten days' written notice to the holder of such license. Such notice shall include the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held, provided that the city clerk shall suspend an alcoholic beverage license for no more than 30 days pending hearing in any of the following instances: 
(1)  Two violations attributable to the same licensee within the immediately preceding two-year period have occurred with disciplinary action having been taken by the city for each violation; 
(2)  The licensee is on probation for a previous violation at the time the current violation occurs; or 
(3)  Conditions were placed on the license as a result of a previous violation and the current act constitutes a violation of such conditions. 
(c)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business, or for the violation of any state or federal law related to alcoholic beverages, gambling, narcotics, or any crime of moral turpitude. Such violation may be an act of the licensee or of any agent, officer or employee of the licensee. 
(d)  Hearings shall be conducted by the city clerk. At any hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent himself or be represented by counsel, may cross examine all witnesses offered by the city, and may present evidence in his own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the fact finder shall have the right to exclude evidence which carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. Both the city and the licensee shall have the right to subpoena witnesses. 
(e)  If, after hearing, the city clerk finds a violation has occurred, the license may be suspended or revoked as follows: 
(1)  First offense at the establishment, suspension of the license for not less than seven days nor more than 120 days, plus not less than three nor more than 12 months' probation. 
(2)  Second offense, if during probationary period, the license shall be suspended for no less than 60 days nor more than 180 days and the probationary period may be extended up to an additional 12 months. 
(3)  If a third offense occurs during a probationary period, then the license shall be revoked and no license shall be issued to the same person, firm or corporation for a period of 12 months. 
(4)  In addition to the license suspension or revocation, the city clerk may impose monetary civil penalties within his discretion as follows: 
a.  First offense: Not to exceed $1,000.00. 
b.  Second and subsequent offenses: Not to exceed $5,000.00. 
Any action taken by the city clerk shall be final. 
(f)  In the event of revocation, no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be paid. 
(g)  Any applicant aggrieved by a suspension or revocation decision of the city clerk shall file a notice of appeal request with the city manager within three business days after the city clerk's decision. Upon the timely filing of an appeal, the aggrieved applicant shall be afforded a hearing before the city manager with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. Within 30 days from the date of the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager shall notify the applicant, in writing, of his decision on the appeal. 
(Code 1994, § 6-46; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-46), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-64. - Employees; qualifications; permits; records filed with city; investigations. 
(a)  Persons ineligible for employment. 
(1)  No licensee shall employ in any premises licensed for the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine, any person who, once within the immediately preceding six months, twice within the immediately preceding 12 months, or three times within the immediately preceding five years, has been convicted of, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, any city, state or federal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, or who, within the immediately preceding ten years has been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony. 
(2)  No licensee shall employ in any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, any person, who, once within the immediately preceding year, twice within the immediately preceding two years, or three times within the immediately preceding ten years, has been convicted of, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, any city, state or federal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, narcotics, gambling, or sex offense, including, but not limited to, prostitution, solicitation of prostitution or keeping a disorderly house, or who, within the immediately preceding ten years, has been convicted of, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, any felony. 
(3)  Subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section shall only apply to those employees hired for the purpose of or actively engaged in the dispensing, serving, selling or other handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  In the event an employee of a licensed alcoholic beverage establishment is convicted of or enters a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any offense which would preclude his initial employment under subsections (a)(1) to (3) of this section, such employee shall be placed on probationary status for a period of 12 months. Any subsequent conviction or plea to such an offense during the probationary period shall result in the employee's disqualification from further eligibility for employment in a capacity which involves the dispensing, serving, selling or other handling of alcoholic beverages in an alcoholic beverage establishment in the city for a period of five years; provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require a license holder to continue the employment of such an employee nor shall the provisions of this subsection be construed to prohibit dismissal of such an employee as a condition of maintaining the alcoholic beverage license where the conduct of the employee is of an egregious nature or shows a total disregard for the laws and regulations pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  All employees of a licensee holding a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall obtain a permit from the police department prior to handling any sales of such alcoholic beverages. Provisional permits shall be issued by the police department pending completion of a departmental investigation, and sales of alcoholic beverages under such provisional permits shall be allowable. Provisional permits shall be surrendered to the department on the issuance or denial of a permanent permit. All such employees shall be subject to such investigative rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary from time to time by the police department. An investigative fee in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time shall be paid by all permit applicants. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding retail or wholesale licenses to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the chief of police the names of all employees authorized to sell alcoholic beverages, with their home addresses, home telephone numbers and places of employment. Such list shall be filed upon obtaining the initial license or, for those businesses which are not open on the date the license is issued, upon the date the licensee's premises open to the public. Any change in the list of employees shall be filed with the chief of police within three days of the date of such change. 
(d)  The licensee shall acquaint all employees engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages with the requirements of this chapter and state law regulating the handling, sale or dispensing of such beverages, and shall obtain from each such employee a signed acknowledgment that the employee has read the provisions of this chapter and state law regulating the handling, sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages. Such signed acknowledgment shall be retained in the business office of the licensed premises during the employment period for each such employee, and shall be available for inspection during business hours at the request of the city clerk, chief of police, or any city law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Minors under 18 years of age may be employed in or about places of business where alcoholic beverages are sold, provided that such minors shall not be allowed or required to dispense, serve, sell, deliver or take orders for such alcoholic beverages or in any manner aid or assist in the dispensing, serving, sale, delivery or taking orders for same. Persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries or drug stores may handle the stocking or storage of alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises, but may not assist in the sale thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 6-47; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-47), 8-12-1996) 
Secs. 4-65—4-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATION OF PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 4-87. - Business hours and days. 
(a)  Retail dealers in wine and malt beverages shall not engage in the sale of such beverages except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and shall not permit their places of business to be opened for the sale of distilled spirits on Christmas Day. Business hours of wholesale dealers shall be from sunup to sundown. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages on election days shall commence after the official closing of the polls. 
(Code 1994, § 6-61; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-61), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-88. - Price lists or tags required. 
(a)  Each licensee shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the alcoholic beverages offered for sale and one printed copy of the penal sections of this chapter; provided that a licensee, in lieu of having four copies of a printed price list, may have the price placed on the bottles or on the bottom of the shelf where alcoholic beverages are exhibited for sale. 
(b)  All licensees hereunder shall display in prominent places their current prices of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1994, § 6-62; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-62), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-89. - Lighted electric advertising signs on wine or malt beverage establishments. 
No licensee operating premises wherein wine or malt beverages are sold shall operate lighted electrical signs or devices advertising such alcoholic beverages except during the hours that such products are being offered for sale to the public. 
(Code 1994, § 6-63; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-63), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-90. - Sanitary regulations; immoral conduct, etc.; inspection and report by police department. 
(a)  All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity, or public indecency on the premises. 
(b)  The police department shall, upon request of the city clerk, inspect such premises and report its findings to the city clerk. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all time with all building and fire regulations of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-64; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-64), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-91. - Physical requirements of applicant's premises. 
(a)  No license shall be granted to a retailer under the provision of this chapter, unless the front entrance to the premises is clearly visible from a public street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply where the licensee is a hotel, motel, or private club, or has a location in a shopping center or multiple-story business building. 
(b)  Where a building in which a retailer intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is at the time of the application for such license not in existence or not yet completed, a license may be issued for such location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  No sales shall be made from such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with said plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-65; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-65), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-92. - Interior visibility required. 
No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or opening of any door of any retail alcoholic beverage store, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(Code 1994, § 6-66; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-66), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-93. - Slot machines, etc., prohibited on premises. 
(a)  Except as otherwise permitted in this section, no retail licensee shall permit on such licensee's premises any slot machines, mechanical music boxes, pinball machines or coin-operated amusement machines of any kind or character. 
(b)  Convenience stores, the primary purpose of which is the sale of food items, may utilize coin-operated amusement devices as provided by chapter 6, article III, provided that all such machines shall be located in a separate room from the room in which alcoholic beverages are stored or offered for sale. 
(Code 1994, § 6-67; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-67), 8-12-1996) 
Secs. 4-94—4-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF SALES BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 4-115. - Prohibited hours of operation. 
No license holder shall sell, give away, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. Sunday; or 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on other days. 
(Code 1994, § 6-81; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-81), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-116. - Service to be by employees only. 
Alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be served by employees of the establishment only. 
(Code 1994, § 6-82; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-82), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-117. - Standards to determine sleeping or seating capacity; inspections; compliance with fire requirements. 
Where a minimum sleeping or seating capacity is prescribed in this chapter, the same shall be judged by existing ordinances of the county or state regulations or by reasonable standards. The fire department shall, upon request of the city clerk, inspect such premises and report its findings to the city clerk. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times to all fire regulations of the city, county and state. 
(Code 1994, § 6-83; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-83), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-118. - Sales outside of licensed premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any sale to be made outside of the enclosed building, premises or place of business licensed for such sale except as permitted by this section and section 4-119. 
(b)  The mayor and council may authorize special events no more than two times per year per licensee during which the use of contiguous structures, such as tents, may be utilized by a licensee in the conduct of his business. All such special events shall be limited to 48 hours in duration. Activities in contiguous structures shall cease no later than 10:30 p.m. of each day. Use of contiguous structures shall be permitted only where a sufficient number of parking spaces remain after erection of the structure to meet the zoning regulations in chapter 42. 
(c)  The mayor and council, in granting a special event permit, may attach conditions to the permit to protect the appropriate use of neighboring properties. 
(Code 1994, § 6-84; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-84), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-119. - Alcoholic beverage caterers. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized catered function means an event at a location not otherwise licensed for consumption of alcoholic beverages by the drink at which alcoholic beverages are furnished, for consideration, and sold, dispensed or provided free of charge to persons present at the event, by the drink, pursuant to a permit obtained under this section. 
Food caterer means any person who, for consideration, prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any person licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the state and who possesses a license by a local government in the state authorizing such person to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink off licensed premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
(b)  Licenses may be obtained for the purpose of selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages by the drink on premises at which authorized catered functions are to be held. Such licenses shall be annual licenses and may be obtained only by those persons, firms or corporations already licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail or by the drink. The procedures for securing such licenses and the terms thereof, including license fees, shall be as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(c)  Before a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at any authorized catered function, such caterer shall obtain a permit. The application for permit shall include the name of the alcoholic beverage caterer, the caterer's license number, and the date, address and time of the event. No permit fee shall be charged for the alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by the city. For caterers licensed by jurisdictions other than the city, a per event permit fee shall be charged. The amount of the fee shall be as established by the mayor and council from time to time. No permit shall be issued to any person under this section who does not hold an alcoholic beverage caterer's license from a local jurisdiction in the state. The permit shall be kept in the vehicle used to transport alcoholic beverages to the event at all times during which the permit is in effect. 
(d)  Caterers licensed by a jurisdiction other than the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported into the city for the event, and shall pay an excise tax to the city covering all such beverages at the rates provided by article V of this chapter. Failure to report and remit the tax within seven days of the conclusion of the event shall be grounds for denial of subsequent permits to that caterer for similar events. 
(e)  Caterers licensed by the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported for each event, by event, and shall make report and remittance of such taxes with their regular monthly reports to the city. 
(f)  No alcoholic beverages shall be transported, distributed or sold to other than licensed locations in the city, except to authorized catered functions, unless otherwise authorized by this chapter or by state law. 
(g)  The hours and days of sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages under this section shall be the same as provided for sales by the drink. 
(h)  No licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall employ any person under 21 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or handle alcoholic beverages at authorized catered functions. 
(i)  As a condition of permit issuance, alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by jurisdictions other than the city shall be provided a copy of the city's alcoholic beverage ordinances, and shall indicate, by signature, that they have received such ordinances and acknowledge the applicability of such ordinances to their operations. 
(Code 1994, § 6-85; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-85), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-120. - Operation of video games. 
(a)  No licensee under this article shall allow, maintain or operate on the licensed premises more than three video games. This provision does not include or pertain to musical machines or jukeboxes. 
(b)  Other provisions of this Code specifying license fees for the use of video games notwithstanding, licensees under this article shall pay a license fee, payable annually in advance, for the use of any allowed number of video games on the licensed premises. The amount of the annual license fee shall be as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(c)  Except as specified herein, the provision of this Code regarding the regulation and licensing of coin-operated amusement machines shall apply and be in full force and effect. 
(Code 1994, § 6-86; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-86), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-121. - Pricing. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business day means that period running from the commencement of business until 4:00 a.m. the following day. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on each licensed establishment or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner as to be in view of the paying public, and the schedule shall be effective for not less than one day. 
(c)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons. 
(2)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during that business day, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons at any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(6)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during that business day. 
(7)  Encourage or permit on the licensed establishment any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(8)  Issue to any customer any coupon, receipt, ticket or other item purporting to authorize the receipt of any free or reduced-price alcoholic beverage. 
(9)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any patron any alcoholic beverage if said patron has in such patron's possession or control any unconsumed alcoholic beverage. 
(d)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed establishment, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, provided that all patrons are allowed equal access to such free food, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests. No provision of this section shall prohibit a licensee from offering packages in which alcoholic beverages and food or lodging are offered as a unit; provided that the value of the alcoholic beverage is established at a uniform level for each package so offered, and the alcohol delivered as part of the package does not exceed the package allowance, and the tax due on the package allowance is remitted in full to the city for each package sold. 
(f)  No hotel or motel maintaining more than one licensed establishment upon its premises shall allow the promotion of one of its licensed establishments over another on the basis of prices for alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1994, § 6-87; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-87), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-122. - Hotel in-room service. 
Licenses obtained by hotels shall include the right to serve alcoholic beverages by the drink to registered guests in their hotel rooms as well as to deliver alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages to registered guests' rooms when such beverages have been ordered by such guests and/or to provide a cabinet or other facility in a hotel guest's room which contains alcoholic beverages for which licensed, and which is provided upon written request of the guest, and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest, and for which the sale of the alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested, except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused and unopened portion. All alcoholic beverages sold or distributed under this section shall be obtained by the hotel directly from a licensed wholesaler or distributor and shall be stored on the premises of the hotel until sold or served. 
(Code 1994, § 6-88; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-88), 8-12-1996) 
Secs. 4-123—4-142. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXCISE TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on sale of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80 et seq.; local excise tax on sales of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130 et seq.; local excise tax on sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq.; local excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-143. - Excise tax on distilled spirits retail sales. 
There is hereby imposed and levied an excise tax upon the wholesale sale of distilled spirits. The amount of such excise tax shall be computed on the basis of $0.22 per liter, excluding fortified wines, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-101; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-101), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-144. - Levy on wine sales. 
There is hereby imposed and levied an excise tax upon the wholesale sale of wine. The amount of such excise tax shall be computed on the basis of $0.22 per liter, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-102; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-102), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-145. - Levy on malt beverage sales. 
There is hereby imposed and levied upon wholesale dealers engaged in the city in the business of selling malt beverages an excise tax on malt beverages to be based, computed and collected as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrels or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(Code 1994, § 6-103; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-103), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-146. - Dealers required to collect; monthly reports. 
Wholesale dealers in alcoholic beverages are hereby required to remit the taxes imposed in sections 4-143 through 4-145. Wholesale dealers and distributors of said products shall make reports to the city clerk on or before the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month of the total gallons of such products sold or distributed within the city limits during the previous month, and shall accompany the report with payment of the tax due at the rate provided in sections 4-143 through 4-145 based upon the quantities of such product so sold the previous month. Each monthly report shall be accompanied by a sworn statement that the report is a true and correct report of all sales and shipments made within the city. Reports shall include all sales to any retail dealer in the city, whether delivered to the retail dealer's place of business in the city or elsewhere for resale in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-104; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-104), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-147. - Additional to other taxes. 
Excise taxes imposed by this article shall be in addition to any other taxes on licenses now imposed against such dealers. 
(Code 1994, § 6-114; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-114), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-148. - Failure to make reports or collect taxes. 
If any manufacturer or holder of a license fails or refuses to make the reports required in this chapter and collect and transmit taxes to the city, the city shall notify that party in writing, and if the report is not made within five days after the date of the notice, or the taxes not remitted, the city may withdraw from the wholesale dealer or license holder, the privilege of doing business in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-115; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-115), 8-12-1996) 
Secs. 4-149—4-164. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SALES BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 4-165. - Levy of tax. 
There is hereby imposed and levied upon every sale of an alcoholic beverage purchased by the drink in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of said beverage. 
(Code 1994, § 6-105; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-105), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-166. - Itemized billing by licensee; liability for payment. 
Every licensee licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink operating a place of business in the city, shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverages served shall be itemized separately. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(Code 1994, § 6-106; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-106), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-167. - Collection; information to city. 
Every licensee or licensee's agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax herein imposed from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink sold under the license. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the city to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(Code 1994, § 6-107; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-107), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-168. - Payment; collection fee. 
(a)  Due date. All taxes collected by any licensee or agent hereunder shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period, as set forth herein. 
(b)  Return; time of filing, persons required to file, execution. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city clerk in such form as the city may prescribe by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city. 
(d)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due, to the city clerk at city hall. 
(e)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under state law. 
(Code 1994, § 6-108; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-108), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-169. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation; authority to make, basis. If the city clerk is not satisfied with any return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, the city clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the city clerk's possession or that may come into such city clerk's possession. One or more than one deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination the city clerk may offset overpayments for a period against underpayments for another period, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 4-170(c). 
(d)  Penalty for negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to gross negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of such deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provision of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice of city clerk's determination; service of. The city clerk, or his designated representative, shall give to the licensee written notice of the city clerk's determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the licensee at the licensee's address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time within such notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules and regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1994, § 6-109; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-109), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-170. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee, or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Upon the basis of this estimate, the city clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(b)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest. In making a determination, the city clerk may offset overpayments for period or periods, against penalties and the interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(d)  Payment for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in section 4-171. 
(e)  Giving of notice; manner of service. Promptly after making the determination, the city clerk shall give the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Code 1994, § 6-110; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-110), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-171. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. 
Any person who fails to pay the tax herein imposed to the city, within the time required, shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the tax, in addition to the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 4-170(c). 
(Code 1994, § 6-111; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-111), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-172. - Collection of delinquent tax by city; duty of assignees to withhold taxes; liability; offsetting erroneous collections. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax, the city may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States, to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incidental thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any licensee liable for any amount under this article sells out such business or quits the business, such licensee's successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk showing that such licensee has paid the tax, or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the necessary amount from the purchase price as heretofore required, such purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the city clerk shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at the purchaser's address as it appears on the records of the city of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall begin at the time the licensee sells the business or at the time that the determination against the licensee becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(d)  Tax credit, penalty or interest paid more than once or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset as provided in section 4-169. If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not be determined by the city clerk, such licensee will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city, the excess amount paid to the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the licensee by whom it was paid, or such licensee's administrators or executors. 
(Code 1994, § 6-112; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-112), 8-12-1996) 
Sec. 4-173. - Administration; enforcement; rules; records; confidentiality of reports. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The city clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the Constitution of the state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes imposed hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from licensee; form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city clerk may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the city may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in any of such persons' possession or custody, information relating to sales of alcoholic beverages which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall set for the price charged for each sale, the dates of sales, and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(f)  Disclosure of business of operators, etc.; limitation on rule. The city clerk, or any person having an administrative duty under this article, shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment or other facilities of any licensee or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set for the or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this article, except in the case of judicial proceeding or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax hereby levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, upon satisfactory proof of interest, shall be given information as to the items included in the measure and amounts of unpaid tax and interest penalties. 
(Code 1994, § 6-113; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1(6-113), 8-12-1996) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BILLIARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power of local governments to license, regulate and tax billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billiard room means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. 
Billiards means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and includes all forms of the game known as "carom billiards," "pocket billiards," "English billiards," and "pool." 
Premises means the interior of the establishment holding a license under this article, as well as all exterior grounds and parking areas which are under the control or ownership of the license holder. 
(Code 1994, § 10-26; Ord. No. 90-4, § 1, 10-8-1990) 
Sec. 6-20. - Penalties. 
Any owner or operator of a billiard room found to be in violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 10-27; Ord. No. 90-2, § 5, 10-8-1990) 
Sec. 6-21. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or other constituted authorities to inspect all public billiard rooms for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not this article is being observed. 
(Code 1994, § 10-28; Ord. No. 90-2, § 3(d), 10-8-1990) 
Sec. 6-22. - Unobstructed view of tables. 
No billiard room shall be configured in such a manner that any person, upon entering the building on the premises, is not afforded a clear and unobstructed view of all billiard tables located within the building on the premises. No person who operates a billiard room shall permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions or other obstructions to be used to prevent such a clear view. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the maintenance of washrooms and toilet rooms for proper purposes and other maintenance of closets for storage purposes exclusively. 
(Code 1994, § 10-29; Ord. No. 90-2, § 3(a), 10-8-1990) 
Sec. 6-23. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard room between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. or to permit any person to remain in such billiard room between such prohibited hours, except regular employees performing necessary labor on the premises. 
(Code 1994, § 10-30) 
Sec. 6-24. - Gambling. 
No form of gambling shall be allowed on the premises of a billiard room, including in any other business premises operated in connection with the licensed operation. 
(Code 1994, § 10-31; Ord. No. 90-2, § 3(c), 10-8-1990) 
Sec. 6-25. - Doors unlocked when tables in use. 
The doors of every billiard room shall be kept unlocked whenever the tables are in use or when any person other than the proprietor or his agent is present in the establishment. 
(Code 1994, § 10-32; Ord. No. 90-2, § 3(e), 10-8-1990) 
Sec. 6-26. - Alcoholic beverages. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold in a billiard room except in an establishment which also possesses a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Only alcoholic beverages sold under the license may be consumed or be kept on the premises and must remain within the building at all times. 
(Code 1994, § 10-33; Ord. No. 90-2, § 3(f), 10-8-1990) 
Sec. 6-27. - Presence of minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to play billiards in or for any other purpose to enter or remain on the premises of any billiard room in which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale. This section shall not apply to a person under 18 years of age who is accompanied by a parent or guardian or who possesses a written permit from a parent or guardian, which permit is witnessed by a notary public with seal. If the proprietor of a billiard room is of the opinion that any person desiring admission is under the age of 18 years, he shall require such person to produce photo identification establishing his age. 
(Code 1994, § 10-34; Ord. No. 90-2, § 3(g), 10-8-1990) 
Secs. 6-28—6-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-58. - Required; application; issuance. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a billiard room shall obtain a license which, unless billiards is to be the sole business enterprise, shall be acquired in addition to all other licenses required by this Code, including but not limited to licenses to serve alcoholic beverages and other business licenses. Such person shall make application to the city clerk or designated representative and shall show the following: 
(1)  The applicant has never been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude; 
(2)  The applicant will certify that he is actively involved in the management of the business and that he will be responsible for violations that occur; and 
(3)  The applicant agrees to comply with all state laws and applicable sections of this Code and other local ordinances pertaining to the business. 
(b)  The application shall include a scale drawing of the premises, including interior walls and also any parking areas reserved for the licensed establishment. 
(c)  Upon the applicant meeting the requirements set forth in this section, a license shall be issued by the city for such fee as set forth in the city business license schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 10-46; Ord. No. 90-2, § 2, 10-8-1990) 
Sec. 6-59. - Alcoholic beverage sales. 
No license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the billiard room premises shall be issued or remain in effect for any business holding a billiard room license, unless the establishment is licensed as a restaurant and derives at least 50 percent of its revenue from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages. No package sales of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed for any business holding a billiard room license. 
(Code 1994, § 10-47) 
Sec. 6-60. - Suspension; revocation. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties prescribed by section 6-20, the city manager or designee, upon becoming aware of an alleged violation of this article or of any state law pertaining to alcoholic beverages or controlled substances on the licensed billiard room premises, may notify the license holder to appear for a hearing at such time and place as established by the city manager to answer to charges of the alleged violation and to show cause why his license should not be suspended or revoked. At least ten days' written notice shall be provided to a license holder of any hearing under this subsection. Such notice shall state the date and time for the hearing which shall be conducted by the city manager or designee. The decision of the city manager or designee may be appealed to the mayor and city council within ten days of the date of the decision issued in writing by the city manager or designee by delivering an appeal in writing to the city manager. The mayor and city council, upon receiving the appeal, shall hold a hearing within 30 days after the receipt of the appeal. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. An aggrieved party may appeal said decision to the Superior Court of Clayton County by petition for writ of certiorari in accordance with state law. 
(b)  Any violation of this article, chapter 4, pertaining to alcoholic beverages, other sections of this Code or city ordinances or state laws relating to billiard rooms, alcoholic beverages or controlled substances shall be considered as grounds for license suspension or revocation under this article. 
(Code 1994, § 10-48; Ord. No. 90-2, § 6, 10-8-1990; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 6, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 6-61—6-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-79. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arcade room means any establishment where more than three coin-operated amusement devices are maintained. 
Arcade room proprietor means any proprietor of an arcade room. The terms "proprietor" and "arcade room proprietor" shall be synonymous, unless specifically provided otherwise. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine. 
(1)  The term "bona fide coin-operated amusement machine" means every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket, card, or similar object and the result of whose operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b) through (g), and which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law. 
(2)  Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
a.  Pinball machines; 
b.  Console machines; 
c.  Video games; 
d.  Crane machines; 
e.  Claw machines; 
f.  Pusher machines; 
g.  Bowling machines; 
h.  Novelty arcade games; 
i.  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
j.  Miniature racetrack, football, or golf machines; 
k.  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
l.  Basketball machines; 
m.  Shuffleboard games; 
n.  Kiddie ride games; 
o.  Skeeball machines; 
p.  Air hockey machines; 
q.  Roll down machines; 
r.  Trivia machines; 
s.  Laser games; 
t.  Simulator games; 
u.  Virtual reality machines; 
v.  Maze games; 
w.  Racing games; 
x.  Coin-operated pool tables or coin-operated billiard tables as defined in of O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1(3); and 
y.  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in the state. 
(3)  The term "bona fide coin-operated amusement machine" also means machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide music whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket, card, or similar object such as jukeboxes or other similar types of music machines. 
(4)  The term "bona fide coin-operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
a.  Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; 
b.  Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
c.  Gas and electric meters; 
d.  Pay telephones; 
e.  Pay toilets; 
f.  Cigarette vending machines; 
g.  Coin-operated scales; 
h.  Coin-operated gumball machines; 
i.  Coin-operated parking meters; 
j.  Coin-operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
k.  Coin-operated massage beds; and 
l.  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in the state. 
Class A machine means a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine that is not a Class B machine, does not allow a successful player to carry over points won on one play to a subsequent play or plays, and: 
(1)  Provides no reward to a successful player; 
(2)  Rewards a successful player only with free replays or additional time to play; 
(3)  Rewards a successful player with noncash merchandise, prizes, toys, gift certificates, or novelties in compliance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c) or (d)(1), and does not reward a successful player with any item prohibited as a reward in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(i) or any reward redeemable as an item prohibited as a reward in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(i); 
(4)  Rewards a successful player with points, tokens, tickets, or other evidence of winnings that may be exchanged only for items listed in subsection (3) of this definition; or 
(5)  Rewards a successful player with any combination of items listed in subsections (2), (3), and (4) of this definition. 
Class B machine means a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine that allows a successful player to accrue points on the machine and carry over points won on one play to a subsequent play or plays in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(2) and: 
(1)  Rewards a successful player in compliance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(1) and (2); and 
(2)  Does not reward a successful player with any item prohibited as a reward in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(i) or any reward redeemable as an item prohibited as a reward in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(i). 
Distributor means any person who sets up for operation by another and leases or rents for the purpose of operation by another any device to which this article applies, whether such leasing or renting is for a fixed charge or rental or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such device or otherwise. 
Proprietor means any person who, as the owner or lessee, has under his control any establishment, place or premises in or at which a coin-operated amusement device is placed or kept for use or play or is on exhibition for the purpose of use or play by the general public. 
(Code 1994, § 10-71) 
Sec. 6-80. - Inspections. 
The chief of police shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any coin-operated amusement device is operated or set up for operation and shall inspect, investigate and test such devices as needed. 
(Code 1994, § 10-72) 
Sec. 6-81. - Attendant required. 
Under this article, it shall be unlawful for any proprietor to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. The attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. The attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(Code 1994, § 10-73) 
Sec. 6-82. - Placement of devices. 
All coin-operated amusement devices shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person who may frequent or be in any place of business where such devices are kept or used. However, no machine shall be placed within five feet of any public entrance or exit, and no proprietor, except game room proprietors, may keep or maintain a machine between any public entrance or exit and any cash register. 
(Code 1994, § 10-74) 
Sec. 6-83. - Gambling devices. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(Code 1994, § 10-75) 
Sec. 6-84. - Refunds and adjustments. 
Refunds and adjustments to all customers shall be the responsibility of the proprietor of the coin-operated amusement device in question. 
(Code 1994, § 10-76) 
Sec. 6-85. - Loitering. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Loitering means remaining idle in essentially one location and includes the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly and also includes the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter within the immediate vicinity of any coin-operated amusement device or business premises to which this article pertains or for any person licensed to operate a game room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any coin-operated amusement device or business premises to which this article pertains in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace. 
(2)  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person. 
(3)  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles. 
(4)  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place. 
(Code 1994, § 10-77) 
Sec. 6-86. - Minors. 
Under this article, proprietors shall not allow anyone under the age of 18 years to frequent or remain on their premises except during the following hours: 
(1)  During normal school terms: 
a.  Sunday through Thursday, 3:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
b.  Friday, 3:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
c.  Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(2)  During times when public schools are not in session: 
a.  Sunday through Thursday, 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
b.  Friday through Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(Code 1994, § 10-78) 
Sec. 6-87. - Attire of patrons. 
Under this article, all proprietors shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by persons frequenting their premises. 
(Code 1994, § 10-79) 
Sec. 6-88. - Pool tables. 
Under this article, no proprietor shall maintain pool tables or bumper pool tables on the premises. 
(Code 1994, § 10-80) 
Sec. 6-89. - Alcoholic beverages. 
Under this article, no proprietor shall allow alcoholic beverages to be brought onto his premises by any person. 
(Code 1994, § 10-81) 
Secs. 6-90—6-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-107. - Required. 
No person shall engage in the business of a distributor or proprietor of coin-operated amusement devices without first having obtained the proper license. 
(Code 1994, § 10-91) 
Sec. 6-108. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a license required by this division shall be filed in writing with the business license department, on a form to be provided by the city, and shall specify the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and, if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses. 
(2)  For a proprietor, the address of the premises where the licensed devices are to be operated, together with the character of the business carried on at such place. 
(3)  For a proprietor, the number of devices to be maintained on the premises. 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the devices, if other than the proprietor. This information shall not be released to the general public without the consent of the licensee. 
(5)  Whether or not the person having the management of or supervision over the applicant's business has been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any city ordinance or section of this Code, and the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefor. 
(b)  The proper license fee shall accompany the application. 
(Code 1994, § 10-92) 
Sec. 6-109. - Distributor's fee. 
The fee for each distributor applying for a license required under this division shall be as provided in the city business license tax schedule. All distributors' license fees shall be payable annually in advance. No portion of the license fee shall be refunded to the licensee. 
(Code 1994, § 10-93) 
Sec. 6-110. - Proprietor's fee. 
The fee for each proprietor applying for a license required under this division shall be as provided in the city business license tax schedule. All proprietors' license fees shall be payable annually in advance. No portion of the license fee shall be refunded to the licensee. 
(Code 1994, § 10-94) 
Sec. 6-111. - Arcade room proprietor's fee. 
The fee for each arcade room proprietor applying for a license required under this division shall be as provided in the city business license tax schedule. All arcade room proprietors' license fees shall be payable annually in advance. No portion of the license fee shall be refunded to the licensee. 
(Code 1994, § 10-95) 
Sec. 6-112. - Qualifications of applicant. 
No license required under this division shall be issued to or renewed for any person who has or employs a person who has, within five years of issuance or renewal of the license, been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony involving any federal or state offense or any federal or state misdemeanor involving a drug-related offense or an offense involving moral turpitude. The licensee will submit the identity of all owners and employees to the business license department on a continuing basis as changes occur. This information is to be forwarded to the police department for the purpose of allowing a complete check in order that these character qualifications be fulfilled prior to the issuance or renewal of any license issued under this division. 
(Code 1994, § 10-96) 
Sec. 6-113. - Posting; transferability; placing stickers on devices. 
(a)  The license issued under this division shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee. 
(b)  Such license shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and for a proprietor shall apply only to the premises for which such license is issued. 
(c)  In addition, each coin-operated amusement device shall have placed upon it by the licensee a sticker showing the license number of its distributor or proprietor. 
(Code 1994, § 10-97) 
Sec. 6-114. - Increasing number of devices. 
If a proprietor licensed under this division desires, after the expiration of any portion of any license year, to increase the number of coin-operated amusement devices to be used or played or exhibited for use or play in his establishment so that he then has four or more machines, he shall surrender his license to the business license department who shall issue a new arcade room proprietor license upon payment of the proper license fee with any applicable credit for the previously paid license fee. 
(Code 1994, § 10-98) 
Sec. 6-115. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued under this division shall be subject to suspension or revocation. 
(b)  Violation of any provision of this article shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of a license issued pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1994, § 10-99) 
Secs. 6-116—6-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; governing authority has power to enact legislation to restrict operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1. 

Sec. 6-144. - Purpose. 
(a)  Based on city officials' review of information regarding establishments that exploit live human nudity and human sexuality for commercial profit, euphemistically referred to as "adult entertainment," and the experiences of other urban cities and counties, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas; Manatee County, Florida; the State of Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and Phoenix, Arizona, and as further described in City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120 S. Ct 1382 (2000), which experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the city, and based on the evidence and testimony of persons who have appeared before the mayor and council, the mayor and council take note of the well-known and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of live human nudity and human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within the country. 
(b)  The mayor and council expressly find that the negative effects of adult entertainment are not limited to adult entertainment that offers live or recorded performances with human nudity or the depiction of sexual acts. Other forms of adult entertainment also have a deleterious effect upon the quality of life in nearby neighborhoods and commercial districts and on urban life in general Such other forms of adult entertainment include, but are not limited to, adult bookstores, peep shows, adult theaters, adult gift or novelty shops, and lingerie modeling studios. 
(c)  Further, based on the investigation conducted by the city regarding lingerie modeling studios, it is the finding of the mayor and council that lingerie modeling studios are establishments that offer adult entertainment in the form of live human nudity in a private setting. Based on the evidence presented to the mayor and council, it is apparent that lingerie modeling studios, by providing adult entertainment in a private setting, lead to criminal behavior, including, but not limited to, masturbation for hire, prostitution, and sodomy. 
(d)  Furthermore, based on the investigation conducted by the city, it is apparent that lingerie modeling studios pose a more difficult challenge to the enforcement of regulations pertaining to adult entertainment business, in that the activity occurs within a private setting, as opposed to in an open area which is visible to all patrons of the establishment. The mayor and council have determined that lighting, visibility and access are measures that can reduce the risk of crime to patrons and others. 
(e)  Accordingly, the mayor and council find that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to limit and regulate adult entertainment within the corporate boundaries of the city, so as to limit the adverse impact on property values, other business uses, residential uses and public and semi-public uses; to ensure that adult entertainment uses and adult entertainment facilities do not impede development, redevelopment and neighborhood revitalization efforts; to restrict adult entertainment and adult uses in heavily-used public pedestrian areas; and to protect patrons of adult entertainment business from unreasonable risk of crime. 
(f)  After giving due consideration to the considerations stated in these findings and the current state of growth and development of the city, the mayor and council find that the area zoned M Manufacturing is so situated as to provide sufficient vehicular access to patrons and suppliers, while providing the desired containment from residential uses and pedestrian traffic, regarding adult entertainment facilities and adult entertainment businesses. 
(g)  This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. This article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of providers and patrons of adult entertainment. 
(h)  It is a matter of governmental interest and concern and in the interest of the public welfare to minimize the proliferation of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments that commercially exploit human sexuality through adult entertainment to limit adult entertainment uses of property to certain prescribed areas of the city. To that end, the ordinance from which this article is derived is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-100), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-145. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult entertainment means, by way of description and not by limitation, the commercial, for-profit offering or provision of any of the following or any combination thereof: 
(1)  When offered for sale, rental, viewing or use and the proceeds from such offering constitute more than ten percent of the gross income of the establishment, any motion picture not rated G, PG, PG-13 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America, or any good, material, device, instrument, writing, document, audio recording, photograph, or tangible thing of whatever kind or description, including data compilations from which information can be obtained or viewed through any machine, instrument, computer or other detection or interpretation device, the principal intended effect of which is to excite the sexual arousal, desire or gratification of the user or another person and, further, that is characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual acts, activities, conduct, contact, relations or situations, or the exhibition, display or exposure of any specified human anatomical parts or areas; 
(2)  When offered as part of a commercial transaction, any service, whether or not it involves physical contact, performed by an employee or agent for a patron during which any specified human anatomical part or area of the employee or agent, is exposed, displayed or exhibited, or touched by either a patron or any employee; 
(3)  When offered as part of a commercial transaction, any activity, performance, exhibition, entertainment, show, demonstration, simulation or amusement the principal intended effect of which is to excite the sexual arousal, desire or gratification of any participant or any person viewing or intended to view such performance, exhibition, entertainment show, demonstration or amusement and, further, that is characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual acts, activities, conduct, contact, relations or situations, or the exhibition, display or exposure of any specified human anatomical parts or areas; 
(4)  Random acts of patrons or employees done without the consent, authority, foreknowledge, encouragement, acquiescence or tolerance of the management of a commercial establishment that do not yield a direct financial benefit to the establishment shall not be construed as adult entertainment for the purposes of this article; 
(5)  Sale or rental of any device or paraphernalia that is designed principally for sexual activities, but not including contraceptive devices, so long as such sales or rentals account for more than ten percent of gross income for the establishment; or 
(6)  Sale or rental of any drug related object, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32, so long as such sales or rentals account for more than ten percent of gross income for the establishment. 
Adult entertainment business or business shall include, by way of description and not by way of limitation, any establishment, business, commercial enterprise or service that offers any form of adult entertainment, as defined herein, to the public on the premises of the business or elsewhere, in exchange for a fee, payment, tip, charge, compensation, or other value or consideration as part of a commercial transaction. 
Adult entertainment facility or facility means any building, structure or location within the corporate limits of the city where adult entertainment, as defined herein, is sponsored, allowed, encouraged, condoned, presented, sold or offered to the public or to patrons or members, and any establishment with a segment, room or section devoted to such activity. A facility meets this definition even if such activity occurs on only one occasion. Examples of adult entertainment facilities include, but are not limited to, adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult theaters, peep shows, adult gift or novelty shops and establishments where live nude entertainment is offered. 
Dressing room means an employee restroom or a room or area within an adult entertainment facility used by employees for the purpose of changing clothes. 
Employee or agent means, without regard to whether such person would be considered an employee, agent or independent contractor for other purposes, any person who derives income or compensation from, or offers or provides with the expectation of receiving income or compensation, any of the following: 
(1)  The conduct or operation of any adult entertainment business; 
(2)  The provision or offering of adult entertainment; 
(3)  Any commercial transaction involving adult entertainment, whether or not such transaction is completed; or 
(4)  Any commercial transaction incidental to an adult entertainment business and involving any intended interaction with any patron, whether or not such transaction is completed. 
Fixed stage means a raised-floor area or stage at least four feet high and designed exclusively for, and used only by performers. A table used for seating of and service to customers does not constitute a fixed stage and shall not be used for performance purposes. 
License means a current license to operate an adult entertainment business within the corporate limits of the city issued by the city clerk upon true, correct and complete information provided by the license applicant. 
Lingerie modeling studio means any commercial establishment which offers for sale lingerie, bathing suits, or other garments and offers modeling of such garments. 
Patron includes any person other than an employee, contractor, agent or supplier of an adult entertainment business who frequents, visits, attends, or is present at an adult entertainment facility, including any customer, client, invitee or licensee of any adult entertainment business, whether or not a commercial transaction is completed with such person. 
Place of assembly means a structure, portion of a structure, or area (either indoor or outdoor), including but not limited to movie theaters, concert halls, stadiums, amusement parks carnivals, churches, elementary, middle, high, secondary and post graduate schools, day care centers, private commercial schools, such as martial arts or dance studios, clubs, lodges and arenas, designed primarily for people to gather to observe or participate in a single event or series of single events, including but not limited to the presentation of a motion picture, a concert, an educational presentation, a sermon, an inspirational presentation, a rally, a lecture, dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performance, or a sporting event. 
Principal intended effect means the consequence reasonably to be anticipated, and may be inferred from the totality of the circumstances. 
Private performance means adult entertainment at an adult entertainment facility that takes place in or is viewed in a private room. 
Private room means any area within an adult entertainment facility access to which is restricted to less than all patrons, customers or clients at some or all times during business hours, or an area within an adult entertainment facility which is intentionally totally or partially screened or partitioned so as to restrict visibility of or access to the screened area to less than all patrons. 
Specified human anatomical parts or areas refers to the body of any employee or agent of an adult entertainment business, any person depicted in any recorded medium and to any patron, customer, invitee or licensee of any such business, and the following when uncovered or covered by less than fully opaque material: the areola of the female breast; the female genitalia, including the mons veneris, vulva, vagina, labia and clitoris; the male genitalia and pubic region, including the pubis, penis, scrotum and testicles; the anus, perineum and more than two inches of the cleft of the buttocks. 
Specified sexual acts, activities, conduct, contact, relations or situations shall include, by way of description and not by limitation, any of the following, performed, portrayed, exhibited, simulated, or depicted in the presence of a patron, within view of a patron, or with the anticipation of a patron or recorded for the purpose of thereafter being viewed, used, or observed by a patron: actual sexual intercourse; masturbation; manual, mechanical, digital, oral or penile stimulation of any specific human anatomical part or area; stimulation or penetration of any specific human anatomical part or area by any foreign object; exposure, exhibition or display of any specified human anatomical part or area; disrobing or stripping to expose any specified human anatomical part or area; and any other act the principal intended effect of which is to excite the sexual arousal, desire or gratification of any patron. 
Stimulation includes fondling, caressing, stroking, touching and any other form of physical contact the principal intended effect of which is to excite the prurient interest or sexual arousal, desire or gratification of any patron of an adult entertainment business. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-101), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-146. - Regulation of conduct on premises. 
Any person, firm, business, partnership, corporation or other entity licensed hereunder or patronizing an adult entertainment business or an adult entertainment facility shall comply with the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  No person shall offer adult entertainment and no patron shall remain on the premises of any adult entertainment facility except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Sunday. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the premises of an adult entertainment facility. 
(3)  No patron shall touch, fondle or caress any employee, nor shall any employee touch, fondle or caress any patron. 
(4)  No patron shall place any tip or gratuity upon the person of any employee or in the clothing of any employee and no employee shall permit any tip or gratuity to be placed on their person or in their clothing by a patron. 
(5)  No part of any live performance of adult entertainment shall take place other than in an area generally accessible to all patrons and on a fixed stage. No person who is performing live adult entertainment shall leave a fixed stage during any performance, dance or demonstration. 
(6)  No patron shall be permitted on a fixed stage for any purpose. 
(7)  No patron shall be allowed within three feet of any fixed stage. 
(8)  No person shall serve, offer, consume or be in possession of any alcoholic beverage on the premises of an adult entertainment facility or in any parking area dedicated to use of an adult entertainment facility. 
(9)  In all rooms where adult entertainment occurs, lighting equivalent to five footcandles, as that term is used in Kaufman and Christensen, Eds., IES Lighting Handbook (Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, 1987), shall be maintained at all times that the facility is accessible to patrons. 
(10)  No private performances shall be allowed within an adult entertainment facility. 
(11)  No adult entertainment shall occur in a private room within an adult entertainment facility. 
(12)  No patron shall be permitted to enter any dressing room or private room nor shall any employee and patron jointly occupy any private room or dressing area. 
(13)  The license shall be displayed in a prominent place on the premises at all times. 
(14)  It shall be unlawful for any employee to be in a state of nudity except in a dressing room. It shall be unlawful for any patron to be in a state of nudity. For the purposes of this section, the term "nudity" shall mean showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple. It is the belief of the mayor and council that this subsection is legal under state law and the laws of the United States of America. However, if any court of competent jurisdiction declares to the contrary, it is the intention of the mayor and council that this subsection shall cease to be applicable or enforceable and shall instead be void. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-102), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-147. - Prohibitions; permitted locations. 
(a)  It is the belief of the mayor and council that the activities described in subsection (1) of the definition of "adult entertainment" in section 6-145 are illegal under state law and therefore not licensable under city ordinance. However, if any court of competent jurisdiction declares to the contrary, adult entertainment shall be a permitted use within the corporate limits of the city only pursuant to this article and in locations zoned M Manufacturing. 
(b)  It is the belief of the mayor and council that the activities described in subsection (2) of the definition of "adult entertainment" in section 6-145 are illegal under state law and therefore not licensable under city ordinance. However, if any court of competent jurisdiction declares to the contrary, adult entertainment shall be a permitted use within the corporate limits of the city only pursuant to this article and in locations zoned M Manufacturing. 
(c)  It is the belief of the mayor and council that the activities described in subsection (3) of the definition of "adult entertainment" in section 6-145 are illegal under state law and therefore not licensable under city ordinance. However, if any court of competent jurisdiction declares to the contrary, adult entertainment shall be a permitted use within the corporate limits of the city only pursuant to this article and in locations zoned M Manufacturing. 
(d)  It is the belief of the mayor and council that the activities described in subsection (5) of the definition of "adult entertainment" in section 6-145 are illegal under state law and therefore not licensable under city ordinance. However, if any court of competent jurisdiction declares to the contrary, adult entertainment shall be a permitted use within the corporate limits of the city only pursuant to this article and in locations zoned M Manufacturing. 
(e)  It is the belief of the mayor and council that the activities described in subsection (6) of the definition of "adult entertainment" in section 6-145 are illegal under state law and therefore not licensable under city ordinance. However, if any court of competent jurisdiction declares to the contrary, adult entertainment shall be a permitted use within the corporate limits of the city only pursuant to this article and in locations zoned M Manufacturing. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any lingerie modeling studio to allow modeling of lingerie in any room that is closed to the public. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-103), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-148. - Other location requirements. 
(a)  No adult entertainment business or adult entertainment facility shall be located: 
(1)  Within 200 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a place of assembly, governmental building, library, public park or playground, hospital, child care business, community club, jail, prison or building owned or operated by any governmental or quasi-governmental entity is located; 
(3)  Within 100 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined under this article is located; 
(4)  Within 200 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
(5)  Within 500 feet of the property boundary of any hotel or motel; or 
(6)  On a parcel which fails to provide one parking space for every three patrons that such an establishment has the capacity to hold. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by straight-line measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-104), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-149. - Structural requirements. 
Adult entertainment businesses and adult entertainment facilities shall be subject to the provisions of the zoning regulations in chapter 42, as may from time to time be amended, this article, and the following standards of use: 
(1)  In addition to the development standards of the zoning regulations in chapter 42, each adult entertainment business shall have an adult entertainment facility dedicated solely to the operation of the business named in its license. Said adult entertainment facility shall be located on a lot used for no purpose other than the conduct of the business named in the license. No adult entertainment facility shall be located in any strip shopping center, mall or other group structure. No adult entertainment facility shall share any common wall, parking area, entrance, waiting area, restrooms or lobby with any other business or use. 
(2)  The minimum lot area for an adult entertainment facility shall be one acre. 
(3)  In addition to zoning development standards governing commercial zoning districts, buildings and structures established in connection with an adult entertainment business or as an adult entertainment facility shall be separated by at least 40 feet from the buildings and structures of any other business establishment. The minimum rear yard shall be 75 feet. 
(4)  The parking standards established by the zoning regulations in chapter 42 shall apply to adult entertainment businesses and adult entertainment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-105), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-150. - Licenses subject to suspension or revocation. 
All licenses are subject to be suspended or revoked under the provisions of the ordinances of the city now in effect or which hereafter may be enacted. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-106), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-151. - License required. 
(a)  No person, group, unincorporated association, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity may operate or conduct an adult entertainment business or an adult entertainment facility or offer any form of adult entertainment without a valid and current license for an adult entertainment business having first been issued by the city clerk. A license shall be valid only if the information contained in the application therefor is true, correct and complete. 
(b)  A license to operate an adult entertainment business must be applied for and held in the name of the person, group, unincorporated association, firm, partnership, limited liability company or corporation that actually operates the business. 
(c)  No person, group, unincorporated association, firm, partnership, limited liability company or corporation shall maintain an adult entertainment facility without a valid license to operate an adult entertainment business. 
(d)  The license shall be displayed in a prominent place on the premises at all times. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-107), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-152. - License application information. 
To obtain an adult entertainment business license, an applicant must submit to the city clerk a completed, sworn license application containing the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual's legal name, aliases, date of birth, and mailing address; 
b.  A partnership, full and complete name of the partnership, whether the partnership is general or limited, a copy of the partnership agreement (if any), and the legal names, dates of birth, aliases and mailing addresses of each partner; 
c.  A corporation, the corporation's exact and complete corporate name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is registered to do business in and in good standing with the state, the legal name, date of birth, aliases, mailing address and corporate title of each officer and director and of each stockholder, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process, and the address of the principal business office of the corporation; or 
d.  Another entity, full and complete name of the entity, whether the entity is for profit or not for profit, a copy of the document that creates the entity or establishes the rights and duties of the owners of the entity, or if no such document exists, a document that recites the rights and duties of the owners and the legal names, dates of birth, aliases and mailing addresses of each and every person who has any ownership interest in the entity or who will benefit or profit in any way from the conduct of the business; 
e.  Regardless of the form of ownership of the applicant, the legal names, dates of birth, aliases and mailing addresses of each and every person who is a beneficial or equitable owner of the adult entertainment business, being defined as any person who enjoys the rights and benefits incident to ownership, whether or not legal title evidences such ownership; 
(2)  Whether within the 15 years immediately preceding the date of the application, the applicant or any individual identified in response to subsection (1) of this section was convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any criminal offense in violation of chapter 6 of title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia, other than O.C.G.A. § 16-6-23 or 16-6-24; 
(3)  Whether the applicant or any individual identified in response to subsection (1) of this section has been issued or has applied for a license to operate an adult entertainment business under this Code or in any other jurisdiction; and, if so, the name in which the license was issued or applied for; the date any such license was granted or, if not granted, applied for; the business location for which license was issued or applied for; the current status of the application or license; and the date and circumstances of any application denial, license suspension or license revocation or other adverse action regarding any license, permit or application for license or permit; 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any individual identified in response to subsection (1) of this section holds any other business or occupation license under this Code or similar codes from other jurisdictions, and, if so, the name, location, license number, and licensing jurisdiction or agency of each such other licensed establishment; 
(5)  The location of the proposed adult entertainment facility for the conduct of the adult entertainment business for which application is made, including a legal description of the property and the legal street address; 
(6)  The names, addresses, dates of birth, aliases and dates of employment of all employees known as of the date of the application; 
(7)  A site plan and a certified survey drawn to appropriate scale of the proposed adult entertainment facility indicating at least all property lines, rights-of-way, location of buildings, parking areas and spaces, curb cuts, driveways and distances to the following: 
a.  The nearest parcel of land used or zoned for residential use; 
b.  The nearest parcel of land upon which any hotel, motel, place of assembly, library, public park, hospital, child care business, community club, jail, prison or building owned or operated by any governmental or quasi-governmental entity is located; 
c.  The nearest parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined under this article is located; and 
d.  The nearest parcel of land upon which an establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(8)  A floor plan drawn to appropriate scale of the proposed establishment indicating, but not limited to: 
a.  All windows, all doors, all entrances and exits; and 
b.  All fixed structural and interior features, including but not limited to doors, walls, stages, partitions, dressing rooms, and private areas. 
(9)  Designation of two individuals who are to be actively involved in the on-site management of the proposed adult entertainment business, who reside in the Greater Atlanta area, as listed in the Bellsouth Real White Pages, or within 30 miles of the city limits, together with such representatives residence addresses, day and evening telephone numbers and means of being contacted 24 hours per day, in case of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-108), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-153. - Investigation fee. 
Payment of an investigation fee must accompany an application to operate an adult entertainment business. The investigative fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-109), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-154. - Disqualification for criminal conviction of specified offenses. 
(a)  No person, partnership, business, firm or corporation shall be granted a license if any person, partner, officer or owner of 15 percent or more of the shares of or interest in any such business, firm, partnership or corporation has been convicted of or has plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any criminal offense in violation of chapter 6 of title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia, other than O.C.G.A. § 16-6-23 or 16-6-24, within a period of 15 years immediately prior to the filing of the application. 
(b)  Should any such person, partner, or officer or shareholder of a corporation, after a license has been granted, be convicted of or plead guilty or nolo contendere to any such crime, said license shall be subject to suspension or revocation under section 6-165. 
(c)  Withdrawal of an owner, officer or partner or enumerated shareholder, after being convicted or entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the crimes specified in subsection (a) of this section shall not necessarily mitigate against denial o fan application or suspension or revocation of a license. 
(d)  Transfer of ownership while an owner, partner, officer or enumerated shareholder is under investigation by any law enforcement agency for any of the crimes specified in subsection (a) of this section or after such person has been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall not necessarily mitigate against denial of an application or suspension or revocation of a license. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-110), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-155. - Limitation on number of licenses. 
(a)  The following shall be the maximum number of licenses for adult entertainment businesses per 1,500 persons living in the city according to the most recent decennial census of the United States as published by the United States Bureau of the Census (in making this calculation, fractions of the required population minimum shall not be counted toward the establishment of an available license): 
(1)  One license for an adult entertainment business offering adult entertainment as described in subsection (1) of the definition of "adult entertainment" in section 6-145; 
(2)  One license for an adult entertainment business offering adult entertainment as described in subsection (2) of the definition of "adult entertainment" in section 6-145; 
(3)  One license for an adult entertainment business offering adult entertainment as described in subsection (3) of the definition of "adult entertainment" in section 6-145; 
(4)  One license for an adult entertainment business offering adult entertainment as described in subsection (5) of the definition of "adult entertainment" in section 6-145; and 
(5)  One license for an adult entertainment business offering adult entertainment as described in subsection (6) of the definition of "adult entertainment" in section 6-145. 
(b)  Should an adult entertainment business meet the definition of more than one of the above, then its dominant use shall determine the category for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-111), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-156. - Illegal activity not permitted. 
This article does not license, permit or render legal any act or conduct that is illegal under the laws of the state or the United States of America. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-112), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-157. - License renewal. 
A license to operate an adult entertainment business shall be valid from the date of issuance until January 1 of the following year and must be renewed annually. A change of ownership at any time shall require a new license and a new license fee. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-113), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-158. - License fee. 
The fee for an adult entertainment business license shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time, and shall be payable upon approval of license application, and thereafter annually and upon any change in ownership of the business, as a prerequisite to issuance of a license. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-114), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-159. - Effect of change in ownership. 
(a)  Any change in more than 20 percent of the ownership, including but not limited to sale of stock or substitution of partners or members, of an adult entertainment business shall require a separate application and investigation fee. 
(b)  Any change in 20 percent or less of the ownership, including but not limited to sale of stock or substitution of partners or members, of an adult entertainment business shall not require a separate application and investigation fee. However, the adult entertainment business shall provide to the city, within 30 days of such in ownership, notice of the change as well as the names, addresses and phone number of all new stockholders, partners, members or other owners. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-115), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-160. - Compliance with law. 
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation which holds an adult entertainment business license must also comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-116), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-161. - Time for action by city clerk. 
Applications for new licenses shall be passed upon by the city clerk within 60 days of the date of filing of the completed application. Date of filing shall be the time that a properly completed and executed application, along with the investigation fee, is received by the city clerk. Upon the expiration of the 60-day period without a decision being made on the application by the city clerk, the applicant shall be permitted to begin and conduct business as an adult entertainment business under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the city clerk denies the application for a new license. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment business under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the city clerk later denies the application, the business must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-117), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-162. - Denial of application. 
(a)  In the event that the city clerk denies an application for a license, the denial shall be transmitted in writing, with the reasons for that action specified to the mailing address specified on the application and pursuant to section 6-161 and the other requirements of this article. 
(b)  Effective date of denial; review hearing. 
(1)  Should the city clerk deny an application, the denial shall be effective beginning three business days from the date of the notice. Any applicant may request a hearing within ten days of the date of such notice before the city manager for the purpose of presenting evidence and asking for reconsideration of such action. Failure to request such reconsideration within ten days of the date of the notice shall result in a waiver of any appeal rights hereunder. 
(2)  If a hearing for reconsideration before the city manager is requested, a hearing shall be held not more than 30 days from the date the written notice requesting such hearing is received by the city manager. Upon the expiration of the 30-day period without a hearing, the applicant shall be permitted to begin business as an adult entertainment business under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the city manager sustains or modifies the original determination. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment business under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the city manager later sustains or modifies the original determination, the business must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(3)  The city manager may sustain, overrule, or modify the original determination. The decision of the city manager following the hearing on the matter shall be issued within 20 days of the date of the hearing and shall be final. Upon the expiration of the 20-day period without a decision of the city manager being issued on the matter, the applicant shall be permitted to begin or resume business as an adult entertainment business under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the city manager sustains the original determination. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment business under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the city manager later sustains or modifies the original determination, the business must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-118), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-163. - Employee investigation; fees. 
(a)  No person may be employed, whether as an employee or as an independent contractor whose work involves any intended interaction with any patron, by an adult entertainment business holding a license issued pursuant hereto without first obtaining a work permit from the police department indicating the person has not, within the preceding ten years, been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any criminal offense in violation of chapter 6 of title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia, other than O.C.G.A. § 16-6-23 or 16-6-24. A current and valid work permit must be kept on file at the adult entertainment facility where such person performs or is otherwise employed. This subsection shall apply to performers, entertainers and musicians engaged in temporary work as well as regular full-time and part-time employees, regardless of the nature of work performed. 
(b)  Eligibility for employment. 
(1)  The police department shall fingerprint all persons applying for a work permit to work for an adult entertainment business or at an adult entertainment facility and shall determine whether the work permit applicant has a record of conviction, whether by trial verdict, guilty plea or plea of nolo contendere, of any criminal offense in violation of chapter 6 of title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia, other than O.C.G.A. § 16-6-23 or 16-6-24. Within 20 days from the date a complete application is received by the police department, the police department shall mail (by certified mail, return receipt requested) to the work permit applicant a letter stating whether the applicant is eligible or ineligible for employment at an adult entertainment facility or by an adult entertainment business according to the criterion set forth herein. If a determination of ineligibility is made, the reason therefor shall be set forth in the letter. Upon the expiration of the 20-day period without a letter regarding eligibility being mailed to the applicant, the applicant shall be permitted to begin employment at an adult entertainment facility or by an adult entertainment business under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the police department mails to the applicant a letter stating that the applicant is ineligible. No applicant employed at an adult entertainment facility or by an adult entertainment business under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to such continued employment, and if the police department later mails to the applicant a letter stating that the applicant is ineligible, the applicant must comply with this article. For the purposes of this section, date of mailing shall be the date on which the letter is posted with the United States Postal Service. 
(2)  A determination of ineligibility may be appealed to the city clerk. A notice of appeal shall be filed in writing no later than six business days from the date of the letter from the police department. Failure to appeal the police department's determination within six business days of the letter from the police department shall constitute a waiver of any appeal rights hereunder. If an appeal is filed, a hearing shall be held not more than 30 days from the date of the written notice of appeal. Upon the expiration of the 30-day period without a hearing, the applicant shall be permitted to begin employment at an adult entertainment facility or by an adult entertainment business under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the city clerk sustains or modifies the determination of the police department. No applicant employed at an adult entertainment facility or by an adult entertainment business under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to such continued employment, and if the city clerk later sustains or modifies the determination of the police department, the applicant must comply with this article. 
(3)  The city clerk may sustain, overrule, or modify the determination of the police department. The decision of the city clerk following the hearing on the matter shall be issued within 30 days of the date of the hearing and shall be final. Upon the expiration of the 30-day period without a decision of the city clerk being issued on the matter, the applicant shall be permitted to begin employment at an adult entertainment facility or by an adult entertainment business under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the city clerk sustains or modifies the decision of the police department. No applicant employed at an adult entertainment facility or by an adult entertainment business under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued employment at such business, and if the city clerk later sustains or modifies the determination of the police department, the applicant must comply with this article. There shall be no right of appeal of the decision of the city clerk. 
(c)  Work permits shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance and it shall be the responsibility of the employee or independent contractor to see that the permit is thereafter renewed. It shall be unlawful for an adult entertainment business or facility to allow any person required by this article to obtain a work permit to work or perform on its premises without a valid work permit. The adult entertainment business must keep a copy of the work permit of each person required by this article to obtain a work permit on file at the adult entertainment facility available at the facility for inspection by city officials at all times. 
(d)  The mayor and council may prescribe reasonable fees for work permits and investigations incident thereto. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-119), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-164. - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to the practice of any profession or occupation licensed by the state or a licensing agency recognized by the state. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-120), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 6-165. - Suspension or revocation of license; appeal. 
(a)  The following shall constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of adult entertainment business licenses: 
(1)  Any violation of this article regulating adult entertainment facilities or businesses or other ordinances of the city relating to conduct of the business. 
(2)  Violation of any federal or state law by any owner or employee arising out of conduct on the licensed premises or otherwise affecting the suitability of such person to engage in adult entertainment. 
(b)  Notice; review hearing. 
(1)  Should the city clerk determine that grounds exist for the suspension or revocation of a license under subsection (a) of this section, the city clerk shall send by first class mail to the license holder written notice of the license suspension or revocation with a statement of the grounds supporting such action. Such suspension or revocation shall be effective beginning three business days from the date of the notice. Any license holder may request a hearing within ten days of the date of such notice before the city manager for the purpose of presenting evidence and asking for reconsideration of such action. Failure to request such reconsideration within ten days of the date of the notice shall result in a waiver of any appeal rights hereunder. 
(2)  If a hearing for reconsideration before the city manager is requested, a hearing shall be held not more than 30 days from the date the written notice requesting such hearing is received by the city manager. Upon the expiration of the 30-day period without a hearing, the license holder shall be permitted to resume business as an adult entertainment business under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the city manager sustains or modifies the original determination. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment business under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the city manager later sustains or modifies the original determination, the business must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(3)  The city manager may sustain, overrule, or modify the original determination. The decision of the city manager following the hearing on the matter shall be issued within 20 days of the date of the hearing and shall be final. Upon the expiration of the 20-day period without a decision of the city manager being issued on the matter, the license holder shall be permitted to resume business as an adult entertainment business under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the city manager sustains the original determination. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment business under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the city manager later sustains or modifies the original determination, the business must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(c)  Any violation by an agent or employee of a license holder which would subject the licensee to suspension or revocation under subsection (a) of this section shall be considered a violation by the licensee for the purpose of the suspension and revocation provisions of this section. 
(d)  In addition to the procedure for license suspension and/or revocation as outlined in this section, any violation of this article shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to punishment as provided by section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 1(art. IV, § 10-121), 4-14-2003) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; rabies control and licensing of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Agreement with county. 
The mayor and council are authorized to enter into an agreement with the county or any agency or department thereof for the enforcement of this chapter. When such is the case, the rules of the party with whom the contract is made as to impoundment, storage, costs, fees, redemption and disposal shall prevail. 
(Code 1972, § 3-6; Code 1994, § 14-1) 
Sec. 8-2. - Manner of keeping animals and fowl. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit any animal or fowl in the city in such manner as to create an unsatisfactory condition or to cause offensive odors. Upon receipt of a complaint from a citizen of the city that such a condition exists, it shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer or the chief of police to inform the owner or the person in charge of the animal or fowl of the complaint made. Such owner or keeper shall be notified that he has a period of 72 hours within which the unsanitary condition or offensive odor must be abated. Failure to abate the condition or the odor within the time specified shall constitute an offense against this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 3-9; Code 1994, § 14-2) 
Sec. 8-3. - Poison. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or deposit any poison or substance containing poison on any property not owned by such person. 
(Code 1972, § 3-8; Code 1994, § 14-3) 
Sec. 8-4. - Disposal of dead animals. 
Dead animals on public or private property shall be removed by the owner, and it shall be unlawful to fail to do so. Should the owner fail to do so, the city shall remove and dispose of the carcass and charge the costs of removal and disposition to the owner. 
(Code 1972, § 3-7; Code 1994, § 14-4) 
Secs. 8-5—8-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-27. - Confinement; leash required. 
A dog owner residing in the city is required to confine his dog to the premises of the owner, and it shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to do so. However, the owner or some competent person who has the permission of the owner may have a dog off the owner's premises, provided that the dog is on a leash not more than six feet in length. 
(Code 1972, § 3-4; Code 1994, § 14-26) 
Sec. 8-28. - Impoundment of dogs running at large. 
A dog at large is defined as any dog off the owner's premises and not on a leash as described in section 8-27. All dogs at large in the city shall be impounded by the proper authorities of the county. 
(Code 1972, § 3-5; Code 1994, § 14-27) 
Secs. 8-29—8-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 8-60. - Authority; definitions. 
(a)  The ordinance from which this division is derived is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. ("Dangerous Dog Control—Definitions"), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this division. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq., and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
(Code 1994, § 14-41; Ord. No. 89-1, § 3(3-16), 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 8-61. - Appointment of dog control officer and animal control board. 
(a)  The county, pursuant to contract with the city, shall designate a dog control officer who shall perform the duties and exercise the powers assigned to that position by the Dangerous Dog Control Law (O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.). 
(b)  The county animal control boards are designated to serve as animal control boards for the city, pursuant to intergovernmental contract. 
(Code 1994, § 14-42; Ord. No. 89-1, § 3(3-17), 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 8-62. - Registration. 
(a)  The owner of a classified dog must secure a certificate of registration in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27 (Dangerous Dog Control—Issuance of Certificate of Registration). 
(b)  The annual fee for the certificate of registration shall be as established from time to time by the county. 
(c)  Nonpayment of the registration fee shall be an offense and shall be punishable under section 1-8. 
(d)  The dog control officer shall maintain a copy of all state laws and sections of this Code applicable to dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs which shall be available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. The dog control officer shall not be authorized to interpret these laws or give advice to owners. 
(Code 1994, § 14-43; Ord. No. 89-1, § 3(3-20), 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 8-63. - Investigation. 
The dog control officer may make such investigations and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs and their respective owners within the city. The dog control officer shall have the authority to investigate complaints as part of the process of identifying dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs. The dog control officer's authority to investigate shall include the power to enter onto public and private property for the purpose of periodic inspection. 
(Code 1994, § 14-44; Ord. No. 89-1, § 3(3-18), 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 8-64. - Classification; notice and hearing. 
(a)  When a dog control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the city manager or his designee on the dog control officer's determination within 15 days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall also provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this division. 
(b)  When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the city manager or designee for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city manager or designee conducting the hearing shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the city manager or designee conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
(c)  Within ten days after the hearing, the city manager or designee which conducted the hearing shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(d)  Judicial review of the authority's final decision may be had in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-13-19. 
(Code 1994, § 14-45; Ord. No. 89-1, § 3(3-19), 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 8-65. - Confiscation. 
(a)  Dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs are subject to immediate confiscation pursuant to the grounds for confiscation in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. 
(b)  Dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs that have been confiscated shall be taken to such impound facility as is designated from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Dog owners shall pay a confiscation fee and the daily boarding fee as established by the county for each day the dog remains at the impound facility. Nonpayment of either or both of these fees shall be an offense and shall be punishable under section 1-8. 
(d)  Dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs shall be returned to their owners pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27 and after all fees have been paid. 
(Code 1994, § 14-46; Ord. No. 89-1, § 3(3-21), 1-10-1989) 
Secs. 8-66—8-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 8-89. - Running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or the person having custody to allow any livestock or fowl to run at large in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 3-1; Code 1994, § 14-66) 
Sec. 8-90. - Impoundment; fees. 
It shall be the duty of the proper authorities of the county to impound any livestock or fowl found running or roaming at large in the city. For each day of impoundment of any livestock or fowl, the county shall receive a fee from the owner or custodian in accordance with county policies prior to release. 
(Code 1972, § 3-2; Code 1994, § 14-67) 
Sec. 8-91. - Notice of impounding; disposition. 
Upon the impoundment of any livestock or fowl, the officer impounding shall make a reasonable and continuing effort to notify the true owner or custodian. The animal may be redeemed by the owner or custodian by the payment of the impounding fees referred to in section 8-90. If an impounded animal is not redeemed in accordance with county policies, the county will dispose of the animal. 
(Code 1972, § 3-3; Code 1994, § 14-68) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official or building inspector means the qualified building official or qualified building inspector as designated by the city. 
Code enforcement officer means the qualified code enforcement official as designated by the city. 
Sec. 10-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The building official and the code enforcement official are hereby authorized to enforce within the city the provisions of this chapter, the zoning regulations in chapter 42, and the state minimum codes adopted herein. 
(b)  The building official and the code enforcement official are further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter and the adopted state codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the force and effect of law and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code or in the adopted state codes. 
Sec. 10-3. - Final decision. 
The city manager or his designee shall constitute the building and construction board of appeals of the city (hereinafter referred to as the "appeals board"). The duties of the appeals board will be to act as a reviewing body in matters pertaining to building and construction standards, devices, appliances and equipment. The building and construction board of appeals shall review and render a decision, when requested to do so by any person, firm or corporation, on any interpretation or ruling made by the building official or the code enforcement official relative to this chapter. Any decision or ruling rendered by the appeals board shall be final, subject to appeal to and decision of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 10-4. - Duties of code enforcement officer. 
It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to see to the proper construction, alteration, repair, redesigning, remodeling, demolition, moving, removal, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings of every nature in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 4-1; Code 1994, § 18-1) 
Sec. 10-5. - Codes adopted; amendments. 
(a)  The codes listed in this section are adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, repair, redesigning, remodeling, demolition, moving, removal, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided for by subsequent ordinance or another provision of this Code, the technical building and construction codes listed in this section are adopted by reference and incorporated into this Code as if set out fully herein, including the administration and appendix chapters also contained in those codes. The state minimum codes enumerated under O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9), as now or hereafter revised or modified pursuant to state law: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(3)  International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments 2011 and 2012. 
(9)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2009. 
(10)  International Existing Building Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2009. 
(11)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(c)  Wherever the term "municipality" or "city" is used in the codes adopted under this section, it shall be held to mean the City of Lake City. 
(d)  If any of the publications listed in subsection (b) of this section are adopted as a state minimum code pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the edition adopted by the state shall control. If any of the publications listed in subsection (b) of this section are less stringent than the state minimum codes promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the state minimum code shall control. 
(e)  A copy of each of the publications listed in subsection (b) of this section, as adopted by the state, is filed in the clerk's office and available for review by the public. The same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 4-2; Code 1994, § 18-2) 
Sec. 10-6. - References to officials in adopted technical codes. 
Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this chapter, then that official of the city as designated by the city manager who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code, shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
Sec. 10-7. - Tests. 
The building official or code enforcement official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
Sec. 10-8. - Violation of codes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act prohibited by any code adopted in section 10-5 or to fail to do any act required by such codes. 
(Code 1972, § 4-6; Code 1994, § 18-3) 
Sec. 10-9. - Issuance of building permits. 
Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the applicable sections of this Code as set out in the zoning regulations in chapter 42. 
(Code 1972, § 4-3; Code 1994, § 18-4) 
Sec. 10-10. - Building permit fees. 
Fees for building permits shall be as set forth in the building code adopted in section 10-5. 
(Code 1972, § 4-4; Code 1994, § 18-5) 
Sec. 10-11. - Revocation of building permit. 
The code enforcement officer shall have the authority to revoke any building permit and to seek injunctive relief against any person in violation of any applicable code adopted in section 10-5 or in the zoning regulations in chapter 42. 
(Code 1972, § 4-7; Code 1994, § 18-6) 
Sec. 10-12. - Performing inspections; contracting for inspection services; self-inspection by master plumbers or utility contractors not authorized. 
(a)  Inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be made by the building official or such official's duly authorized representatives. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building official or representative may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon such official by the code. The building official and representatives are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the code and are hereby invested with all police power necessary for the purpose of making arrests, issuing copies of charges and prosecution of any person as may be charged with any violation of this chapter or other ordinances of the city. 
(b)  All installations of any equipment, appliance or system for which a permit has been issued as prescribed in the code shall be subject to inspection by the building official or representatives. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall, from time to time, have the authority to enter into a contract with other municipalities or the county for building, electrical, gas, heating and air conditioning, or plumbing inspection. An inspector for another political subdivision may be appointed as such for the city by the mayor and council. 
(d)  The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 4-5; Code 1994, § 18-7; Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 6-10-1996; Ord. No. 96-03, § 1, 6-10-1996) 
Sec. 10-13. - Temporary structures. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected any temporary structure or tent to be used for public assemblages or for public religious, educational or entertainment purposes without first obtaining a permit from the mayor and council. Any person desiring to erect such a tent or structure shall apply in writing for a permit. The application shall be delivered to the city clerk and shall reveal the following: 
(1)  The type of structure or tent desired; 
(2)  The material from which the tent or structure is made; 
(3)  The equipment expected to be used inside and outside the structure when erected; 
(4)  The exact use to be made of the structure; 
(5)  The number of people expected to use the facility; 
(6)  The arrangements for traffic control; 
(7)  Parking; 
(8)  The desired location of the structure; 
(9)  The precautions to be taken against fire; and 
(10)  The sanitary facilities available. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall consider the application within ten days of its submission and shall render a decision within 15 days. The mayor and council shall consider all pertinent factors, including but not limited to noise, dust, safety, traffic and nuisance, if any, to other citizens and property owners. 
(c)  A permit shall not be issued unless the proposed structure or tent conforms to the applicable sections of this chapter, the zoning regulations in chapter 42, all sanitary and health regulations and all other sections of this Code and other ordinances or unless the structure or tent, as finally constructed, complies with plans upon which the permit was requested. 
(d)  No temporary structure or tent shall ever be used as a residence. 
(e)  Permits for temporary structures shall expire 90 days after issuance, unless issued for a shorter period of time by vote of the mayor and council. One renewal may be granted by the mayor and council following expiration of the original permit term. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as interfering with the use of tents for funeral purposes, Boy Scout activities and children's at-home recreation. 
(Code 1972, § 4-8; Code 1994, § 18-8) 
Sec. 10-14. - Fencing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow any fence to be located on any property in the city unless such fence is constructed of metal, including chainlinks, wood, or other similarly solid, rigid, durable material and so as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension, except for doors and gates. Additionally, all fencing shall be constructed such that all structural supports, framing, and other such components are facing towards the interior of the property. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, any fence required by this Code, except for article IV, division 2, of this chapter, to be erected shall be of such opaque material and so constructed as to completely obscure any view through any portion of the fence. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1(18.9), 4-14-2003) 
Secs. 10-15—10-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-32—10-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS; INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 10-51. - Permit required. 
Any person, except a public utility company operating under a franchise, installing line wires, meters, signal or communicating systems, before doing any electrical wiring or making additions to or alterations in existing electrical wiring, shall file written notice at the city clerk's office, stating fully the nature of the work to be done and the owner of and location of the property where the work is to be done, and shall obtain a permit to do the work outlined. 
(Code 1994, § 18-41) 
Sec. 10-52. - Issuance of permit restricted. 
No electrical work permit shall be issued to any person who shall not be a duly licensed electric wiring contractor. 
(Code 1994, § 18-42) 
Sec. 10-53. - Fees. 
The fees to be paid for permits and inspections required by this division shall be as fixed and determined by the mayor and council from time to time and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 18-43) 
Sec. 10-54. - Concealment of work. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or cause to be concealed, in such manner that the electrical inspector cannot satisfy himself that this division has been complied with, any electrical wiring until after the wiring has been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1994, § 18-44) 
Sec. 10-55. - Inspections required. 
Upon the completion of any electrical wiring installation and before the installation may be connected to a source of electrical service, the installation shall be inspected and approved by the electrical inspector as being in compliance with this division. 
(Code 1994, § 18-45) 
Sec. 10-56. - Certificate of approval. 
Upon approval of an electrical wiring installation, the electrical inspector shall issue a certificate of approval. 
(Code 1994, § 18-46) 
Sec. 10-57. - Temporary connections. 
Permission may be granted by the electrical inspector for temporary electrical service for a period of time not exceeding 30 days for the connection of electrical service to any electrical wiring installation. 
(Code 1994, § 18-47) 
Secs. 10-58—10-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLUMBING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-88. - Regulations adopted. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference as if set out at length herein the latest editions of the Rules of Department of Human Resources Public Health Chapter 290-5-26 On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter referred to as the "regulations"). 
(b)  All on-site sewage management systems of every kind or character maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in the city shall be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in accordance with the regulations, and no permit shall be issued for the maintenance, erection, building, repair, renovation or expansion of any swimming pool unless the same is to be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in the city in accordance with the regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with this subsection. 
(c)  At least one copy of the regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Where reference is made in the regulations to the duties of certain officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the regulations shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the regulations is concerned. 
(Ord. No. 04-01, § 1(18-71), 12-13-2004) 
Secs. 10-89—10-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOW-FLOW FIXTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 10-120. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial building means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and includes the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Plumbing fixture means any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory or kitchen faucet and replacement aerators. 
Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling unit, but does not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl, but not provided with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
(Code 1994, § 18-81; Ord. No. 91-1, § 2, 3-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-121. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this division to require the use of ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings for the purpose of conserving water, to maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies and to reduce wastewater flows. 
(Code 1994, § 18-82; Ord. No. 91-1, § 1, 3-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-122. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This division shall be enforced by the code enforcement officer who shall have full authority to issue citations for violations of this division. 
(b)  Any person violating this division shall be tried before the judge of the municipal court and, upon conviction or entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, each violation of this division shall subject such person to the punishments as provided in section 1-8. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 18-83; Ord. No. 91-1, § 7, 3-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-123. - Remedies for violations. 
(a)  In addition to criminal prosecution pursuant to section 10-122, any building or plumbing contractor, developer, owner or other person who violates this division shall be subject to suspension of his business license for a period of up to 90 days. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties referred to in section 10-122, the city may take such other actions as authorized by law to compel compliance with the requirements of this division and may specifically maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to comply with or restrain any violation of this division. 
(Code 1994, § 18-84; Ord. No. 91-1, § 8, 3-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-124. - Standards for plumbing fixtures. 
(a)  No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state minimum plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 10-126. 
(b)  The standards are as follows: 
(1)  A water closet or toilet that: 
a.  Is a dual-flush water closet that meets the following standards: 
1.  The average flush volume of two reduced flushes and one full flush may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
2.  The toilet meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the following standards, as applicable: 
(i)  American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2-2008; and 
(ii)  American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.14-2006 Six-Liter Water Closets Equipped with a Dual Flushing Device"; and 
3.  Is listed to the WaterSense TM Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; or 
b.  Is a single-flush water closet, including gravity, pressure-assisted, and electro-hydraulic tank types, that meets the following standards: 
1.  The average flush volume may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
2.  The toilet must meet the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.192/CSA B45.1 or A112.19.14; and 
3.  The toilet must be listed to the WaterSense TM Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; 
(2)  A showerhead that allows a flow of no more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  A urinal and associated flush valve that: 
a.  Uses no more than 0.5 gallons of water per flush; 
b.  Meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2/CSA B45.1; 
c.  For flushing urinals, meets all WaterSense TM specifications for flushing urinals; and 
d.  Where non-water urinals are employed, complies with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.3/CSA B45.4 or American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.19/CSA B45.4. Non-water urinals shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions after installation. Where non-water urinals are installed they shall have a water distribution line roughed-in to the urinal location at a minimum height of 56 inches (1,422 mm) to allow for the installation of an approved backflow prevention device in the event of a retrofit. Such water distribution lines shall be installed with shut-off valves located as close as possible to the distributing main to prevent the creation of dead ends. Where non-water urinals are installed, a minimum of one water-supplied fixture rated at a minimum of one water-supplied fixture unit shall be installed upstream on the same drain line to facilitate drain line flow and rinsing; 
(4)  A lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 1.5 gallons of water per minute at a pressure of 60 pounds per square inch in accordance with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.18.1/CSA B.125.1 and listed to the WaterSense TM High-Efficiency Lavatory Faucet Specification; and 
(5)  A kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute. 
(Code 1994, § 18-85; Ord. No. 91-1, § 3, 3-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-125. - Applicability. 
Section 10-124 shall apply to any residential construction, and to any commercial construction, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement toilets or showers, or both. 
(Code 1994, § 18-86; Ord. No. 91-1, § 4, 3-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-126. - Exemptions. 
New construction and the repair or renovation of existing buildings shall be exempt from the requirements of section 10-124 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewer system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing building. 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewer system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this division were installed. This exemption includes but is not limited to showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as an emergency eyewash station. 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity-flow system from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence. 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(Code 1994, § 18-87; Ord. No. 91-1, § 5, 3-11-1991) 
Sec. 10-127. - Procedure for obtaining exemption. 
(a)  No owner shall be entitled to an exemption from the requirements of section 10-124 unless he shall first have obtained an exemption in writing from the code enforcement officer. Application for exemption shall be made on a form provided by the code enforcement officer and shall include a listing of the specific exemption sought; the basis for such exemption; and, where such exemption is based on technological unfeasibility, the affidavit of a registered professional engineer or architect verifying the unfeasibility of the water conservation device for the particular existing structure. 
(b)  A fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council shall be charged for issuance of such an exemption. 
(c)  The code enforcement officer shall review the plans for the facility and may make inspections of existing premises where exemptions from the requirements of this division are sought. 
(d)  If, upon the basis of such investigation and any inspections, the code enforcement officer determines that the requested exemption falls within those parameters provided by section 10-126, he shall issue such exemption in written form, which form shall bear his signature and date. 
(Code 1994, § 18-88; Ord. No. 91-1, § 6, 3-11-1991) 
Secs. 10-128—10-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SWIMMING POOLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-153. - Regulations adopted. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference as if set out at length herein the latest editions of the county health department swimming pool regulations, as adopted and amended by the county environmental health department (hereinafter referred to as "the regulations"). 
(b)  All swimming pools of every kind or character maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in the city shall be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in accordance with the regulations, and no permit shall be issued for the maintenance, erection, building, repair, renovation or expansion of any swimming pool unless the same is to be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in the city shall be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in accordance with the regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with this subsection. 
(c)  At least one copy of the regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Where reference is made in the regulations to the duties of certain officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the regulations shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the regulations is concerned. 
(Ord. No. 04-01, § 2(18-111), 12-13-2004) 
Secs. 10-154—10-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FENCES 

Sec. 10-175. - Applicability. 
This division shall be applicable to all new swimming pools constructed, other than indoor pools, and shall apply to all pools which have a minimum depth of 18 inches of water. 
(Code 1994, § 18-121; Ord. of 8-12-1980(2)) 
Sec. 10-176. - Required. 
No person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser, lessee, tenant or a licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool or family pool having a minimum depth of 18 inches shall fail to provide and maintain a fence or wall as provided in this division. 
(Code 1994, § 18-122; Ord. of 8-12-1980(2)) 
Sec. 10-177. - Specifications. 
Every outdoor swimming pool or family pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than five feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension, except for doors and gates. If a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal dimensions shall not exceed four inches. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. 
(Code 1994, § 18-123; Ord. of 8-12-1980(2)) 
Sec. 10-178. - Gates or doors. 
All gates or doors opening through a swimming pool enclosure, shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. 
(Code 1994, § 18-124; Ord. of 8-12-1980(2)) 
Secs. 10-179—10-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT (RESERVED) 

Secs. 10-210—10-226. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GRADING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-227—10-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 10-246. - Required. 
In order to engage in any grading or other activity involving the clearing of land encompassing less than one acre within the city, each contractor, whether a general contractor or a subcontractor, must first procure a grading permit from the city in the same manner and for the same fee as a building permit is procured as set forth in applicable sections of this chapter and the zoning regulations in chapter 42. The clearing of land involving one acre or more shall be administered and enforced by the state environmental protection division. 
(Code 1994, § 38-66; Ord. of 3-27-1975(1), § 21-1) 
Sec. 10-247. - Responsibility of general contractor. 
Each general contractor shall be responsible for procuring a grading permit by any subcontractor employed by him to engage in grading or other activity involving the clearing of land before such work is begun. The penalty for the failure of a subcontractor to procure a grading permit and the fee therefor shall be assessed by the city against the employing general contractor. 
(Code 1994, § 38-67; Ord. of 3-27-1975(1), § 21-2) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Coin-operated devices and vending machines. 
Each coin-operated device and vending machine shall have affixed thereon a stamp or decal provided and affixed by the city to indicate that the business license tax for the current year has been paid. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer such device or machine for operation if such current stamp is not affixed thereto. 
(Code 1972, § 16-24; Code 1994, § 22-1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Telephone company occupational license tax. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "actual recurring local service revenues" means those revenues customarily included in the Uniform System of Accounts as prescribed by the Federal Communications Commission for Class "A" and "B" companies; provided, however, that only the local service portion of the following accounts shall be included: 
(1)  Basic local service revenue, as defined in 47 CFR 32.5000; 
(2)  Basic area revenue, as defined in 47 CFR 32.5001; 
(3)  Optional extended area revenue, as defined in 47 CFR 32.5002; 
(4)  Public telephone revenue, as defined in 47 CFR 32.5010; 
(5)  Local private line revenue, as defined in 47 CFR 35.5040; provided, however, that the portion of such accounts attributable to audio and video program transmission service where both terminals of the private line are within the corporate limits of the municipal authority shall not be included; 
(6)  Other local exchange revenue, as defined in 47 CFR 32.5060; 
(7)  Local exchange service, as defined in 47 CFR 32.5069; 
(8)  Network access revenue, as defined in 47 CFR 32.5080; 
(9)  Directory revenue, as defined in 47 CFR 32.5320; provided, however, that the portion of such accounts attributable to revenue derived from listings in portion of directories not considered white pages shall not be included; 
(10)  Nonregulated operating revenue, as defined in 47 CFR 32.5280; provided, however, that the portion of such accounts attributable to revenues derived from private lines shall not be included; and 
(11)  Uncollectible revenue, as defined in 47 CFR 32.5300. 
(b)  Telephone companies shall pay, on or before August 31 of each year, an occupational license tax for that year in the amount of three percent of the actual recurring local service revenues received by the company from subscribers located within the city. The annual amount due may be computed by annualizing the taxable revenues billed during the month of June preceding the date of payment. 
(Code 1994, § 22-2; Ord. of 2-8-1973) 
State Law reference— Power of municipal authorities concerning telegraph or telephone company service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1. 
Sec. 12-3. - Fortunetelling. 
(a)  Any person within the corporate limits of the city wishing to carry on the business of telling fortunes or carrying on the trade, business or profession of phrenology, clairvoyance, palmistry or other business of like kind or nature in which the future of any person is foretold or attempted to be foretold shall first obtain a business license from the city. 
(b)  An application must be submitted with proper documentation that the business: 
(1)  Must not be located within 500 feet of a: 
a.  Church. 
b.  School. 
c.  Residence. 
(2)  Shall be located within a manufacturing zoning district and meet any other requirements contained in the zoning regulations in chapter 42. 
(c)  Hours of operation will not be later than 10:00 p.m. 
(d)  The regulatory fee per year, per location, will be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Code 1994, § 22-3; Ord. of 3-8-1988) 
Sec. 12-4. - Automobile-related businesses. 
(a)  Any person or entity wishing to operate an automobile-related business within the corporate limits of the city shall first obtain an occupation tax certificate from the city. For purposes of this section, an automobile-related business means any of the following types of businesses (as those businesses are defined in section 42-124 of this Code): automobile broker; automobile dealer; automobile repair garage; automobile retail establishment; automobile sales establishment; automobile salvage shop; automobile service station; convenience store; gasoline service station or used automobile sales establishment. 
(b)  The submission of an application seeking an occupation tax certificate to operate an automobile broker, an automobile dealer, an automobile repair garage, an automobile sales establishment, an automobile salvage shop, an automobile service station, or a used automobile sales establishment (as each of these businesses is defined in section 42-124 of this Code) must be accompanied by documentation establishing that the proposed business would be located on property within the M manufacturing zoning district and that the location of the proposed business would comply with any other applicable requirements contained in chapter 42, zoning, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-4, §1, 10-12-2015; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Secs. 12-5—12-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 12-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts means the total amount of revenue generated from the following sources during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax imposed by section 12-28 is due: 
(1)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with the respect to banks are as follows: 
a.  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
b.  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions; 
c.  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale; 
d.  Interest on other bonds, notes and debentures, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
e.  Dividends on stocks; 
f.  Income from direct lease financing; 
g.  Income from fiduciary activities; 
h.  Service charges on deposit accounts; 
i.  Other service charges, commissions and fees; and 
j.  Other income. 
(2)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
a.  Interest on mortgage loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold in service for others; 
b.  Interest on mortgages, participations or mortgage-backed securities; 
c.  Interest on real estate sold on contract; 
d.  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; 
e.  Interest on other loans, excluding obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
f.  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; 
g.  Loan fees; 
h.  Loan servicing fees; 
i.  Other fees and charges; 
j.  Gross income from real-estate-owned operations; 
k.  Net income from office building operations; 
l.  Gross income from real estate held for investment; 
m.  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; 
n.  Miscellaneous operating income; 
o.  Profit on sale of real-estate-owned operations, investment securities, loans, and other assets; and 
p.  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
(3)  The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) of this definition: 
a.  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; 
b.  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 7-1-730 et seq.; 
c.  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions; 
d.  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (3)b and (3)c of this definition, any deductions taken under subsection (3)a of this definition shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (3)b and (3)c of this definition bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (3)a through (3)c of this definition. 
(Code 1994, § 22-26; Ord. of 10-8-1985, § 2) 
Sec. 12-28. - Business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 of one percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. Notwithstanding any other section of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1994, § 22-27; Ord. of 10-8-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 12-29. - Due date of tax, filing return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. The returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1994, § 22-28; Ord. of 10-8-1985, § 3) 
Secs. 12-30—12-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— General assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c); powers of municipal corporations to impose license fees on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 12-47. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Insurer means any company authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5 as Class (1). 
(Code 1994, § 22-51; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(22-51), 12-11-1995) 
Sec. 12-48. - Insurer license fees. 
There is levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 12-49, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is levied a license fee. The annual license fees shall be in amounts as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Code 1972, § 16-27; Code 1994, § 22-52; Ord. of 9-13-1983(2), § 16-27; Ord. of 4-9-1984, § 16-27; Ord. of 7-10-1984; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(22-52), 12-11-1995) 
Sec. 12-49. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and, in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits, or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee per location for each year. The additional license fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Code 1994, § 22-53; Ord. of 9-13-1983(2), § 16-28; Ord. of 4-9-1984, § 16-28; Ord. of 7-10-1984; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(22-53), 12-11-1995) 
Sec. 12-50. - License fee for independent insurance agencies, brokers not otherwise licensed. 
There is levied an annual license fee on independent insurance agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 12-48. The annual license fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Code 1972, § 16-28; Code 1994, § 22-54; Ord. of 9-13-1983(2), § 16-29; Ord. of 4-9-1984, § 16-29; Ord. of 7-10-1984; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(22-54), 12-11-1995) 
Sec. 12-51. - Gross premiums tax on insurers writing life, accident and health insurance. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident, and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. As used in this section, the term "gross direct premiums" means the same as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 12-48. 
(Code 1972, § 16-29; Code 1994, § 22-55; Ord. of 9-13-1983(2), § 16-30; Ord. of 4-9-1984, § 16-30; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(22-55), 12-11-1995) 
Sec. 12-52. - Gross premiums tax on all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. As used in this section, the term "gross premiums" means the same as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 12-48. 
(Code 1972, § 16-30; Code 1994, § 22-56; Ord. of 9-13-1983(2), § 16-31; Ord. of 4-9-1984, § 16-31; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(22-56), 12-11-1995) 
Sec. 12-53. - Administration. 
(a)  Due date for licensees. License fees imposed in sections 12-48, 12-49 and 12-50 shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(b)  Copy of article sent to state insurance commissioner. The city clerk is directed to forward a duly certified copy of the ordinance from which this article is derived to the state insurance commissioner within 45 days of its enactment. 
(c)  Reports. 
(1)  The person responsible for each insurance business location subject to a license fee under section 12-50 shall file with the city clerk a report, on forms prescribed by him, showing the address of the business location; the class of insurance written; the names of the persons writing insurance at such location; the names of the companies represented; and such other reasonable information as may be required. 
(2)  All reports required to be filed under this section shall be confidential, and the information contained therein shall be solely for the use of the officers of the city responsible for administering this article. 
(Code 1972, §§ 16-31, 16-32; Code 1994, § 22-57; Ord. of 9-13-1983(2), § 16-32; Ord. of 4-9-1984, § 16-32; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(22-57), 12-11-1995) 
Secs. 12-54—12-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OCCUPATIONAL TAXES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 12-80. - Occupation tax levied; occupation tax required for business dealings in the city. 
For each year an occupation tax is levied, and each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state but exerting substantial efforts within the city or owning real or personal property located within the city from which income is generated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7(b), shall register the business, trade, profession or occupation and shall pay the occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable occupation tax certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such occupation tax certificate shall be shown to the city clerk or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city, upon request. 
(Code 1994, § 22-81; Ord. No. 95-4, § 1, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-81), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-81. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business, trade, profession or occupation for the period. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without limitation, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), between or among a parent corporation, wholly owned subsidiaries of such parent corporation, and any corporation in which such parent corporation or one or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries owns stock possessing at least 30 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of such partially owned corporation, or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Number of employees means the number of full-time equivalents resulting when all persons employed by the business, trade, profession or occupation, regardless of full-time, part-time or seasonal status, are counted. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in a business, trade, occupation, or profession. Such tax is imposed for revenue-raising purposes. 
Occupational tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioners of professions or occupations are those persons one who engage in a profession, trade, business or occupation identified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18). The term "practitioners of professions and occupations" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fee means a payment, whether designated as a license fee, permit fee, or by another name, which is required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, trade, profession, or business. Except where otherwise authorized by state statute, the amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 1994, § 22-82; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-82), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-82. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. The administrative fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on applicable businesses for which regulations under the city's police power are adopted. 
(Code 1994, § 22-83; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-83), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-83. - Occupation tax structure. 
(a)  The occupation tax is imposed upon businesses, and practitioners of professions and occupations based upon gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, trade, profession, or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget in its Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987 edition. 
(b)  Where federal law precludes the imposition of a gross receipts tax on a particular class of business, trade, occupation or profession, including but not limited to the airline industry, which business, trade, occupation or progression is otherwise subject to taxation by the city, such occupation tax is imposed based on the number of employees of the business, trade, occupation or progression. 
(c)  Occupation tax schedule. 
(1)  Number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows: 

 
(2)  Profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts. The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be as follows: 

 
(d)  Additional limitations. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business's or practitioner's gross receipts. 
(3)  No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents, or companies whose offices are located outside the taxing jurisdiction and who sell property inside the taxing jurisdiction. 
(5)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the city or, for those businesses not maintaining a location in the state, on receipts earned in the state. 
(6)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in the state shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as set out in section 12-84. 
(Code 1994, § 22-84; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-84), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-84. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the state if the business's or practitioner's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Any person, business or practitioner engaged in the activities identified in subsection (a)(1) and (2) of this section shall be required to register with the city and shall be presumed to be subject to taxation under this article; provide no tax shall apply where: 
(1)  Such person, business or practitioner provides proof of gross receipts generated within the state to another local government which exceed the gross receipts generated within the city and on which a tax is paid to the other jurisdiction; or 
(2)  Proof of payment of a tax on receipts generated in the state to a government outside the state is provided. 
(Code 1994, § 22-85; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-85), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-85. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city clerk and that line of business being noted by the city clerk upon the occupation tax certificate form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Code 1994, § 22-86; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-86), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-86. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Code 1994, § 22-87; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-87), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-87. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18). 
Practitioners of professions and occupations as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in section 12-83; or 
(2)  A fee per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. The practitioner's fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1994, § 22-88; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-88), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-88. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to register or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1994, § 22-89; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-89), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-89. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such business, profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses, trades, occupations, and professions which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses, trades, occupations and professions are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 1994, § 22-90; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-90), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-90. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year, beginning in 1995 and continuing in succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be due and payable April 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by July 1 of each year, be subject to ten percent penalty for delinquency and interest at a rate of one and a half percent per month. 
(b)  On any new profession trade, profession or occupation begun in the city in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained 30 days following the beginning of the business and a ten percent penalty imposed. 
(c)  The occupation tax certificate shall be issued by the city clerk and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain an occupation tax certificate shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city any of the kind of business, profession, trade, or occupation subject to this article without having first obtained said certificate, such offender shall, upon conviction by the municipal judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, either or both in the discretion of the judge. 
(d)  In addition to the remedies hereinabove, the chief of police may proceed to collect the tax in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 1994, § 22-91; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-91), 12-12-1994; Ord. No. 2017-1, § 1, 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 12-91. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses and practitioners having multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-14(a)(2). At the time of annual registration, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business or practitioner has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied by a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local government, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Code 1994, § 22-92; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-92), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-92. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No person for which an occupation tax certificate is required or an occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Code 1994, § 22-93; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-93), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-93. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city tax certificate may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1994, § 22-94; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-94), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-94. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any person required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter as a condition of engaging in business shall first, before the issuance of a city tax certificate, show evidence that such requirements have been met and, where applicable, that annual application for continuance of the business has been submitted to the appropriate agency. 
(Code 1994, § 22-95; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-95), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-95. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary tax certificate for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a tax certificate. Every person commencing business in city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the tax certificate herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact, in the city any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said tax certificate, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 22-96; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-96), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-96. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the municipal judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 90 days, either or both, in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Code 1994, § 22-97; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-97), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-97. - City clerk; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The city clerk and his duly designated officers and inspectors or successors shall be classified as deputy marshals-business inspectors with full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Code 1994, § 22-98; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-98), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-98. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses and activities are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the public service commission and the department of public safety. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls). 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 1994, § 22-99; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-99), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-99. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax based on gross receipts shall not apply to any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 1994, § 22-100; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-100), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-100. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year; final return and adjustment. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the current calendar year. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, each person subject to the occupation tax levied in section 12-80 shall, on or before the dates hereinafter set forth, file with the city clerk the return hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payment of the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth here. 
(b)  Where a person subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has conducted business for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(c)  The owner, proprietor, manager, or secretary officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before February 15 of the current calendar year, file with the city clerk of city, on a form furnished by said officer, a signed return setting forth the amount of actual gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current year. 
(d)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year, based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article, is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said person based on the estimate filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the difference in said amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on April 1 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before said date. 
(e)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year, based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article, exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said person based on the estimate filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the difference in said amount shall be refundable by the city to the taxpayer; or, if said business continues to conduct business in the city during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by said person for the current year. This election is to be taken by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 22-101; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-101), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-101. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business or profession subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business or profession liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid in advance of a tax certificate being issued. 
(Code 1994, § 22-102; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-102), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-102. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business or profession is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business or profession shall be required to obtain the necessary tax certificate for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Code 1994, § 22-103; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-103), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-103. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee or agent of the city, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of said return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees or agents of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as "employees." Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States, and other local governments. 
(Code 1994, § 22-104; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-104), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-104. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the city clerk of the city, through his officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business or profession for which the returns are made. The city clerk shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business or profession of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city clerk such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax certificate currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in city, for examination by the city clerk at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, interest in the amount of 1.5 percent per month in addition to a ten percent penalty will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Code 1994, § 22-105; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-105), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-105. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 12-104, any occupation tax certificate granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new occupation tax certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 12-104. 
(Code 1994, § 22-106; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-106), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-106. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any person, or his manager, agent, or employee, who does business in the city after the tax certificate for said business has been revoked as provided in section 12-105, hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fails to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuses to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who makes false returns; and any person, or his manager, agent, or employee, who refuses to permit an inspection of books in his charge when the officer, agent, employee, or representative of the city requests such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided in section 12-96. 
(Code 1994, § 22-107; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-107), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-107. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city clerk of the city, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person liable for said tax. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the chief of police of the city upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 1994, § 22-108; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. No. 95-06, § 1(22-108), 12-12-1994) 
Sec. 12-108. - Public hearings. 
(a)  The city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate. 
(b)  In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the city shall hold one or more public hearings as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2015-5, § 1, 10-12-2015) 
Secs. 12-109—12-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOTOR VEHICLE DISMANTLERS 

Sec. 12-128. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antique vehicle means a motor vehicle manufactured no later than 1948. 
Classic vehicle means a motor vehicle manufactured between the years 1925 and 1942. 
Historic vehicle means a motor vehicle over 30 years of age and owned solely as a collector's item and for participation in club activities, exhibitions, tours, parades and similar uses, but which shall not be used for general transportation. 
Junk vehicle means any motor vehicle, the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative or discarded, in such a manner as to create an unsightly condition or to be rendered unroadworthy according to standards established by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq. 
Motor vehicle dismantler means any person who, for commission or with the intent to make a profit or gain in money or other thing of value, engages in the business of acquiring, by purchase or other means, wrecked, abandoned or repairable motor vehicles and either removes the usable parts therefrom or allows others to remove the usable parts therefrom for subsequent sale. 
Motor vehicle salvage dealer means any person who, for commission or with the intent to make a profit or gain in money or other thing of value, is engaged in the business of acquiring wrecked, abandoned or reparable motor vehicles for the purpose of reselling such vehicles as a unit. Motor vehicle salvage dealers do not remove or allow the removal of usable parts from such wrecked, abandoned or reparable motor vehicles, but sell, store or otherwise dispose of such vehicles in their entirety. 
Used motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, other than a motor vehicle which has never previously been the subject of a retail sale by a new motor vehicle dealer, offered for sale by a used motor vehicle dealer to a consumer for such consumer's own use or for resale or to other resellers. 
Used motor vehicle dealer means any person who, for commission or with the intent to make a profit or gain in money or other thing of value, sells, exchanges, rents with option to purchase, offers or attempts to negotiate a sale or exchange of an interest in used motor vehicles or who is engaged wholly or in part in the business of selling used motor vehicles, whether or not such motor vehicles are owned by such person. Used motor vehicle dealers includes those persons and excludes those persons included or excluded within the definition of used motor vehicle dealer in O.C.G.A. § 43-47-2(6)(A). 
(Code 1994, § 22-111; Ord. No. 93-3, § 1, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 12-129. - Applicability. 
Classic, antique and historic vehicles which meet the definition of junk vehicle shall be subject to all restrictions on junk vehicles enacted by the ordinance from which this article is derived, and no special exception to this article shall be established for those vehicles merely by their categorization as a classic, antique or historic vehicle. 
(Code 1994, § 22-112; Ord. No. 93-3, § 2, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 12-130. - Inspection authority. 
The chief of police or his agent shall have the right to enter onto premises licensed under this article, at reasonable times, to inspect the premises for compliance with this article. 
(Code 1994, § 22-113; Ord. No. 93-3, § 10, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 12-131. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Upon conviction or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any citation under this article, the person cited shall be subject to penalties set out in section 1-8. 
(b)  In addition to the criminal penalties prescribed by subsection (a) of this section, upon a third conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere within a 12-month period, the business license of the license holder shall be suspended for a period of six months. A fourth conviction or a plea to a similar offense within 12 months shall result in forfeiture of the business license. No new business license shall issue to a person whose license has been forfeited for the same category of business within the city for a period of 12 months. Suspension or forfeiture of licenses shall be accomplished by action of the mayor and council following notice and opportunity to be heard. 
(Code 1994, § 22-114; Ord. No. 93-3, § 11, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 12-132. - Business licenses. 
All used motor vehicle dealers, motor vehicle dismantlers and motor vehicle salvage dealers operating within the city shall obtain a city business license and pay the appropriate license fees and taxes therefor as a condition of carrying on such business. No business license shall be issued to a used motor vehicle dealer unless the applicant presents proof of a current state license to operate as a used car dealer under O.C.G.A. § 43-47-1 et seq. No business license shall be issued to a motor vehicle dismantler unless the applicant presents proof of a current state license to operate as a dismantler under O.C.G.A. § 43-48-1 et seq. 
(Code 1994, § 22-115; Ord. No. 93-3, § 3, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 12-133. - Open storage of used vehicles. 
The open storage or display of used motor vehicles, other than junk vehicles, is permitted by used motor vehicle dealers, provided the location of such storage or display areas is limited to the BG General Business District or M Manufacturing District and otherwise complies with the zoning standards in chapter 42. 
(Code 1994, § 22-116; Ord. No. 93-3, § 4, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 12-134. - Display of junk vehicles. 
Junk vehicles may not be maintained on open lots or be located upon premises of a used motor vehicle dealer so as to be visible from any public right-of-way or from any adjacent private property. All junk vehicles shall be completely enclosed within a building or stored behind a solid opaque fence at least eight feet in height. Such fence shall meet the setback requirements of chapter 42, pertaining to zoning. The use of webbing in chainlink fences to meet the requirements of this section is specifically prohibited. 
(Code 1994, § 22-117; Ord. No. 93-3, § 5, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 12-135. - Locations for motor vehicle salvage dealers and dismantlers. 
Motor vehicle salvage dealers and motor vehicle dismantlers may be located only within the M Manufacturing District. All storage of vehicles and parts shall be either completely enclosed within a building or behind a solid opaque fence at least eight feet in height so as to screen the operations from any public right-of-way or adjacent private property. Usable parts removed by motor vehicle dismantlers shall be likewise stored within enclosed buildings or behind a solid opaque fence at least eight feet in height so that such parts are not readily visible from any public right-of-way or any adjacent private property. 
(Code 1994, § 22-118; Ord. No. 93-3, § 6, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 12-136. - Restrictions on dismantlers. 
A motor vehicle dismantler shall conduct his operations in strict compliance with the following standards: 
(1)  All fluids shall be drained from every vehicle at the time the vehicle first appears on the dismantler's property. Drainage and storage of fluids shall be performed in compliance with all EPA and EPD rules. 
(2)  Dismantling of parts from abandoned, wrecked or reparable motor vehicles shall be accomplished within ten days of the date such vehicles are first moved to the dismantler's facility. 
(3)  When usable parts are removed from a vehicle, the hulk of the vehicle shall be removed from the dismantler's premises within 20 days. 
(4)  A dismantler shall keep records showing the date each vehicle from which parts are taken was brought onto the dealer's premises, the date parts and fluids removal was completed and the date when the hulk of the vehicle was removed from those premises. Such records shall be open to inspection during reasonable business hours by officials of the city for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article. 
(Code 1994, § 22-119; Ord. No. 93-3, § 7, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 12-137. - Notice to remove. 
(a)  Whenever the chief of police or his authorized agent determines that vehicles or dismantled parts are being maintained in violation of this article, he shall provide notice to the owner or operator of the business to correct such violation and to bring the premises into compliance with this article. Such notice shall be in writing, shall describe the offense and shall provide five days within which to comply with this article. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall be served by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Personal service; 
(2)  Certified mail, return receipt requested; and 
(3)  Where service has been attempted and cannot be accomplished either by personal service or by certified mail, the notice may be served by mailing a copy of the notice by first class mail, with adequate postage, to the last known address of the owner and by posting a copy of the notice on the business premises. 
(Code 1994, § 22-120; Ord. No. 93-3, § 8, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 12-138. - Failure to comply with notice. 
Upon receipt of a notice of violation pursuant to section 12-137 and upon failure of the owner or operator of those premises to bring the premises into compliance with this article within the period of time stated in the notice, the chief of police or his agent may proceed to cite the owner or operator of the business for violation of this article. Such notice of violation shall include a summons to appear in the municipal court on a date certain to answer the charge of violation of this article. Each and every vehicle maintained in violation of this article shall be considered as a separate offense, and each day beyond the five-day notice period during which such vehicle remains on the property shall also be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 22-121; Ord. No. 93-3, § 9, 6-21-1993) 
Secs. 12-139—12-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MASSAGE THERAPY AND MASSAGE PARLORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.; municipal ordinances in effect before July 1, 2005, relating to the practice of massage therapy or requiring licensure of a massage therapist are preempted from enforcement against persons issued a license under Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22. 

Sec. 12-160. - Massage therapy definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board means the state board of massage therapy established under O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. 
License means a valid and current certificate of registration issued by the state board of massage therapy as provided by O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. 
Massage and/or massage therapy means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term "massage" or "massage therapy" includes complementary methods, including without limitation the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands; the term "massage" or "massage therapy" also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. The term "massage therapy" shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities. 
Massage therapist means a person who administers massage or massage therapy for compensation. 
Massage therapy assistant means any person who does not qualify as a massage therapist as that term is defined in this section, but who assists a massage therapist and who works under the direct supervision of a licensed massage therapist. 
(Ord. No. 06-02, § (a)(22-122), 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 12-161. - Practice by person not licensed; public nuisance. 
The practice of massage therapy is declared to be an activity affecting the public interest and involving the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Such practice by a person who is not licensed to practice in the state is declared to be a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 06-02, § (a)(22-123), 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 12-162. - State license. 
The city recognizes that the state has not formed a state board at this time for massage therapists to apply for a license in the state. Consequently, all massage therapy shall be prohibited within the city limits until such state board is formed as provided by O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. Any and all massage and/or massage therapy clinics and/or parlors existing within the city limits at this time shall apply for a state license as provided by O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq., as soon as the state board is formed. 
(Ord. No. 06-02, § (a)(22-124), 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 12-163. - Fines and punishment. 
Any person who practices massage therapy without a valid license in violation of O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq., upon being convicted, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense or with imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or both. Upon being convicted a second or subsequent time under this section, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each offense, imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 06-02, § (a)(22-124), 6-12-2006) 
Secs. 12-164—12-194. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NON-CONSENSUAL TOWING PERMITS 

Sec. 12-195. - Definitions. 
The following terms when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
License means a private trespass towing license issued by the city pursuant to this article and to O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13(d). 
Towing and storage firm means a business entity that removes vehicles from private real property at the request of a person in possession of such private real property pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13(a). 
(Ord. No. 03-10, § 1(art. VI, § 22-131), 12-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-196. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any towing and storage firm to operate within the city without a valid non-consensual towing permit. The city shall charge an annual fee for the permit. The annual permit fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. Permits shall be valid for 12 months after the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, § 1(art. VI, § 22-132), 12-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-197. - Qualifications. 
(a)  In order to qualify for and keep a permit, a towing and storage firm must adhere to the following conditions: 
(1)  Maximum reasonable costs for removal, relocation, and storage of vehicles shall not exceed the maximum rate tariff as set by the state department of motor vehicle safety from time to time. 
(2)  No storage fees shall be charged for the first 24 hours after a vehicle is removed from a property. 
(3)  No fees for removal or storage shall be charged for any removal or storage that occurs in violation of O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
(4)  For each vehicle removed, the towing and storage firm must notify the local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the property from which the vehicle is removed as soon as reasonably possible after such removal that the vehicle has been towed and of the license tag identification information for the vehicle. 
(5)  A secure impoundment facility must be maintained. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a towing and storage firm to fail to adhere to these conditions. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, § 1(art. VI, § 22-133), 12-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-198. - Adoption of other regulations. 
All other applicable regulations contained in O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13 and adopted by the state department of motor vehicle safety are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, § 1(art. VI, § 22-134), 12-8-2013) 
Sec. 12-199. - Penalties. 
(a)  For each failure to provide the notice required by section 12-197(a)(4), violators shall be subject to a fine of $200.00. The city's receipt from another jurisdiction of a report that the vehicle has been stolen shall raise a rebuttable presumption of a failure to provide the notice required by section 12-197(a)(4). 
(b)  Failure to obtain a permit required by this article may result in a civil penalty of $2,500.00. 
(c)  In addition to, or in lieu of, the penalty provided by subsection (a) of this section, the city may terminate the permit of a towing and storage firm for any failure to comply with the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, § 1(art. VI, § 22-135), 12-8-2013) 
Secs. 12-200—12-221. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CABLE AND VIDEO FRANCHISES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Consumer Choice for Television Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-76-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-222. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. The term "cable service" shall not include any video programming provided by a provider of commercial mobile service as defined in 47 USC 332(d) or video programming provided as part of and via a service that enables users to access content, information, e-mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
Cable service provider means any person or group of persons: 
(1)  Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or 
(2)  Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
Cable system means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but the term "cable system" shall not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way as defined in this section; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 USC 201 through 276, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system, other than for purposes of 47 USC 541(c), to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services as that term is defined in 47 USC 522(12); 
(4)  An open video system that complies with 47 USC 573; or 
(5)  Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating such electric utility system. 
Franchise means an initial authorization or renewal of an authorization issued by a franchise authority, regardless of whether the authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, ordinance, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, that authorizes the construction or operation of a cable service provider or video service provider's network in the public rights-of-way. 
Franchise authority means any governmental entity empowered by federal, state, or local law to grant a franchise. With regard to the holder of a state franchise within the service areas covered by such state franchise, the secretary of state shall be the sole franchising authority. With respect to a franchise agreement with a municipal or county governing authority, that municipality or county shall be the sole franchising authority within the service areas covered by that local franchise. 
Gross revenues means all revenues received from subscribers for the provision of cable service or video service, including franchise fees for cable service providers and video service providers, and advertising and home shopping services revenues and shall be determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The term "gross revenues" shall not include: 
(1)  Amounts billed and collected as a line item on the subscriber's bill to recover any taxes, surcharges, or governmental fees that are imposed on or with respect to the services provided or measured by the charges, receipts, or payments therefor; provided, however, that for purposes of this section, such tax, surcharge, or governmental fee shall not include any ad valorem taxes, net income taxes, or generally applicable business or occupation taxes not measured exclusively as a percentage of the charges, receipts, or payments for services; 
(2)  Any revenue, such as bad debt, not actually received, even if billed; 
(3)  Any revenue received by any affiliate or any other person in exchange for supplying goods or services used by the provider to provide cable service or video programming; 
(4)  Any amounts attributable to refunds, rebates, or discounts; 
(5)  Any revenue from services provided over the network that are associated with or classified as noncable or nonvideo services under federal law, including, without limitation, revenues received from telecommunications services, information services other than cable service or video service, Internet access services, or directory or Internet advertising revenue, including, without limitation, yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisements, and electronic publishing advertising. Where the sale of any such noncable or nonvideo service is bundled with the sale of one or more cable services or video services and sold for a single nonitemized price, the term "gross revenues" shall include only those revenues that are attributable to cable service or video service based on the provider's books and records; such revenues shall be allocated in a manner consistent with generally accepted accounting principles; 
(6)  Any revenue from late fees not initially booked as revenues, returned check fees, or interest; 
(7)  Any revenue from sales or rental of property, except such property as the subscriber shall be required to buy or rent exclusively from the cable service provider or video service provider to receive cable service or video service; 
(8)  Any revenue received from providing or maintaining inside wiring; 
(9)  Any revenue from sales for resale with respect to which the purchaser shall be required to pay a franchise fee, provided the purchaser certifies in writing that it shall resell the service and pay a franchise fee with respect thereto; or 
(10)  Any amounts attributable to a reimbursement of costs, including, but not limited to, the reimbursements by programmers of marketing costs incurred for the promotion or introduction of video programming. 
Public right-of-way means the area in, on, along, over, or under the public roads that are part of the municipal or county road system or the state highway system. 
Service area means the geographic territory within the city where a cable service provider or video service provider provides or has proposed to offer cable service or video service pursuant to a franchise. 
Subscriber means any person or entity lawfully receiving video service from a video service provider or cable service from a cable service provider. 
Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station, as set forth in 47 USC 522(20). 
Video service means the provision of video programming through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public rights-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. The term "video service" shall not include any video programming provided by a provider of commercial mobile service as defined in 47 USC 332(d) or video programming provided as part of and via a service that enables users to access content, information, e-mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
Video service provider means an entity providing video service as defined in this section. The term "video service provider" shall not include a cable service provider. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1(22-130), 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 12-223. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  For all cable and/or video service provided in the service area by cable and/or video service providers, a franchise fee shall be imposed in the amount equal to five percent of the gross revenues the cable and/or video service provider receives from providing cable and/or video service to subscribers in the service area. 
(b)  The franchise fee shall be payable to the city within 30 days after the last day of each calendar quarter. Such payment will be considered complete if accompanied by a statement showing, for the quarter covered by the payment: 
(1)  The aggregate amount of the state franchise holder's gross revenues, specifically identifying subscriber and advertising and home shopping services revenues under this article insofar as the franchise holder's existing billing systems include such capability, attributable to such municipality or unincorporated areas of the county; and 
(2)  The amount of the franchise fee payment due to such municipality or county. 
(c)  In the event that franchise fees are not paid on or before the dates specified in subsection (b) of this section, then the city shall provide written notice to the franchise holder giving the cable service provider or video service provider 15 days from the date of the franchise holder's receipt of such notice to cure any such nonpayment. In the event franchise fees are not remitted to the city postmarked on or before the expiration of the 15 day cure period, then the holder of the state franchise shall pay interest thereon at a rate of one percent per month to the city. If the 15 day cure period expires on Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, the due date shall be the next business day. Moreover, the franchise holder shall not be assessed interest on late payments if franchise payments were submitted in error to a neighboring local governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1(22-131), 3-10-2008) 
Secs. 12-224—12-254. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PAWNBROKERS AND PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; municipal authority to license and regulate pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136; duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-255. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer in precious metals and gems means a person, whether known as a redemption center, gold and silver dealer, pawnshop or any other name, either owner or manager, whose business involves receiving by buying or trading of, for or in precious metals such as gold or silver or platinum, including coins, and the receiving by buying or trading jewelry, gems or precious or semiprecious stones; however, the term shall not include purchases from licensed wholesalers in the normal course of business nor shall it include pawnbrokers who only take precious metals or gems on pawn or pledge. 
Employee means any person employed or allowed to perform duties, whether or not such person receives a salary, wages or other compensation or consideration, but not including the person covered on the license or renewal application. 
Goods means the same as its normal meaning and the term should further be construed in the broadest sense allowable and should include all forms of personal property. 
Owner means any person or partner or stockholder owning 25 percent or more of a business. 
Pawnbroker means any person who shall in any manner lend or advance money or other things for profit on the pledge or possession of personal property or other valuable things other than securities or written evidences of indebtedness or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable things on condition of selling such back to the seller at a stipulated price. 
Person means individual, firm, corporation, partnership or any other entity. 
(Code 1994, § 74-1) 
Sec. 12-256. - State law. 
This article is to be construed as consistent with state law. However, this article is to be applied in lieu of state law and state fee and registration requirements whenever possible. It is the intent of the mayor and council that all duties delegated to the chief law enforcement officer of the city shall be exercised as provided in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 74-3) 
Sec. 12-257. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person licensed under this article shall be guilty of an offense if such person shall: 
(1)  Fail to make any entry of any required item in the permanent record book. 
(2)  Make any false entry therein. 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate, record so that information is illegible, or destroy or remove from his place of business such permanent record book. 
(4)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such permanent record book or any goods in his possession, during the ordinary hours of business or any reasonable time, or refuse to allow any member of the general public to inspect goods in his possession being held under pawn or purchase, within the 15-day purchase and 30-day pawn dates, pursuant to section 12-268, during ordinary hours of business. 
(5)  Be convicted or plead nolo contendere to any crime prohibited by this section. 
(6)  Fail to maintain a record of each pawn or purchase transaction for at least four years. 
(7)  Violate any other section of this article. 
(b)  Operation of any business under this article in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense for each day of operation. 
(Code 1994, § 74-4) 
Sec. 12-258. - Exclusions, exceptions. 
Businesses which limit the purchase of used valuables to the acceptance of trade-ins for credit for new goods or the dispensing of refunds in regard to valuables previously purchased from the business shall not be required to comply with this article. 
(Code 1994, § 74-5) 
Sec. 12-259. - Location of business. 
All businesses licensed under this article shall be located in strict compliance with chapter 42, pertaining to zoning, and at a location with an identifiable street address, which shall be stated on the license or renewal application, along with other required information. No business licensed under this article shall change its address without giving advance notice to the city clerk, the code enforcement officer and the police department and receiving approval of the change, such approval being granted if the new location complies with this article and chapter 42, pertaining to zoning. No such business shall be operated in or from a motel or hotel. 
(Code 1994, § 74-6) 
Sec. 12-260. - Records. 
All pawnbrokers and dealers of precious metals and gems, in addition to other records, shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property received by or pledged or sold to them. Such description shall include the brand name of the article; any identifying mark, number, initial, social security number or name of any person or company; and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. In such books there shall be entered also the name, age, address, signature and identification number from a driver's license or similar identification of the person by whom the property was delivered, deposited or sold; the name of the broker, agent or employee receiving the item; the time when such transaction occurred; the price paid for the goods purchased; and the check number issued, if applicable. These entries shall be made no later than one hour after the transaction. A permanent bound set of the pawn tickets shall constitute the book required by this section. All books and records required by this article and items pledged or sold shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by any law enforcement officer of the city or the state. Any person engaged in any business licensed under this article who shall fail or refuse to keep the records as provided in this article or who shall make false entries concerning the transaction or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection by any law enforcement officer of the city or the state of such records and of the property with or sold to them shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 74-7) 
Sec. 12-261. - Standard forms required. 
All businesses licensed under this article shall use a standard form for pawn and a standard form for purchase, and no ticket may be used for a dual purpose. Standard forms may differ only by the name of the business and business' address. The design of this form shall be provided by the city and the forms shall be numbered and chronologically used and sent to the police department. Each number missing from the chronological sequence shall be considered a separate violation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 74-8) 
Sec. 12-262. - Accepting articles without making required records. 
No business licensed under this article shall take any item in pawn or purchase, taking full or possession title thereto, without entering each transaction of such goods on the books and on the standard forms as provided in sections 12-260 and 12-261. 
(Code 1994, § 74-9) 
Sec. 12-263. - Daily report to police. 
Every business licensed under this article shall make a daily report in writing to the police department of all property pledged or purchased during the 24-hour period ending at 10:00 p.m. on the date of the report. Such reports shall be legibly written or typed in English and shall show the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the business; 
(2)  Time of transaction; 
(3)  Sequel number of the pawn or purchase tickets; 
(4)  Amount paid or advanced; 
(5)  Full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design and number of stones in jewelry and all identifying names, marks, numbers, initials or social security numbers; and 
(6)  A description of the person selling or pawning the item, including name, address, race, weight and height, and a description of the identifications presented by the person selling or pawning the item. 
(Code 1994, § 74-10) 
Sec. 12-264. - Identification required. 
All businesses licensed under this article shall, when receiving in pawn or in purchasing goods, require a proper identification, driver's license or military ID card or state-approved ID card containing a picture and showing positive identification of the person who is pawning, selling or bartering and shall verify the identification. A photograph or videotape of such person shall also be made. 
(Code 1994, § 74-11) 
Sec. 12-265. - Fingerprint required. 
Every business licensed under this article shall require every person from whom it accepts goods on pawn or purchase to place the fingerprint of his right index finger (if right index finger is missing, the next finger in line will be used) in ink on the front of the copy of the pawn or purchase ticket which is to be sent to the police department. 
(Code 1994, § 74-12) 
Sec. 12-266. - Retention period for purchased articles. 
Every business licensed under this article shall, unless sooner released to the owner, hold, on the premises designated in the license for doing business, every item required to be listed under section 12-260 for at least 15 days before disposing of the item by sale, transfer or shipment. This section shall not apply to purchases from licensed wholesalers in the normal course of business. 
(Code 1994, § 74-13) 
Sec. 12-267. - Retention period for pawned articles. 
Every business licensed under this article which takes goods on pawn shall hold such goods for at least 30 days, unless redeemed by the owner or on authority of the owner, before disposing of the goods by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Code 1994, § 74-14) 
Sec. 12-268. - Display of goods pledged or purchased. 
For a period of 15 days from the date of purchase and 30 days from the date of pledge, unless redeemed by or on authority of the person who pledged the goods, all goods purchased or pawned pursuant to this article and required to be listed under section 12-260 shall be kept on the premises designated in the license for doing business. Every item required to be kept on the premises under this section shall have attached to it either a copy of the form required in section 12-261 or the number of such form. Any person desiring to examine any merchandise shall first obtain a copy of a police department incident or stolen property report. Upon presentation of a copy of such report to any licensed dealer or employee and upon giving in writing to such dealer a full description of the stolen items sought, including all identifying characteristics, his name, address, signature, identification and incident or stolen property report number and issuing department, such individual shall be allowed to examine any merchandise of the type described on the premises. Such written information shall be kept in sequential, dated order in a permanent file or book. This record shall be kept in addition to all other records required in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 74-15) 
Sec. 12-269. - Alteration of articles. 
Any item required to be kept or displayed under sections 12-266 through 12-268 shall be kept in its original form as it existed when first purchased, and its physical characteristics shall not be altered in any material or immaterial manner. 
(Code 1994, § 74-16) 
Sec. 12-270. - Erasures, obliterations or changes in records. 
No person licensed under this article shall erase, obliterate, type over, write over or in any way cause the original entry on the records required under this article to become illegible. All pawn or purchase tickets filled out in error shall be sent to the police department in their numbered order along with daily reports and shall have the term "void" typed or written across the front. Such entry shall not be used to cause the original entry to be illegible. If an error is made and the ticket is still to be used, a single line shall be drawn through the incorrect entry. This line shall not cause the original entry to be illegible, and the correct information entry shall be made on the next available area. 
(Code 1994, § 74-17) 
Sec. 12-271. - Records maintained for four years. 
The record of each pawn or purchase transaction regulated by this article shall be maintained for a period of not less than four years from the date of the transaction. 
(Code 1994, § 74-18) 
Sec. 12-272. - Hours of operation. 
Every business licensed under this article shall close its establishment and cease transacting any business no later than 10:00 p.m. each day and shall not begin its operation and commence transacting business before 7:00 a.m. each day. 
(Code 1994, § 74-19) 
Sec. 12-273. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this article to receive in pawn or in purchase any goods of any character or of any description from any person who has not attained the age of 17 years. 
(Code 1994, § 74-20) 
Sec. 12-274. - Transactions conducted outside building. 
No business transaction by any business licensed under this article shall be conducted outside the building designated as the normal place to conduct transactions. The term "business transaction" means any part of business including inspection or appraisal of any goods when it is possible for such goods to be taken inside the building where transactions normally are made (the term "possible" being used in the broadest sense), and no person other than a person possessing a license or employee permit shall be allowed to conduct any form of business transaction either inside the establishment or on any part of outside land area covered under address of the license. 
(Code 1994, § 74-21) 
Sec. 12-275. - Accepting articles with serial numbers removed, altered or obliterated. 
No business licensed under this article shall accept any article that has had the serial number altered, obliterated or removed from such article or which the person who is making the business transaction knows should have a serial number on it. Licensees shall immediately report any attempted business transactions of this nature to the police department. 
(Code 1994, § 74-22) 
Sec. 12-276. - Nonformed precious metals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this article to purchase precious metals in a melted, smelted or nonformed state unless the purchase is from a registered dealer in precious metals. 
(Code 1994, § 74-23) 
Sec. 12-277. - Stolen items. 
Every person licensed under this article shall, immediately upon request, turn over to the police department every item believed by the police department to be a stolen item. The police department shall furnish a property receipt including a case number of recovery to the dealer surrendering such item. The item shall be returned to the licensee only after it has been determined that such item is not stolen. If it is determined that such item is stolen, it shall be returned to its lawful owner. 
(Code 1994, § 74-24) 
Sec. 12-278. - Access from separate business establishment. 
No business licensed under this article shall be designed or operated so as to allow immediate access to the business from any other business without first exiting the other business into a common or open area to which the public at large has access. 
(Code 1994, § 74-25) 
Secs. 12-279—12-304. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE AND EMPLOYEE PERMIT 

Sec. 12-305. - License required. 
(a)  Every person doing business in the city as a pawnbroker or dealer in precious metals or gems, prior to commencing business, shall make proper application for and receive the appropriate business license as set forth in this division. 
(b)  No application for a license to do business as a pawnbroker or dealer in precious metals and gems shall be considered, approved or issued where the number of such licenses issued and in effect at the time of such application number one for each 5,000 residents according to the latest decennial census figures available. Licenses to pawnbrokers dealing exclusively with pawns of car titles shall not exceed one license for every 1,000 residents according to the latest decennial census figures available. In making this computation, fractions of population shall not be considered. 
(Code 1994, § 74-46) 
Sec. 12-306. - Employee permit. 
Each person authorized or allowed to work, whether or not for compensation, in any place of business covered under this division shall be considered an employee and must have an approved employee permit. This permit must be displayed along with the business license. 
(Code 1994, § 74-47) 
Sec. 12-307. - Application for license and permit. 
(a)  An applicant for a license or permit under this division shall file with the city clerk a written, sworn application on a form provided by the city clerk. The application shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, by the partner making application if a partnership and by the president if a corporation. The application shall show the following: 
(1)  The names of the principals, agents and employees of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the city; the local addresses of such persons while engaged in such business; the permanent addresses of such persons; the capacity in which such persons will act (as proprietor, agent, employee or otherwise); the name and the address of the person for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation under the laws of what state it is incorporated; 
(2)  The fingerprints of the principals, agents or employees of the applicant's business and other evidence which establishes to the satisfaction of the city clerk, subject to the approval of the mayor and council, the good character of such persons to carry on the business; 
(3)  The place in the city where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business, the zoning district at such place and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business shall be conducted; 
(4)  The place, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant within the six months next preceding the date of the application conducted an itinerant business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address or any building or office in which such business was conducted; 
(5)  Whether or not the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefor; 
(6)  Credentials from the person for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative; 
(7)  If the applicant is a corporation, whether or not: 
a.  Any shares in the corporation have been sold and if so to whom the shares were sold; and 
b.  Majority control of the corporation has been transferred in the preceding year; and 
(8)  Such other information as to the identity or character of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business or the method or plan of doing such business as the city clerk may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public good. 
(b)  Every applicant for a license shall post with the city clerk a surety bond in favor of the city in the amount of $8,000.00, which bond shall not be accepted unless it is with a corporate surety licensed to do business in the state and unless it is conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all applicable provisions of federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations concerning the activity for which the applicant is to be licensed and that the property purchased is guaranteed to be in accordance with the specifications, standards and conditions represented to the purchaser by the applicant. A blanket bond otherwise meeting the requirements of this subsection shall be accepted. In lieu of posting the bond, the licensee may post cash. 
(c)  If any person shall be aggrieved by the conduct of any licensee and shall receive judgment against him therefor, such person may, after the return unsatisfied, either in whole or in part, of any execution issued upon the judgment, maintain an action in his own name upon the bond or letter of credit of the licensee in any court having jurisdiction of the amount of the judgment remaining unsatisfied. 
(d)  The application shall state the following: "It is unlawful for any person to make a false statement on this application." Any false statement made on the application form will be cause to revoke the license issued thereunder and also shall constitute a violation of city ordinances. 
(Code 1994, § 74-48) 
Sec. 12-308. - Fees. 
(a)  All businesses licensed under this division shall pay a designated license and permit fee: 
(1)  Pawn shops/dealers in precious metals or gems shall pay a license fee each calendar year. This fee shall include the initial registration of the named applicant. The annual license shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(2)  Employee permit, per calendar year per application. The employee permit shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(b)  Any co-owner, agent, employee or any other person authorized to transact business other than the licensee shall be required to have the employee permit for each license he operates or transacts business under. There shall be no proration or refund of any license fee. 
(Code 1994, § 74-49) 
Sec. 12-309. - Character qualifications. 
No license or employee permit required under this division shall be issued to continue, or be renewed for any person who conducts or is employed in a business in which such owner or employee has currently, or within five years of issuance or renewal, been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony involving any federal or state offense or any federal or state misdemeanor involving theft-related offenses, alcohol, drugs or any crime of moral turpitude, and the licensee will submit the identity of all owners and employees to the city clerk on a continuing basis as changes occur. This information is to be forwarded to the police department, for the purpose of allowing a complete check in order that these character qualifications be fulfilled, prior to the issuance of or renewal of any license or permit issued. 
(Code 1994, § 74-50) 
Sec. 12-310. - Transferability. 
(a)  Transfer of license or permit. The license and permit issued under this division, regardless of whether issued to a person, firm or corporation, shall be transferrable as to location if the new location otherwise meets all of the qualifications required by this division. A fee as established from time to time by the mayor and council shall be required for all license transfers. 
(b)  Transfer of ownership interest. Any transfer of 25 percent or more of the ownership interest in a corporation which holds a license under this division shall be considered a new license application, and the transferee shall comply with this division as to application and issuance. Transfers of less than 25 percent ownership interest may be approved by the city clerk upon payment of the required transfer fee and proof that the transferee meets all standards of this article. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation of proceedings. In the event proceedings have been instituted against a license holder for possible suspension or revocation of the license, no transfer of such license shall be permitted to any other person, firm or corporation. 
(Code 1994, § 74-51) 
Sec. 12-311. - Inspection. 
As a condition of the granting of the license under this division, every licensee agrees to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer, pursuant to his official duties, to be and remain on or about his premises without the formality of a warrant, provided the officer does not unduly interfere in the licensee's operation. 
(Code 1994, § 74-52) 
Secs. 12-312—12-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 12-341—12-368. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 12-369. - Registration; permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, attempt to sell, take order for future delivery or promote any product, picture, map, book, magazine, household device, equipment or goods at any residence in the city without first registering with the chief of police. The person shall provide the chief with a recognizable photograph of himself and shall pay a regulatory fee for a 30-day permit. The regulatory fee will be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Code 1972, § 14-1; Code 1994, § 78-1; Ord. No. 99-01, § 1(78-1), 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 12-370. - Notification of division provisions. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to provide a copy of the ordinance from which this division is derived to any person to whom he issues a permit under section 12-369. 
(Code 1972, § 14-5; Code 1994, § 78-2) 
Sec. 12-371. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a valid permit under section 12-369 to make any calls except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. No calls shall be made on Sunday. 
(Code 1972, § 14-2; Code 1994, § 78-3) 
Sec. 12-372. - Calls prohibited on certain property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a valid permit under section 12-369 to make a call at any residence where the owner or any person residing therein has posted a sign reading as follows: "No Solicitors." 
(Code 1972, § 14-3; Code 1994, § 78-4) 
Sec. 12-373. - Failure to leave premises upon request. 
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a valid permit under section 12-369 to fail to immediately leave the premises of any person when requested to do so. 
(Code 1972, § 14-4; Code 1994, § 78-5) 
Secs. 12-374—12-404. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-405. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Merchandise means any samples, model goods, wares, or merchandise sold or offered for sale by a transient merchant. 
Transient merchant. 
(1)  The term "transient merchant" means any person, firm, or corporation, as principal or agent, or both, which is not a regular retail or wholesale merchant with a permanent place of business in the city, but rather one who displays samples, model goods, wares, or merchandise in any lot, building, room, vehicle, trailer or structure of any kind, whether fixed or mobile, for the purpose of retail sales and the securing of orders for the retail sale of such items or items of like kind or quality for the immediate or future delivery. 
(2)  The term "transient merchant" shall not include any person, firm, or corporation which: 
a.  Sells agriculture or forestry products; 
b.  Makes house-to-house or personal calls for the purpose of displaying samples or taking orders for shipment directly from a manufacturer; 
c.  Conducts business at any industry or association trade show; or 
d.  Sells items at a rummage, garage, antique, or similar sale when such person, firm, or corporation is a resident of the city or has a permanent place of business within the city and such sale has been authorized by city permit. 
(Code 1994, § 100-1; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 9-11-1995) 
Sec. 12-406. - Registration; permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a transient merchant within the city without first registering with the city manager. Any person desiring to operate as a transient merchant within the city shall make application for a permit in writing and file the application with the city manager. The application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and permanent address of the transient merchant; 
(2)  The name and permanent address of the transient merchant's registered agent or office; 
(3)  The type of business to be conducted, including a description of the merchandise to be sold by the transient merchant; 
(4)  The form of the transient merchant's business (i.e., corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship), including the date and state of incorporation, when said transient merchant is a corporation; 
(5)  A recognizable photograph of the transient merchant and any person who will be working with the transient merchant within the city; 
(6)  Documentation in writing from the owner of the property where the transient merchant intends to be located, by lease or otherwise, stating that the transient merchant has permission from the owner to transact business on the property; 
(7)  A map or diagram indicating the parking to be used by customers of the transient merchant. Any such parking must not diminish the available parking for the underlying use of the property below that required by city ordinances; 
(8)  A copy of a liability insurance policy acceptable to the mayor and council and providing liability insurance in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time; 
(9)  A bond in an amount payable to the city so as to provide recourse to the city in the event that a complaint is made by a citizen of defective merchandise sold by the transient merchant and the citizen has no recourse against the transient merchant. The bond will be good for a period through six months for an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time; 
(10)  A description of the lot, building, room, vehicle, trailer or structure of any kind, whether fixed or mobile, in which the transient merchant intends to conduct business within the city; and 
(11)  A set of fingerprints prepared by the chief of police for the transient merchant and all agents or employees who will sell merchandise on behalf of the transient merchant within the city. 
(b)  The application shall be made under oath and the giving of false information shall result in the revocation of any permit issued in reliance thereon. 
(c)  A permit fee must be filed contemporaneously with the application for a 30-day permit. The permit fee will be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(d)  No more than two permits shall be issued to any transient merchant in any calendar year. 
(Code 1994, § 100-2; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 9-11-1995) 
Sec. 12-407. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a valid permit under section 12-406 to conduct any business or sell any merchandise except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(Code 1994, § 100-3; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 9-11-1995) 
Sec. 12-408. - Location of business; signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to conduct business or to be located on any city-owned rights-of-way or to be situated so as to block or impede traffic or interfere with traffic by blocking vision at intersections. 
(b)  The location of the business of a transient merchant must comply with all commercial setback requirements as provided in chapter 42, pertaining to zoning. Establishment of sales and/or display areas within required front yards is specifically prohibited. The parking required for all businesses shall also be provided by transient merchants and such parking shall not diminish the required parking of any business also located on the lot or parcel utilized by the transient merchant. 
(c)  No signs or other visual displays shall be posted by a transient merchant without first obtaining a sign permit as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1994, § 100-4; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 9-11-1995) 
Sec. 12-409. - Business operations. 
(a)  All merchandise must be displayed by the transient merchant in a neat and orderly fashion. 
(b)  All merchandise displayed by the transient merchant must be secure from wind, rain, or other inclement weather. In the event that merchandise is not under a cover or in an enclosed structure, all merchandise must be removed and safely secured from the rain, wind or other inclement weather. 
(c)  All merchandise must be in a secured location during non-business hours. In the event that a transient merchant does not have a building, structure, or vehicle in which the merchandise can be locked, all merchandise must be removed from the property during non-business hours. 
(Code 1994, § 100-5; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 9-11-1995) 
Sec. 12-410. - Inspection authority. 
The chief of police or his agent shall have the right to enter onto the property where the transient merchant is conducting business, at reasonable times, to inspect the property and business operation of the transient merchant for compliance with this division. 
(Code 1994, § 100-6; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 9-11-1995) 
Sec. 12-411. - Penalties. 
(a)  Upon conviction or the entering of a plea of nolo contendere to any citation under this division, the person cited shall be subject to penalties set out in section 1-8. 
(b)  In addition to the criminal penalties prescribed by subsection (a) of this section, upon conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the permit of the transient merchant shall be revoked. No new permit shall issue to a transient merchant whose permit has been forfeited within the city for a period of 12 months. Revocation of permits shall be accomplished by action of the mayor and council following notice and opportunity to be heard. 
(Code 1994, § 100-7; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 9-11-1995) 
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Charge imposed on each wireless enhanced 911 telecommunications connection. 
A wireless enhanced 911 charge is hereby imposed upon each wireless telecommunications connection subscribed to by subscribers whose billing address is within the jurisdiction of the city at a rate per month per wireless connection provided to each telephone subscriber. The amount of the rate charged shall be the maximum allowed under state law. 
(Res. No. 99-02, 6-14-1999) 
Secs. 14-2—14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 14-21. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions, other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters or the imminent threat thereof of man-made or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; protection against the effects of radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; plant protection; shelter; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out such functions. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3 ("Emergency Management—Definitions"), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
(Code 1994, § 26-26; Res. No. 91-4, § I, 10-14-1991) 
Sec. 14-22. - Construction of article. 
This article shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Code 1994, § 26-27; Res. No. 91-4, § VII, 10-14-1991) 
Sec. 14-23. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this article or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article shall, upon conviction, be punished for committing a misdemeanor as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 26-28; Res. No. 91-4, § VI, 10-14-1991) 
Sec. 14-24. - Agency established; office of emergency management director. 
(a)  In agreement with the governing officials of the cities within the county, the establishment of the county emergency management agency is acknowledged and approved. 
(b)  The chairperson of the board of county commissioners, with concurrence of the mayors of cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment by the governor a director of emergency management for the entire county and participating cities located therein. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county and cities therein on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist county and city officials in organizing county and city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the county plan for emergency functions set forth in section 14-21. Such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities therein for approval and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county and city emergency program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices (e.g., financial, daily activity, etc.). 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an undeclared emergency and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Code 1994, § 26-29; Res. No. 91-4, § II, 10-14-1991) 
Sec. 14-25. - County emergency management agency. 
(a)  The county emergency management department shall be established around existing county and city departments and agencies. The emergency functions listed in section 14-21 are assigned as set forth in the functional responsibility assignment, attachment C, of the county emergency operations plan and as attached to the resolution from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Heads of departments listed are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned function, as listed in attachment C of the emergency operating plan reference in subsection (a) of this section. Such plans will be submitted through the emergency management director/coordinator to the county board of commissioners and city mayors for inclusion in the local emergency operations plan. 
(Code 1994, § 26-30; Res. No. 91-4, § III, 10-14-1991) 
Sec. 14-26. - Powers during emergency or disaster. 
If a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other emergency occurs which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county and participating cities, the chairperson of the county board of commissioners, jointly with the mayors of the affected cities or, in their absences, their legally appointed designees, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues the power to: 
(1)  Enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  Seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  Sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)  Perform and exercise such other functions and duties and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Code 1994, § 26-31; Res. No. 91-4, § IV, 10-14-1991) 
Sec. 14-27. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county and cities therein, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county and city officers and employees. 
(Code 1994, § 26-32; Res. No. 91-4, § V, 10-14-1991) 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRAINING OF MOTOR VEHICLE FLUIDS 

Sec. 16-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fluid includes but is not limited to oil, lubricants, transmission fluid, antifreeze, gasoline, brake fluid, windshield washer antifreeze and detergent, Freon, power steering fluid, battery acid and like substances. 
(Code 1994, § 38-26; Ord. No. 91-7, § 2, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 16-20. - Applicability of article. 
This article applies to all businesses licensed in the city that buy, sell or service motor vehicles, whether such businesses are identified as service stations, automobile dealers, salvage dealers, auto auctions or by some other classification. This article further applies to all individuals within the city who drain fluids from motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
(Code 1994, § 38-27; Ord. No. 91-7, § 1, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 16-21. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction or upon the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, be punished as provided in section 1-8. Any owner or manager who participates or directs the violation of this article shall likewise be subject to such criminal penalties. 
(Code 1994, § 38-28; Ord. No. 91-7, § 6, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 16-22. - Suspension or revocation of license for violations. 
In addition to the penalties referred to in section 16-21, the business license of any business under this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation for repeated violations of this article. As used in this section, the term "repeated violations" means three or more prosecutions which result in convictions or pleas of guilty or nolo contendere to violation of this article or any single instance of violation of this article following notice by the city that past violations have been observed and directing that all such violating conditions cease immediately. 
(Code 1994, § 38-29; Ord. No. 91-7, § 7, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 16-23. - Compliance. 
The owner and manager of a business to which this article applies shall each be responsible for ensuring full compliance with this article. 
(Code 1994, § 38-30; Ord. No. 91-7, § 5, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 16-24. - Discharge of fluids prohibited. 
(a)  No business to which this article pertains shall permit the discharge, leaking, dumping or spilling of any fluid from a motor vehicle or from a motor vehicle part onto the ground or onto any paved, graveled or cemented surface. 
(b)  No individual, whether acting within the scope of his employment or on his own, shall permit the discharge, leaking, dumping or spilling of any fluid from a motor vehicle or from a motor vehicle part onto the ground or onto any paved, graveled or cemented surface. 
(Code 1994, § 38-31; Ord. No. 91-7, § 3, 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 16-25. - Disposal of fluids. 
All fluids to be drained from motor vehicles or from motor vehicle parts shall be captured, containerized and disposed of by such methods as approved by state and federal environmental rules. 
(Code 1994, § 38-32; Ord. No. 91-7, § 4, 9-9-1991) 
Secs. 16-26—16-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 16-54. - Unlawful noise. 
(a)  Enumeration. It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any loud, raucous or unusual noise which interferes with the comfort, repose and peace of reasonable persons on property adjacent to the property from which the noise originates or which endangers the health or safety of others within the corporate limits. Such noises as contemplated by this section shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn, whistle, Klaxon, siren, audible signal device, bell or other similar device when such sound is not made in connection with a necessary alert, emergency situation or traffic warning. 
(2)  The discharge into open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, diesel engine, boat motor, motor vehicle, truck, motorcycle, motorbike, motor scooter, go-cart or other vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud and explosive noises therefrom. 
(3)  The operation of a radio, phonograph or television at a volume which carries the sound beyond the boundaries of the premises on which such is operated. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing, except in places of worship. 
(5)  The keeping of any animal or fowl that makes a frequent or continuing sound. 
(6)  The use of any musical instrument or drum. 
(7)  The use of or operation of any mechanical device, blower, hydraulic device, machine or equipment. 
(8)  The erection, demolition, alteration or repair of buildings between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(9)  The operation of grading or excavation equipment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(10)  The shouting, crying, ringing of bells or other sounds made or caused to be made by peddlers, hawkers and vendors. 
(11)  The dragging or hauling of any object which creates noise. 
(b)  Criteria. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (b), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection (b)(1), except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"A" band level means the total sound level of all noise as measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighing network. The unit is the dbA. 
Band pressure level means a specified frequency band; the sound pressure level for the sound contained within the restricted band. The reference pressure shall be specified. 
Cycle means the complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity which occurs during a period. 
Decibel (db) means a unit of level which denotes the ratio between two quantities that are proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base ten of this ratio. 
Frequency, of a function periodic in time, means the reciprocal of the primitive period. The unit is the cycle per unit time and shall be specified. 
Microbar means a unit of pressure commonly used in acoustics which is equal to one dyne per square centimeter. 
Period, with reference to a periodic quantity, means the smallest increment of time for which the function repeats itself. 
Periodic quantity means an oscillating quantity, the values of which recur for equal increments of time. 
Sound analyzer means a device for measuring the band pressure level or pressure spectrum level of a sound as a function of frequency. 
Sound level meter means an instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighing networks, for the measurement of noise and sound levels in a specified manner. 
Sound pressure level means, in decibels of a sound, 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of this sound to the reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. 
Spectrum, of a function of time, means a description of its resolution into components, each of a different frequency. 
(2)  Noise criteria table. 
TABLE 1 
DAYTIME NOISE CRITERION  (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) 

 
NIGHTTIME NOISE CRITERION  (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) 

 
(3)  Machinery, fans, air conditioning in residential zones. It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential zone of the city or within a radius of 500 feet therefrom to utilize any fixed and generally operating machinery or equipment, including but not limited to pumps, fans, air conditioning apparatus, and swimming pool equipment, in such a manner as to create in any inhabited area noise levels at the adjoining property line exceeding those shown in Table 1 in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(4)  Additional criteria. 
a.  The octave band spectra are the basic criteria. The "A" band level is given for a rapid spot check. 
b.  The sound levels are to be measured at the property line, five feet above ground level. 
c.  In the case of an elevated or directional sound source, compliance with the noise limits is to be maintained at any elevation at the boundary. 
d.  If the noise contains pure tone components (hum, whine, whistle, screech or like sounds), the limits are to be lowered five decibels for any octave band containing such tones. 
e.  If the noise is of an impulsive or transient character (hammering or clanking, or the like), the limit levels are to be lowered by five decibels. 
f.  If the noise is steady in character but of short duration, such as steam or air blasts, the limit levels may be increased only during daytime operation (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) by amounts depending on duration, as follows: 
1.  One minute per hour ..... 5 db 
2.  Ten seconds per ten minutes ..... 10 db 
3.  Two seconds per ten minutes ..... 15 db 
g.  If the noise is of short duration, there will be no increase above the basic limits during nighttime operations. 
h.  Compliances with the noise criteria shown in Table 1 in subsection (b)(2) of this section shall be determined by utilizing instrumentation which meets the following United States of America Standards Institute publications: 
1.  S1.4-1961, "Specifications for General Purpose Sound Level Meters." 
2.  S1.11-1966, "Specifications for Octave, Half-Octave and Third-Octave Band Filter Sets." 
(5)  Commercial zones. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any generally operating fixed or moveable equipment of a commercial or manufacturing nature in such a manner as to create noise levels exceeding 70 dbA measured at the nearest commercially zoned boundary. 
(Code 1972, § 8-1; Code 1994, § 38-91) 
Sec. 16-55. - Sound amplification devices. 
(a)  Nothing in section 16-54 shall be construed to prohibit the operation of a sound amplification device, whether stationary or attached to a vehicle, provided that the device is operated under the terms and conditions set out in this section. 
(b)  If any person or organization desires permission to operate a sound amplification device for the purpose of advertising, soliciting, attracting attention, announcing a sporting event or exercising the right of free speech as guaranteed by the United States Constitution, he shall be allowed to do so only after he has applied for and received a permit from the mayor and council. Such operation without such permit is declared unlawful. 
(c)  An application for a permit to operate a sound amplification device shall be in writing, filed with the city clerk, and shall set forth the equipment to be used, the place or route to be followed, the intensity of sound level expected, the purpose of such use and the days and hours such use is desired. 
(d)  The mayor and council shall consider such application at its next regular meeting and shall exercise its discretion after considering all pertinent facts. The mayor and council may require the applicant to demonstrate the equipment before issuing the permit. The mayor and council shall not withhold a permit so as to deprive any person of his constitutional rights, but shall have the right to control sound and noise emitted in the city for the general health and welfare of its citizens. Each permit issued shall be issued for a specific term. 
(Code 1972, § 8-2; Code 1994, § 38-92) 
Secs. 16-56—16-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-8, § 1(exh. A), adopted December 22, 2016, repealed the former article IV, §§ 16-84—16-88, and enacted a new article IV as set out herein. The former article IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1994, §§ 38-141—38-145, 38-166, and 38-167; Ord. No. 90-002, §§ 1—5 , adopted May 14, 1990; and Ord. No. 91-4, §§ 1—5, adopted August 12, 1991. 

Sec. 16-84. - Title. 
This article will be known as "The City of Lake City's Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2016-8, § 1(exh. A), 12-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-85. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission means The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department (DNR) means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable state law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means The Clayton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1, et seq., that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 16-87(c) of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 16-86(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority (LIA) means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia ("manual") published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the county soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-8, § 1(exh. A), 12-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-86. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the LIA; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections (15) and (16) of 16-87(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the LIA from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the LIA, the LIA shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the LIA shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2016-8, § 1(exh. A), 12-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-87. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsection (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum Requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the LIA or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (15), (16) and (17) of subection 16-87(c), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2); 
(15)  Except as provided in subsections (16) and (17) of this subsection (c), there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, of the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, of the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280, et seq., the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat. 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in EPD Rule 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the Division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent the LIA from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-8, § 1(exh. A), 12-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-88. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The LIA shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the LIA. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the LIA to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the LIA and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of section 16-87 will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A.§ 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9), (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the LIA shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the LIA. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections (15), (16) and (17) of subsection 16-87(c) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the LIA and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the LIA to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The LIA, with plan review authority, shall approve or disapprove a revised Plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the LIA, with plan review authority, to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the LIA may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The LIA may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the LIA may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the LIA with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections (b) and (c) of section 16-87, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the LIA of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary, and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the LIA unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the LIA has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections (15), (16) and (17) of subsection 16-87(c) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the LIA are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the LIA. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the LIA, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 (f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2016-8, § 1(exh. A), 12-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-89. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The LIA will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the LIA shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The LIA shall amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The LIA shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this Article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the LIA, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 (a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2016-8, § 1(exh. A), 12-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-90. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the LIA. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the LIA shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the LIA shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the LIA shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the LIA shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the LIA or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the LIA or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection of subsection 16-88(b)(6). The LIA may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-8, § 1(exh. A), 12-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-91. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2016-8, § 1(exh. A), 12-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-92. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the LIA upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council within 30 days after receipt by the LIA of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the LIA, after exhausting its administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal such decision by writ of certiorari to the county superior court as provided in O.C.G.A § 5-4-1. 
(Ord. No. 2016-8, § 1(exh. A), 12-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-93. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the date of its adoption. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the LIA or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby 
(d)  Conflicting ordinances. To the extent any other section in this Code conflicts with the provisions of this article, the provisions in this article will control. 
(Ord. No. 2016-8, § 1(exh. A), 12-22-2016) 
Secs. 16-94—16-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER AND AIR POLLUTION 

Sec. 16-120. - Pollution of streams. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any lake or stream any petroleum product, detergent or other cleaning agent or product, garbage, refuse, waste material, whether solid or liquid, or any other substance which is harmful to plant or animal life or which is unsightly or which causes or tends to cause damming or which causes noxious odors. 
(Code 1972, § 10-1; Code 1994, § 38-166) 
Sec. 16-121. - Pollution of air. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause to be placed in the atmosphere any fumes, dust, smoke, gas, ash, fly ash or similar substance which renders the air less safe for human, animal or plant life or which results in damage to property of others or which causes noxious odors. 
(Code 1972, § 10-2; Code 1994, § 38-167) 
Secs. 16-122—16-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 16-141. - Findings. 
The mayor and council makes the following findings: 
(1)  Stormwater management is needed throughout the county. While specific service and system demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the city is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(2)  Addressing the stormwater management needs in the county is essential to protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. Provision of stormwater management programs and systems results in both service and benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of the county in a variety of ways. 
(3)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater runoff can result in flooding, streambank and ditch erosion, property damage and degradation of water quality, aquatic habitat and biological communities. Failure to manage these impacts can put the county's ability to receive state and federal grants and permits at risk. 
(4)  The volume and quantity of stormwater generated by a development has been proven to be most closely associated with the amount of impervious surface on the property, therefore, the square footage of impervious surface is the most appropriate factor for calculating stormwater utility fees. 
(5)  Clayton County, Forest Park, Jonesboro, Lake City, Lovejoy, Morrow, and Riverdale, presently own and operate stormwater management systems which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by these entities, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the entities to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems in the county in concert with the management of other water resources in the county. In order to do so, there must be adequate and stable funding for the county's stormwater management program's operating needs and capital. 
(6)  The feasibility report submitted to the county, cities, and the Clayton County Water Authority (CCWA) properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the stormwater utility. 
(7)  As a result, the county's governing authority finds that a utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services and the county's governing authority finds that a utility fee provides the most practical and appropriate means of funding stormwater management services in the county. 
(Code 1994, § 38-181; Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 6-12-1995; Ord. No. 06-01, pt. I, art. V, § 25-360, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 16-142. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Credit means a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. The basis of such credits, if granted, will be defined by a specific written agreement at the determination of the stormwater official in accordance with the stormwater utility. 
Customer means all persons or entities to whom the stormwater service charge is billed. 
Detached dwelling unit means developed land containing one structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses, such as garages, carports, or small storage buildings, or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional impervious areas, such as parking spaces, playgrounds, or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar nonresidential uses. The term "detached dwelling unit" shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple dwelling unit residential properties. 
Developed land means real property which has been altered from its natural state by addition of any improvements, such as grading, paving, compaction, construction of structures or impervious surfaces greater than 200 square feet, or drainage works so that hydrologic response of the property is changed from that which would occur in the natural undeveloped conditions. For new construction, property shall be considered developed pursuant to this article upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued. 
Hydrologic response of a property is the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors, including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area; the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property; antecedent moisture conditions; and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious surfaces means those areas, which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. The following types of surfaces will be considered impervious surfaces for purposes of the stormwater utility: the projected area of buildings; asphalt-, concrete-, brick-, or stone-paved areas; improved vehicular drives and parking areas; compacted gravel and soil surfaces; fabric or plastic coverings; and other surfaces that prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff or that change the hydrologic response of the property that existed prior to development. 
Multifamily residential means developed land where more than one attached or detached residential dwelling units are located, including, but not limited to, apartment houses, condominiums, townhomes, attached single-family homes, boardinghouses, group homes, hotels and motels, retirement centers, and other structures in which more than one family group commonly and normally reside or could reside. 
Service charges means the stormwater management service charges applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by CCWA stormwater utility. The charge shall be used to fund the county stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and systems. Service charges are based on measurable parameters that influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or more classes of similarly situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to the owners of particular properties for services or facilities uniquely related to stormwater management of that property, including but not limited to charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced level of stormwater services above those normally provided by CCWA. 
Single-family residential means a developed lot containing one dwelling structure with its principal use being residential. 
Stormwater development guidelines means those guidelines established by CCWA which specify approved design criteria, construction materials and construction methods for components of the stormwater management system. 
Stormwater management system means any one or more of the various devices used in the collection, treatment, or conveyance of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including all manmade structures or natural watercourse for the conveyance or transportation of runoff, such as detention areas, lakes, berms, swales, improved watercourses, open channels, streams, culverts, pipes, catchbasins, inlets; collection, or drainage. 
Stormwater official means the CCWA general manager or his appointee that has direct responsibility for the management of the CCWA stormwater utility. 
Stormwater unit (SU) means the unit of measure which provides the basis for comparing the runoff generated by customer's developed land with that generated by another's. An SU shall be the average impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of single-family residential lots in the county. A stormwater unit has been determined through engineering and analysis to be 2,950 square feet of impervious surface. This unit will be used to determine and compute the service charge for all developed land served by the CCWA stormwater utility. 
Stormwater utility guidebook means the document that defines the basis for the stormwater utility, policies and procedures for operating the utility, and other necessary information determined to help document how the utility was developed and how it is operated. 
Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures in excess of 200 square feet which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
(Code 1994, § 38-183; Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 6-12-1995; Ord. No. 06-01, pt. I, art. V, § 25-361, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 16-143. - Establishment of a utility. 
(a)  The city hereby consents to the establishment of a county-wide stormwater utility (the "stormwater utility") by the CCWA which shall be responsible for stormwater management county-wide, and shall provide for, the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management systems. Specific areas of regulation and maintenance are established in the Stormwater Utility Guidebook so long as they are not in conflict with the terms of this article or that certain intergovernmental agreement between CCWA and the city. 
(b)  Pursuant to the terms of this article and that certain intergovernmental agreement between CCWA and the city, the CCWA shall carry out and perform on behalf of the city, all of city's duties and responsibilities with respect to stormwater management services, enforcement, and systems heretofore owned and operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, pt. I, art. V, § 25-362, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 16-144. - Scope of responsibility for the stormwater utility. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall monitor the design, operation, maintenance, inspection, construction, and use of all stormwater management systems in the county. The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the design and construction of public stormwater facilities owned by the county and shall inspect, operate, and maintain them as prescribed herein. The stormwater utility shall provide services which relate to the: 
(1)  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the county; 
(2)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing city- or county-owned stormwater management systems; 
(3)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
(4)  Maintenance and/or improvement of water quality in waterways throughout the county; 
(5)  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems; 
(6)  Complying with the federal and state regulations related to stormwater management, including the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District (MNGWPD) watershed management requirements; and 
(7)  Education of the public regarding stormwater issues. 
The stormwater utility shall not provide stormwater services related to erosion and sedimentation control (E&SC). 
(b)  The stormwater utility shall be responsible for plan approval and construction inspection of both private stormwater systems and public stormwater systems not owned by the county. Design and construction of public or private stormwater management facilities will be governed by the CCWA's Stormwater Development Guidelines which specify design criteria, construction materials and construction methods. The CCWA Stormwater Development Guidelines will supersede any previously adopted stormwater design or construction guidelines. Additionally, the stormwater utility may accept the responsibility for the operation and maintenance of private stormwater systems only when such services have been agreed to, contracted for, and approved by the governing authority of the utility. 
(c)  The stormwater utility shall provide for inspection of private stormwater systems to ascertain that the stormwater systems are functioning as designed and approved. The MNGWPD post-development stormwater ordinance has been adopted by Clayton County, Forest Park, Jonesboro, Morrow, Lake City, Lovejoy, and Riverdale. Property owners who fail to maintain their stormwater systems will be notified of the violation. If within 30 days (or 24 hours if there is an immediate danger to public safety), no actions are taken, the CCWA may enter the property and correct the failure. The cost for the repair work may be a charge on the customer's water, sewer and stormwater bill or a lien on the property that may be placed on the tax bill. 
(d)  The CCWA owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  Within public road rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)  On public land which is owned by the county, cities, or other governmental entity, and to which CCWA has agreements for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system; 
(3)  Operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of stormwater management systems which are located on private or public property not owned by the county or cities, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights of entry, rights of access, rights of use or other form of dedication thereof to CCWA for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management systems, shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the laws of the state and the United States; and 
(4)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the county or cities. CCWA has expressly reserved the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the CCWA, its directors, and employees arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(e)  The stormwater utility shall provide for effective management of a uniform stormwater plan and program throughout the city and provide compliance with the municipal separate storm sewer NPDES permit issued to each jurisdiction, including but not limited to the following components: 
(1)  Public education and outreach on stormwater issues; 
(2)  Public involvement and participation; 
(3)  Illicit discharge detection and elimination; 
(4)  Post-construction stormwater management; 
(5)  Pollution prevention; 
(6)  Floodplain management; 
(Code 1994, § 38-184; Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 6-12-1995; Ord. No. 06-01, pt. I, art. V, § 25-363, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 16-145. - Stormwater service charges authorized. 
The CCWA is authorized to impose a service charge on each customer of the stormwater system, provided that such charge is closely associated with the amount of impervious surface associated with a particular property for which the service charge is imposed. The stormwater utility guidebook shall provide for the rate structure which shall determine overall charges for properties served by the stormwater utility, based in part on the number of stormwater units each property is determined to consist of. The stormwater service charge and rate structure may be amended from time to time by official action of the CCWA board of directors. The CCWA shall review the stormwater service charge and rate structure on an annual basis and any rate changes will be approved by the CCWA board of directors. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, pt. I, art. V, § 25-365, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 16-146. - Effective date of stormwater service charges. 
The CCWA may begin collecting the stormwater service charge on or after September 1, 2006, but shall bill more frequently than monthly thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, pt. I, art. V, § 25-366, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 16-147. - Exemptions. 
The following properties are exempt from stormwater utility fees: 
(1)  Undeveloped land; 
(2)  All public road rights-of-way; and 
(3)  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks). However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, pt. I, art. V, § 25-368, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 16-148. - Credits. 
(a)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to CCWA's standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities or to private stormwater management systems which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems 
(b)  Property owners of developed land may receive a stormwater service charge credit. The specific credits will be determined based on the guidelines in the Stormwater Utility Guidebook. Credits for structural controls will be based on best management practices performance as defined by the design criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, First Edition, August 2001. 
(c)  Credits may be partial or full credits and property owners can receive a maximum 40 percent credit. 
(d)  Property owners seeking stormwater service charge credits must apply for such credits through completion and submittal to the CCWA of a stormwater service charge credit application. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the CCWA shall review the application and make a determination as to whether the applicable criteria for a credit have been met. All decisions regarding the approval or disapproval of a stormwater credit shall be made within 45 days of the date the completed application was received by CCWA. 
(f)  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the CCWA's design and performance standards as may be updated or amended from time to time; and upon continuing provision of the systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner upon which the credit is based. The CCWA may revoke any credit at any time for noncompliance with this article. 
(g)  Stormwater utility fees may be adjusted retroactively to the date that CCWA received the completed application. 
(h)  Applicants receiving credit for a structural control as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual must have an approved maintenance plan on file with CCWA and the applicant's property must have on-site stormwater management and treatment facilities. 
(i)  A customer shall reapply every five years for the credit granted, however, CCWA may terminate the credit if CCWA finds the facility does not comply with the original approved credit application. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, pt. I, art. V, § 25-369, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 16-149. - Inspection of private facilities. 
Continuing compliance with the CCWA's design and performance standards may be verified by CCWA inspection of the systems or facilities upon which the credit is based. No credit shall be given under this article unless the property owner agrees in writing in its application that the CCWA shall have the right for its designated officers, representatives, agents, and employees to enter upon private and public property, upon reasonable notice to the owner of such property, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering testing, on such property in order to ensure compliance with the design and performance standards and the applicant's credit application. On-site systems or facilities determined to no longer comply with the county's design and performance standards or the applicant's original credit application shall subject the property owner to revocation of all, or a portion of, stormwater service charge credits based on the CCWA inspectors' estimate of capacity reduction for a period of not less than one year. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, pt. I, art. V, § 25-370, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 16-150. - Stormwater service charge, billing, delinquencies and collections. 
The CCWA is authorized to establish and/or utilize its own policies with respect to the billing and collection of the stormwater utility service charge and the treatment of delinquent accounts. The stormwater utility service charge may be billed separately, or on a customer statement and collected along with other utility services provided by CCWA, at the CCWA's sole discretion. The CCWA is authorized to apply partial payments proportionately among the water, sewer, and stormwater fees charged by the CCWA. The CCWA is authorized to use existing CCWA procedures for shutting off water with respect to nonpayment. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, pt. I, art. V, § 25-371, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 16-151. - Stormwater utility enforcement. 
(a)  Every owner of developed real property located in the city, and every person who serves as a contractor or developer for the purpose of developing real property located in the city shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, treat, control and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all city ordinances and development regulations, and the laws of the state and the United States of America. 
(b)  Determination of public nuisance; notice of violation. 
(1)  When the stormwater official determines that a public nuisance exists, the stormwater official shall send a notice of violation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owners of the property described, as their name and address are shown on the latest ad valorem tax records of the county property appraiser. This notice shall be deemed complete and sufficient when so addressed and deposited in the United States mail with proper postage prepaid. 
(2)  The notice of violation shall inform the property owner that a violation of this article exists on the identified property with the description of the public nuisance, that the property owner is responsible for maintaining the identified private stormwater system, that the property owner may allow the city access to the property to abate the nuisance at the expense of the property owner, and that formal enforcement action will be taken if the violation is not corrected within the time period indicated on the notice. The stormwater official shall determine a reasonable period of time for correction of the nuisance. In determining a reasonable period of time, the stormwater official shall consider the following: practicality and ease of correction; the owner's ability to correct the violation; the severity of the violation; the nature, extent, and probability of danger to the public, and other relevant factors. 
(3)  Notice, as required under this provision, shall not be required: 
a.  When the stormwater official determines that the public nuisance presents an imminent endangerment to persons or property; 
b.  When a notice of violation has been sent to the same property owners for the same violation within the previous three months; or 
c.  When notice by certified mail cannot be effected on the owners of record. 
(4)  The notice of violation shall contain substantially the following information and may be in the following form or other appropriate form: notice of violation: name of owner; address of owner; description of property; inspection date; determination made by the stormwater official that the condition on the property is creating adverse conditions so as to constitute a violation of the this article; describe the conditions that caused the property to be in violation and any recommended actions that may be necessary to remedy the nuisance; specify a reasonable time period to proceed and remedy the nuisance; or provide written permission to the city to enter the site and abate the nuisance at the owner's expense. 
(5)  Within the reasonable period of time for compliance specified in the notice of violation, the property owner shall either abate the nuisance or file a written request with CCWA for a hearing before the stormwater official to show that the condition alleged in the notice does not exist or that such condition does not constitute a public nuisance in violation of this article. 
(c)  Any failure to meet the obligation set forth in this section shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by any damaged party, the city or the county in any court of competent jurisdiction. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the CCWA may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner or developer, if any, on a joint and several basis. From the date of the filing of such action, the CCWA shall have lien rights, which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the superior court of the county or the city's municipal court. The CCWA shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, pt. I, art. V, § 25-372, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 16-152. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the stormwater official within 30 days of the decision that is appealed. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  The CCWA shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal, the CCWA may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(4)  All decisions by the CCWA shall be final. 
(b)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the stormwater official may be appealed by application for writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county or city court, filed within 30 days of the date of service of the decision of the chief executive officer. 
(Code 1994, § 38-190; Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 6-12-1995; Ord. No. 06-01, pt. I, art. V, § 25-373, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 16-153. - Regulations adopted. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference as if set out at length herein the Model Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as "the regulations"). 
(b)  At least one copy of the regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Where reference is made in the regulations to the duties of certain officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the regulations shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the regulations is concerned. 
(d)  The following terms, when they appear in the regulations, shall have the following meanings: 
Appropriate municipal, magistrate or recorders means the municipal court. 
Corporate/other means corporate. 
Jurisdiction means the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
Local enforcement authority means the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
Local government means the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
Local permitting authority means the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
Municipal/county means the city. 
Sanitary sewer department/agency means the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1(38-192), 6-13-2005) 
Secs. 16-154—16-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-175. - Findings. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased non-point source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(4)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or credits. The Georgia Greenspace Program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas which provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; localities in the state are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and non-point source pollution; 
(5)  The mayor and council has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and non-point source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 1(38-200)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-176. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and non-point source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, non-point source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 1(38-201)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-177. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city manager or his designee to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 1(38-202)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-178. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a landowner and the city or a land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from Group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to Group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities mean those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Non-point source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Non-point source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional non-point source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff, including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 2(38-220)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-179. - Designation of administrator. 
The city manager or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 1(38-203)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-180. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 1(38-204)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-181. - Stormwater design manual. 
The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information, including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 1(38-206)), 5-14-2007) 
Secs. 16-182—16-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 16-201. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city manager or his designee a permit application on a form provided by the city manager or his designee for that purpose. 
(b)  Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 16-202; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 16-203; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 16-204, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with sections 16-205 and 16-206. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 3(38-226)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-202. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(a)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the landowner or developer meet with the city manager or his designee for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting should take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(b)  To accomplish this goal, the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas, such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system, including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems, such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
Local watershed plans and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 3(38-227)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-203. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in division 3 of this article. 
(b)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklists found in the stormwater design manual. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing conditions hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 3 of this article; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in division 3 of this article must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: a map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms, including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs; documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 3 of this article; drawings, design calculations, elevations for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements, including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catchbasins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public rights-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city manager or his designee as provided in section 16-204, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with section 16-204. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city manager or his designee that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 3(38-228)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-204. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city manager or his designee, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city manager or his designee prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(c)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(d)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city manager or his designee may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in division 5 of this article. 
(e)  The mayor and council, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided that such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 3(38-229)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-205. - Application procedure. 
The application procedure for land development permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 16-201 (four copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(3)  The city manager or his designee shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city manager or his designee shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (3) of this section and this subsection shall apply to such re-submittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the city manager or his designee that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city manager or his designee may issue a permit for the land development project, provided that all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The city manager or his designee shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city manager or his designee; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 16-272. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 3(38-231)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-206. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city manager or his designee and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 3(38-232)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-207. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city clerk, which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city manager or his designee that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 3(38-233)), 5-14-2007) 
Secs. 16-208—16-237. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 

Sec. 16-238. - Applicability. 
The performance criteria in this division shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 4(intro.)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-239. - Water quality. 
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city manager or his designee are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 4(38-250)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-240. - Stream channel protection. 
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures, such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 4(38-251)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-241. - Over-bank flooding protection. 
Downstream over-bank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 4(38-252)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-242. - Extreme flooding protection. 
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 4(38-253)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-243. - Structural stormwater controls. 
(a)  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city manager or his designee before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city manager or his designee may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased non-point source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
(b)  Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 4(38-254)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-244. - Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. 
The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 16-239. The applicant may, if approved by the city manager or his designee, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 4(38-255)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-245. - Drainage system guidelines. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catchbasins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public rights-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 4(38-256)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-246. - Dam design guidelines. 
Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 4(38-257)), 5-14-2007) 
Secs. 16-247—16-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 16-271. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
(a)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction may be conducted by the staff of the public works department or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city manager or his designee. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(b)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(c)  If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 5(38-270), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-272. - Final inspection and as-built plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city manager or his designee is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 5(38-271)), 5-14-2007) 
Secs. 16-273—16-292. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES AND PRACTICES 

Sec. 16-293. - Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan, which is subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement, must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(b)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city manager or his designee shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city manager or his designee may correct the violation as provided in section 16-296. 
(c)  Inspection programs by the city manager may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 6(38-300)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-294. - Right of entry for inspection. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city manager or his designee to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when the city manager or his designee has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 6(38-301)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-295. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 6(38-302)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-296. - Failure to maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city manager or his designee, after 30 days' written notice (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city manager or his designee may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 6(38-303)), 5-14-2007) 
Secs. 16-297—16-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 16-326. - Violation subject to enforcement action; abatement of public nuisance. 
Any action or inaction, which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this division. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in this division shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 7(intro.)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-327. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the city manager or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 7(38-320), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-328. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city manager or his designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city manager or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city manager or his designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided that the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city manager or his designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city manager or his designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided that such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city manager or his designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city manager or his designee shall deem appropriate (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), after the city manager or his designee has taken one or more of the actions described in subsections (1) through (3) of this section, the city manager or his designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city manager or his designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in magistrate court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1(art. IX, div. 7(38-321)), 5-14-2007) 
Secs. 16-329—16-359. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-360. - Findings. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(3)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
a.  Protect human life and health; 
b.  Minimize damage to private property; 
c.  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
d.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  Ga. Const. art. IX, § II and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city does ordain this article and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction provisions for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, intro., 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-361. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 1.1, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-362. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 1.2, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-363. - Designation of administrator. 
The director of community services is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 1.3, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-364. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics; flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of defining and determining areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard, areas of shallow flooding, base flood elevations, floodplains, floodways, future-conditions flood elevations, future-conditions floodplains, potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this article, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
(1)  The Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 4, 1986, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for the county, dated September 4, 1986, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. 
(2)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one percent (100-year) floodplain and floodprone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA-approved methodology and approved by the city. 
(3)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; and 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA-approved methodology approved by the city. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at Clayton County Water Authority (CCWA). 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 1.4, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-365. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 1.5, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-366. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 1.7, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-367. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the director of community services' interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as Zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
Accessory structure or facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building. See Structure. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before September 4, 1986. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 4, 1986. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes any structure commonly referred to as a mobile home regardless of the date of manufacture. The term "manufactured home" also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this article, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
New construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after September 4, 1986. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 4, 1986. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the jurisdiction or local permitting authority to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term "substantial damage" also includes repetitive loss. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official. The term "substantial improvement" also does not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this article. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 2, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-368. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the city. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the city shall have the right to appeal such decision to the mayor and council members as established by the city in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the mayor and council members. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council members may appeal such decision to the superior court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the city and mayor and council members shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this section and other sections of this article. 
(8)  Conditions for variances. 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage provided. 
d.  The director of community services shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the state department of natural resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the city and mayor and council members shall deem necessary for the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in this section and the purposes of this article, the city and the mayor and council members may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 6, 3-27-2014) 
Secs. 16-369—16-394. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 16-395. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city and the Clayton County Water Authority a permit application on a form provided by the city and the Clayton County Water Authority for that purpose. 
(c)  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 3.1, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-396. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
(a)  An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the information listed in subsections (a)(1)a through h of this section by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 16-461(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in section 16-460(5); and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure. 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including but not limited to permits required by section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article. 
(b)  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 3.2, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-397. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(a)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the director of community services a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to ensure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
(b)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The director of community services shall review the certification data submitted in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. 
(c)  Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 3.3, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-398. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the director of community services shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to ensure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of divisions 3 and 4 of this article; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this article in the office of the director of community services and such records shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the state department of natural resources and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the mayor and council members. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 3.4, 3-27-2014) 
Secs. 16-399—16-424. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 16-425. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the Clayton County Water Authority. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the Clayton County Water Authority, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city and the Clayton County Water Authority. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 4.1, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-426. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA-approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the Clayton County Water Authority. If floodway data is not available from the Clayton County Water Authority, it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city and the Clayton County Water Authority. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 4.2, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-427. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under this section shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 16-428; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city and the Clayton County Water Authority using the FEMA Community Concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 4.3, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-428. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city and the Clayton County Water Authority prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the city and the Clayton County Water Authority. Cross sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 4.4, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-429. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) of this section. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted, provided that it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city and the Clayton County Water Authority until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the city and the Clayton County Water Authority. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 4.5, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-430. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The city and the Clayton County Water Authority may direct the property owner, at no cost to the city or the Clayton County Water Authority, to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city and the Clayton County Water Authority. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 4.6, 3-27-2014) 
Secs. 16-431—16-459. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 16-460. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 16-427, 16-428 and 16-429 have been met. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, including ductwork, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(8)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city and the Clayton County Water Authority to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(9)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(10)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(11)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding. 
(12)  Other public utilities, such as gas and electric systems, shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding. 
(13)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(14)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(15)  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this article. 
(16)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the floodprone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, §§ 5(intro.), 5.1, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-461. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard the following building standards are required: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 16-427, 16-428 and 16-429 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 16-427, 16-428 and 16-429 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-460(5)a. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-460(5)a. 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal nonresidential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 16-427, 16-428 and 16-429 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 16-427, 16-428 and 16-429 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-460(5)a. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 16-427, 16-428 and 16-429 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the director of community services using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the director of community services to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-460(5)a. Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the director of community services using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of sections 16-427, 16-428 and 16-429 and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with section 16-460(5)a and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for substantial improvements to residential buildings in section 16-461(1)b, including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 16-427, 16-428 and 16-429 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 16-427, 16-428 and 16-429 have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-460(5)a. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 16-460(7). 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 5.2, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-462. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
For structures and buildings adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain, the following building standards are required: 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-460(5)a. 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-460(5)a. Nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 5.3, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-463. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A zones). 
(a)  For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), the director of community services shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
(b)  If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for floodprone enclosures in accordance with section 16-460(5)a. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 5.4, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-464. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-460(5)a; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the director of community services using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 5.5, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-465. - Standards for subdivisions of land. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data. 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 16-396(a)(2). 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 5.6, 3-27-2014) 
Secs. 16-466—16-483. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 16-484. - Generally. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this division. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in this division shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 7(intro.), 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-485. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 7.1, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 16-486. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided that the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided that such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described in subsections (1) through (3) of this section, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 7.2, 3-27-2014) 
Secs. 16-487—16-510. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-511. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Lake City Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 1(38-500)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-512. - Findings. 
The city finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits, including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sediment; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing streambanks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 1(38-501), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-513. - Purposes. 
It is the purpose of this article to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 1(38-502)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-514. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by section 16-540, buffer and setback requirements), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan (i.e., the regulatory flood). 
Impervious cover means any man-made paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. The term "impervious cover" includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that does not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city manager or his designee required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county, or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond, or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 16-540, buffer and setback requirements extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow; 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city manager or his designee may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Streambank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 1(38-503)), 5-14-2007) 
Secs. 16-515—16-536. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 16-537. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 16-514. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements does not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-520)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-538. - Grandfather provisions. 
This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities, including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-521)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-539. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
b.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
c.  Public access facilities that must be on the water, including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; unpaved foot trails and paths; 
d.  Activities to restore and enhance streambank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
(4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city manager on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city manager or his designee to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silviculture or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
a.  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
b.  Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 16-541. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-522)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-540. - Buffer and setback requirements. 
All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the streambank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or setback. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-524)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-541. - Variance procedures. 
Variances from the buffer and setback requirements set forth in section 16-540 may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the city manager finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the city manager may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided that such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1) of this section, the city manager shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the city manager. The city manager shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city manager shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road of right-of-way. 
(3)  Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances would create an extreme hardship. 
(4)  Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(5)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(6)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-525)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-542. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
(a)  This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(b)  Examples of existing legislation and regulations as of July 2002 include: 
(1)  The Metropolitan River Protection Act and Chattahoochee Corridor Plan; 
(2)  DNR Part 5 Criteria for small (under 100 square miles) water supply watersheds; and 
(3)  DNR Part 5 Criteria for river protection. 
These examples represent only three of the stricter regulations that already exist. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-526)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-543. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater that five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documents that the city manager or his designee may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that this article is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-527)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-544. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-528)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-545. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following the completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city manager or his designee in making such inspections. The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at any reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-529)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-546. - Violation subject to enforcement action; abatement of public nuisance. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section and sections 16-547 and 16-548. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in section 16-548 shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-530)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-547. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the city manager or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-531)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-548. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city manager or his designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city manager or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The city manager may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided that the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city manager may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city manager may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided that such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city manager may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city manager shall deem appropriate (except that, in the event the violation constitutes and immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), after the city manager has taken one or more of the actions described in subsections (1) through (3) of this section, the city manager may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city manager may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in magistrate court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-532)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-549. - Administrative appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city manager or his designee, may appeal in writing within seven days after the issuance of such decision or order to the mayor and council and shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor and council within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. The time for hearing may be reasonably extended by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-534)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-550. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city manager, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1(art. XI, div. 2(38-535)), 5-14-2007) 
Secs. 16-551—16-578. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 16-579. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of conservation subdivision development is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city by allowing flexibility in the design of certain subdivisions from standard regulations in exchange for the dedication and protection of open space and for other benefits to the public welfare. 
(b)  The specific purposes of a conservation subdivision development include: 
(1)  To provide residential subdivision regulations which permit and encourage flexibility of design in order to preserve environmentally sensitive areas and create efficient uses of the land; 
(2)  To preserve open space and unique or sensitive natural resources, such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands, wildlife habitats, historic features and unique topography; 
(3)  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount or infrastructure, including paved surfaces, utilities, earthwork and other land disturbing activities; 
(4)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential developments; 
(5)  To conserve a portion of the otherwise developable property as open space in perpetuity. This option is not necessarily intended to allow an applicant to conserve only the portion of the tract that is already not buildable due to factors such as steep slopes, wetlands, or land adjacent to undesirable areas such as landfills or livestock farming; 
(6)  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the city; 
(7)  To promote linking of greenways and corridors between the city and neighboring jurisdictions; 
(8)  To encourage interactions of persons living in the resulting residential community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood; 
(9)  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries; 
(10)  To incorporate aesthetic design standards that will increase the value of the neighborhood; 
(11)  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by promoting views of open space from arterial and collector roads; and 
(12)  To promote other purposes of the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, soil erosion and sediment control ordinance and other ordinances and policies of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1(art. XII(38-570)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-580. - Permitted locations and districts. 
(a)  Conservation subdivisions, as defined herein, are permitted within the all one-family residential zoning districts. The zoning administrator shall receive all applications for a conservation subdivision on such form as prescribed by the zoning administrator. An application shall include a proposal which will demonstrate compliance with all applicable county regulations regarding the approval of subdivisions as well as the regulations set forth in this article, except as otherwise authorized by this section. The regulations found in this section are optional insofar as it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to determine if conservation development is appropriate for use on a particular piece of property and thereafter apply for approval. 
(b)  An applicant shall tender a conceptual plan to the zoning administrator who shall make a preliminary determination of the general outlines of the subdivision. If the conceptual plan is approved, the applicant will then prepare a preliminary plat, which, if consistent with the conceptual plan, shall serve as the plan for the proposed development. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall have final approval or denial of all applications for conservation subdivisions. Such applications shall be processed in the same manner as other applications for zoning amendments are processed. In making such decisions, the mayor and council shall be guided by the standards set forth in section 16-579. The permitted uses allowed shall be the same as those listed in chapter 42, pertaining to zoning. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1(art. XII(38-571)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-581. - Dimensional requirements for conservation subdivisions. 
The development standards for conservation subdivisions shall be as follows: 
(1)  The minimum lot size shall be 7,000 square feet. 
(2)  The minimum front setback shall be 20 feet from the property line, unless otherwise approved by mayor and council. 
(3)  The minimum side yard shall be the minimum required by the city fire code. 
(4)  The minimum rear yard setback shall be 25 feet from the rear property line. 
(5)  The minimum lot width shall be 70 feet, unless otherwise approved by mayor and council. 
(6)  The minimum house size shall be the same as required by chapter 42, pertaining to zoning. 
(7)  The minimum access easement width to open space shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1(art. XII(38-572)), 5-14-2007; Ord. No. 2016-4, § 1, 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 16-582. - Density restrictions. 
The maximum gross density of development in this district shall be based on the zoning district in which the property is located, except as modified elsewhere in this article. Further, the maximum gross density of development shall be based upon the gross acreage before the same is reduced by the 25 percent open space requirement. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1(art. XII(38-573)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-583. - Subdivision design. 
Proposed conservation subdivisions shall be processed in the same manner as a standard subdivision plat is processed. An approved final plat shall have an additional letter "C," symbolizing the use of conservation design standards, affixed after the original zoning designation listing. Conservation subdivisions to be considered for approval shall meet the following minimum design standards: 
(1)  A minimum of 25 percent of the total land area (open space) shall be permanently protected as described elsewhere in this article. A minimum 20 percent of the total protected land area shall be otherwise suitable for development, be located substantially throughout the subdivision, and adjoin as many lots as is reasonably practical. The land area within any buffer required in subsections (4) and (5) of this section and land in utility and right-of-way easements may be included in calculating the minimum 25 percent open space requirement. 
(2)  All homes must have, at least, all front facades constructed with brick, stone or stucco, or a combination thereof. 
(3)  No vinyl siding, except for eaves and soffits, shall be used. All exterior surface facades, except for eaves and soffits, shall be constructed with a masonry-based material. 
(4)  A 50-foot buffer shall be maintained along all arterial streets and a 25-foot buffer shall be maintained along all collector streets. The buffer shall be natural, planted vegetation, and/or earthen berm, as approved by the zoning administrator; provided, however, that a minimum of a 25-foot vegetated buffer shall be maintained along all external streets. 
(5)  A 75-foot undisturbed buffer shall be maintained on each side of all perennial streams as may otherwise be required by the appropriate state regulatory agency. All buffers should be expanded to include wetlands, steep slopes or the 100-year floodplain. At least part of the buffer must be maintained with native vegetation. 
(6)  All dedications, easements, or other specific measures required to be performed to meet the regulations set forth in this section shall be shown on a final recordable plat prior to the issuance of a building permit on any lot of the subdivision. 
(7)  Front, side and rear yards, where disturbed, shall be sodded. 
(8)  No rear yard fences shall be erected across any drainage or access easements. 
(9)  The minimum pavement width for streets shall be 22 feet. 
(10)  The minimum right-of-way width shall be 43 feet. 
(11)  The minimum width for sidewalks shall be four feet. 
(12)  Sidewalks shall generally slope toward front yards rather than roadways. 
(13)  Unless otherwise approved by mayor and council, sidewalks are required to be constructed on both sides of the street. 
(14)  The maximum driveway widths shall be as follows: nine feet (one lane), 18 feet (two lanes). 
(15)  Shared driveways may be permitted with approval of mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1(art. XII(38-574)), 5-14-2007; Ord. No. 2016-4, § 2, 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 16-584. - Conservation protection implementation. 
An applicant for a conservation subdivision development shall submit a written management plan for the project and its open space areas prior to the approval of the final plat. The management plan shall include: 
(1)  Provisions for the use, restrictions of use, ownership, maintenance and perpetual preservation of the open space areas; 
(2)  Allocation of responsibility and establishing guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon. These guidelines must include provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements if any; 
(3)  Estimates of the costs and requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and an outline of the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
(4)  Provisions for the open space required herein to be permanently protected in perpetuity by a conservation easement conveyed to the city prior to the sale of the first lot in such subdivision. The conservation easement shall be created subject to the provisions of article 1 of chapter 10 of title 44 or the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, which is known as the "Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act" (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq., enacted by Ga. L. 1192, p. 2227, § 1). All such conservation easements shall provide for enforcement rights vested in the city, or in any other party approved by the city manager, and shall provide that the conservation easement may not be terminated or otherwise modified without the consent of all entities having either a property right or enforcement right therein; 
(5)  The open space areas shall be owned and maintained in accordance with the following criteria, provided that the record title to the property and the conservation easement shall be held by different entities: 
a.  Record title may be held by: 
1.  Equal share of undivided interest by each lot owner; 
2.  The homeowners' association; or 
3.  Other entity or arrangement approved by the city manager. 
b.  Conservation easement may be held by: 
1.  The city; or 
2.  Other entity approved by the city manager, qualified to be a holder under the Georgia Uniform 1 Conservation Easement Act. 
c.  Maintenance shall be assumed by: 
1.  Homeowners' association; or 
2.  Other entity approved by the city manager. 
(6)  Homeowners' association. In all cases, a homeowners' association shall be established. Membership shall be mandatory for all lot owners in the development and their successors, and the homeowners' association shall have the power to file liens to collect dues and assessments. The homeowners' association shall be formed under the provisions of article 6 of chapter 3 of title 44 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, which is known as the "Georgia Property Owners' Association Act" (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq., enacted by Ga. 1994, p. 1879, § 1), and shall contain provisions for the automatic extension of the initial term, and subsequent terms, as allowed in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1(art. XII(38-575)), 5-14-2007; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 9, 4-19-2018) 
Sec. 16-585. - Standards for determining open space. 
(a)  The minimum area of open space preserved shall be determined by multiplying the total acreage of all lands included in the development by 0.25. The result shall constitute the minimum amount of area that must be preserved as open space. 
(b)  Physiographic characteristics. The types of land area included in the open space may include the following: 
(1)  Floodprone areas, floodplains, and floodway; 
(2)  Wetlands; 
(3)  Ponds, lakes, stream and river channels, including buffer zones of approximately 100 feet or more (but never less than 25 feet) from the top of the streambanks on both sides; 
(4)  Waters of the state; 
(5)  Wellhead protection zones; 
(6)  Slopes 30 percent and steeper; 
(7)  Areas with shallow bedrock; 
(8)  Areas and soils which, when disturbed, are prone to excessive erosion; 
(9)  Prime views and vistas; 
(10)  Areas of historical or archeological significance; 
(11)  Cemeteries; and 
(12)  Other similar areas which are less suitable for development. 
(c)  The open space should be designed to be, in part, an integrated part of the project rather than an isolated element. The entire project should include elements of design and development that make at least a part of the open space an amenity to the development. 
(d)  The amenity portions of the open space should be designed to be directly or easily accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access (minimum of ten feet) to the open space. 
(e)  Where practicable open space areas shall also be configured to provide a buffer between adjoining property outside the conservation subdivision and the home sites within the subdivision. Excepting approved fences and signs, a 50-foot setback shall be maintained between structures and the exterior boundaries of the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1(art. XII(38-576)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-586. - Permitted uses of open space. 
(a)  Uses of open space may include the following: 
(1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(3)  Walking or bicycle trails; 
(4)  Soccer, baseball, football, or track fields, scattered small, landscaped parks, landscaped traffic circles and islands, pools and related structures, clubhouses and related structures, tennis courts or golf courses, or community gardens; 
(5)  Other conservation-oriented uses if approved by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Non-permitted uses of open space include the following: 
(1)  Paved roads and paved parking lots, except as may be approved otherwise by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Other uses inconsistent with the purposes of these regulations and the zoning regulations set forth in chapter 42, and the purposes of this article, as determined by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1(art. XII(38-577)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-587. - Quality construction density bonuses. 
(a)  Prior to the approval of the final plat, the subdivider may choose to implement construction standards cumulatively, as listed in subsection (b) of this section, and receive the appropriate density bonus. The maximum total of all density bonuses used shall not exceed 35 percent. The density bonus percentage shall be applied to the density (units per acre) requirements as set by the mayor and council. Quality construction standards implemented by the subdivider shall be noted as a requirement on the final plat. 
(b)  Allowable density bonuses include the following: 
(1)  Sidewalks installed on both sides of internal streets, and installation of sidewalks along external abutting streets shall merit a six percent density bonus. 
(2)  Full front-side brick, stone, or stucco facade (or a combination thereof) on all homes in the subdivision shall receive a six percent density bonus. 
(3)  Full all-side brick, stone, or stucco facade (or a combination thereof) on all homes in the subdivision shall receive a ten percent density bonus. 
(4)  All homes, in the subdivision, built with front porches (ten feet in length by six feet in width minimum) shall receive a two percent density bonus. 
(5)  Alternate paving design structures for driveways or sidewalks or streets as evaluated and approved by the transportation and development department shall receive a two percent density bonus. 
(6)  Increasing the dwelling size over minimum zoning district requirements shall receive a two percent density bonus per 50 square feet of heated floor area to a maximum of a 14 percent density bonus. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1(art. XII(38-578)), 5-14-2007) 
Sec. 16-588. - Nonconforming uses/structures. 
The conveyance of certain open space or greenspace to the city's Greenspace Land Trust may result in the remaining property being nonconforming or otherwise incompatible with permitted uses within the districts involved. In these instances, the remaining property, structures, or uses of property and structures shall be deemed to be conforming, and the provisions of this article shall not apply as it relates to the size and density of the remaining property and/or structures located thereon. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1(art. XII(38-579)), 5-14-2007) 
Chapter 18 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Contracts for fire protection. 
The mayor and council shall be authorized to enter into contracts on a year-to-year basis with the county or any adjoining municipality which has adequate equipment and personnel to provide the city with fire protection. When such a contract is in existence, the term "chief of the fire department" shall mean the chief of the fire department protecting the city and the term "fire department" shall mean the protecting department. 
(Code 1972, § 11-4; Code 1994, § 42-1; Ord. of 10-14-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 18-2. - Reciprocal agreements for fire protection. 
The mayor and council shall be authorized to enter into reciprocal agreements for fire protection with the United States, the state, the county and municipalities of the state when such agreements are in the best interests of the city and will serve to protect the lives and properties of its citizens. 
(Code 1972, § 11-5; Code 1994, § 42-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Unlawful acts in connection with fires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Set fire to any motor vehicle without first obtaining the permission of the chief of the fire department. 
(2)  Set fire to any structure or building without first obtaining the permission of the chief of the fire department. 
(3)  Set any fire on or which spreads to the property of another without the owner's permission. 
(4)  Leave any fire unattended. 
(5)  Set any fire that requires the response of the fire department. 
(6)  Burn any substance or material that emits noxious or poisonous fumes or gases. 
(7)  Set any fire on or which spreads to public property. 
(8)  Obstruct in any manner any fire hydrant in the city. 
(9)  Refuse to obey the orders and directions of fire department personnel in the vicinity of a fire. 
(10)  Obstruct a fire hose or drive a motor vehicle across or over such hose. 
(11)  Obstruct fire department vehicles or apparatus. 
(12)  Interfere with or hinder fire department personnel from performing their duties. 
(13)  Give or turn in a false alarm. 
(14)  Turn on a fire hydrant unless authorized to do so. 
(15)  Damage any fire hydrant, fire alarm box or device or fire extinguisher or equipment designed for use in fighting fires. 
(Code 1972, § 11-8; Code 1994, § 42-3) 
Secs. 18-4—18-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODES 

Sec. 18-25. - Adopted. 
(a)  The following codes are adopted by the city for the purpose of regulating conditions that may increase the risk of damage to life and property from fire or explosion: 
(1)  Chapter 42 of the Code of Clayton County, Georgia. 
(b)  The code adopted in subsection (a) of this section is adopted in its entirety and incorporated by reference in this section as fully as though set out at length in this section. In any conflict a provision of the code adopted in subsection (a) and a provision of this Code, that provision which is the most stringent shall prevail and be controlling. 
(c)  Whenever the term "board of commissioners" is used in any provision of the code adopted by this section, it shall mean the mayor and city council. Whenever the term "Clayton County" is used in any provision of the code adopted by this section, it shall mean the City. Whenever the term "County Code of Ordinances" or "County Code" is used in any provision of the code adopted by this section, it shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Lake City, Georgia. 
(d)  Current copies of each code adopted by this section shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk where they shall be available for public inspection. 
(Code 1972, § 11-1; Code 1994, § 42-26; Ord. of 10-14-1991, § 1; Ord. No. 99-03, § 1(42-26), 12-13-1999; Ord. No. 2016-1, § 1, 2-8-2016) 
Secs. 18-26—18-30. - Reserved. 
Ord. No. 2016-1, §§ 2—6, adopted Feb. 8, 2016, repealed former §§ 18-26—18-30 in their entirety. Subject matter and legislative history of the former sections are listed below. 

 
Chapter 20 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - County nuisance regulations adopted. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference as if set out at length herein the latest editions of the nuisance regulation of the Clayton County Board of Health (hereinafter referred to as "the regulations"). 
(b)  All properties and structures in the city shall be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in accordance with the regulations, and no permit shall be issued for the maintenance, erection, building, repair, renovation or expansion of any structure unless the same is to be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in the city shall be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in accordance with the regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with this subsection. 
(c)  At least one copy of the regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Where reference is made in the regulations to the duties of certain officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the regulations shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the regulations is concerned. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1(50-1), 12-13-2004) 
Secs. 20-2—20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 20-21. - Acts constituting nuisances designated. 
(a)  A nuisance is anything that works hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinarily reasonable person. 
(b)  The following conditions, among others, may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, brush, vegetation, or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, or any other objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter upon a premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease to the inhabitants of the city. For the purpose of this article, the term "weeds" means any brush, grass, vegetation, or any plant that is not regularly cultivated, that exceeds a height of ten inches; provided, however, weeds shall not include plants in a maintained wildflower garden. Any plant that is not regularly cultivated exceeding ten inches in height shall be presumed to be a weed. The term "regularly cultivated" means any plant which is routinely cared for by any person to foster its growth, including ornamental grasses, bushes, and trees; 
(3)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(4)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(5)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(6)  Unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise; 
(7)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(8)  Uncleanliness; 
(9)  Unused or inoperable appliances of any size or type, including, but not limited to, iceboxes, refrigerators, washers, dryers, water heaters, televisions, stereos, or any parts thereof; 
(10)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants, or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; 
(11)  Junked or abandoned motor vehicles; 
(12)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(13)  Toilets or sanitary facilities, plumbing, or sewers in bad repair; 
(14)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(15)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(16)  Dilapidation; 
(17)  Disrepair; 
(18)  Structural defects; 
(19)  Vacant and dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes and/or other illegal activity; and 
(20)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state, local or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § I(art. II, § 50-26), 4-8-2013; Ord. No. 2018-04, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise without limitation or impairment by provisions of state law, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 20-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2 as adopted by this Code or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by this Code or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 2; and 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-2, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwelling, building, or structure means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouse, improvement, and appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this section, the term "dwelling, building, or structure" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  Owners; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the city or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the superior court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means the mayor, a member of the city council, city manager, or a head of any department of the city. 
Public officer means the designated building official or code enforcement officer of the city, and/or his designee. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with applicable city codes and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing at the property on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § I(art. II, § 50-27), 4-8-2013; Ord. No. 2018-04, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 20-23. - Conviction; penalties. 
(a)  Authority of municipal court. The city municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health, safety or welfare. Any person who pleads guilty or nolo contendere, or is convicted of violating the provisions of this article, shall be punished as provided in article IV of the city Charter, this Code or such other general law as may be enacted in the future to provide for punishment and penalties that may be imposed by the municipal courts of the state. 
(b)  Penalties. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. Anyone committing a nuisance as defined by this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment for no more than six months, or a combination thereof. In addition to the fine and/or jail sentence, the judge may impose community service and require that the defendant abate or cure the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § I(art. II, § 50-28), 4-8-2013; Ord. No. 2018-04, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 20-24. - Unfit buildings and structures. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, the mayor and council find that there exist within the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which constitute nuisances (i.e., that are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes may be being committed). 
(b)  Duty to maintain premises. It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with the laws and ordinances of the city, state and United States, which regulate the construction, maintenance, and use of such dwellings, buildings, structures, and/or properties. 
(c)  Powers of public officer. The public officer, as defined herein, is designated to exercise the powers prescribed by this article and state law with respect to nuisances and unfit dwellings, buildings, structures, and property within the city. Among these powers, the public officer is empowered: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of illegal activity; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making inspections; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinances to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(d)  Investigation of nuisance. An investigation by the public officer of potentially unfit dwellings, buildings, structures, and/or property within the city may be initiated by: 
(1)  A request filed with the public officer by a public authority; 
(2)  The request of five resident of the city; or 
(3)  A code enforcement officer. 
If the public officer makes a finding that any dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use, is injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure or of the occupants of the neighboring dwelling, building or structure or of other residents of the city, contains defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lacks adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, is dilapidated or in disrepair, structurally deficient, or unclean, and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of illegal activity; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may serve the occupant and/or owner of the property with a notice of violation requesting that such nuisance be abated, as set forth within the notice, by a set time. Should the occupant and/or owner fail to abate the nuisance as requested, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance. Nothing in this article shall prevent the public officer from issuing a complaint in lieu of serving the occupant and/or owner with a notice of violation where the severity and/or circumstances surrounding the condition of the nuisance justify such action. 
(e)  Action to abate. Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by at least five residents of the city, a public authority or another code enforcement officer, charging conditions as described in subsection (c) above, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges issue a complaint in rem with the city municipal court which shall: 
(1)  Identify the subject real property by its street address of tax record and official tax map reference; 
(2)  Identify the interested parties; 
(3)  State with particularity the factual basis for the action; and 
(4)  Contain a statement of the action sought by the code enforcement officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(f)  Service of complaints. Complaints issued under this section shall be served in the following manner. 
(1)  Mailing or posting of complaint and summons; right to answer. 
a.  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, public officer shall cause for copies of the complaint and summons to be mailed by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the summons and complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property and/or hand delivered to an occupant of the property at the location of the property, within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
b.  The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court, at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(2)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(3)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of the at the time of filing the complaint in the municipal court. 
(4)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(g)  Findings by the court. If the municipal court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of illegal activity; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, or any of the violations stated in subsection (c) above, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order. Among other lawful remedies, the court may: 
(1)  Require the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation, if the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure; 
(2)  Require the owner to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of illegal activity; and/or 
(3)  Require the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property, if the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure. 
(h)  Determination of costs. For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors, without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable laws and codes relevant to the cited violations. 
(i)  Abatement for failure to comply. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, among other available remedies, the city and/or the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The code enforcement officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with illegal activity or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(j)  Salvage. If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The code enforcement officer, the city, and the city's employees, agents and officials are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(k)  Lien. The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(l)  Non-exclusivity. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to preclude or prevent the city from instead filing an action for nuisance abatement with a superior court of the state in lieu of the process set forth under this section. Nor shall anything in this section be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § I(art. II, § 50-29), 4-8-2013; Ord. No. 2018-04, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 20-25. - Liens on property for cost of abating nuisances. 
(a)  Attachment of lien; collection procedure. 
(1)  The lien provided for in this article shall attach to the real property upon the filing of the certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of the superior court and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). 
(2)  Upon final determination of costs, fees and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer shall transmit to the city tax collector a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to the interested parties within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the city tax collector to collect the amount of the lien using all methods for collecting real property ad valorem taxes. 
(3)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the tax collector of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of the final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(4)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section together interest, penalties and costs incurred by the city in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien shall be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(b)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-04, § 1, adopted June 11, 2018, renumbered the former § 20-25 as 20-26, and added a new § 20-25 as set out herein. The historical notation remains with the renumbered provision. 
Sec. 20-26. - Summary abatement; when authorized. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the mayor and city council from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § I(art. II, § 50-30), 4-8-2013; Ord. No. 2018-04, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
Editor's note— See note to § 20-25. 
Secs. 20-27—20-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to provide by ordinance for the removal and disposal of any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or junked motor vehicles or parts thereof, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 

Sec. 20-54. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to require the maintenance of premises to retain property values and to protect the general environment and appearance of neighborhoods, residential complexes, and commercial industrial areas, and to ensure safe and sanitary conditions in buildings, structures, and premises in the city to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1994, § 50-51; Ord. No. 96-02, § 2(50-51), 6-10-1996) 
Sec. 20-55. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings described to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Derelict automotive vehicle means a vehicle that for a period of at least ten consecutive days, or 15 consecutive days if located on the premises of an automobile service station, automotive facility including repair and servicing, garage, service station, tire recapping and retreading shop, or repair shop or machine shop for automotive vehicles: 
(1)  Is physically incapable of traveling under its own power; 
(2)  Is physically capable of traveling under its own power, but during such traveling on a public road would be in violation of any provision of title 40, chapter 8, article I, parts 1 through 4 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (not including O.C.G.A. §§ 40-8-76(b)—(d), 40-8-76.1 and 40-8-79); or 
(3)  Possesses at least two of the following characteristics: 
a.  At least one door, the hood, or the trunk cover cannot be closed. 
b.  At least one door, the hood, or the trunk cover is kept in place on the vehicle with tape, rope, or wire. 
c.  Rusting covering at least 50 percent of the body of the vehicle. 
d.  Missing a door, the hood, the trunk cover, or a tire. 
Inoperative means any vehicle or automobile which is rendered unroadworthy according to the standards established by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq. Any vehicle which has been left, stored or kept at the same location for 30 or more days shall be presumed to be inoperative for purposes of this article unless the owner or person in possession of such vehicle or automobile proves, by a preponderance of the evidence, to the contrary. 
Junk automobile or junk vehicle means any automobile or vehicle which is inoperative or which does not bear current license plates. 
Same location means on one lot or on a single piece of property within the city. 
(Code 1994, § 50-52; Ord. No. 96-02, § 2(50-52), 6-10-1996; Ord. No. 03-01, § 1(50-52), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 20-56. - Maintenance of property. 
(a)  Except as may otherwise be allowed by this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to own, rent, lease, or be in possession of any property whereon is kept in an area other than a completely enclosed building dilapidated furniture, appliances, machinery, equipment, antiques, lumber, building materials, inventory, cordage, and similar items and materials, including junk automobiles, derelict automotive vehicles, and junk vehicles or automobiles or vehicles which are in a partially wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition. 
(b)  In the event that any person is in the business of repairing or restoring furniture, appliances, machinery, equipment, antiques, lumber, building materials, inventory, cordage, and similar items and materials, including junk automobiles, derelict automotive vehicles, and junk vehicles or automobiles or vehicles which are in a partially wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition, all work being performed on such items must be done within a completely enclosed building. 
(c)  All persons that are in the business of repairing or restoring junked automobiles or junked vehicles or automobiles or derelict automotive vehicles or vehicles which are in a partially wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition shall have no more than one automobile or vehicle on the property per 200 square feet of indoor repair facility. The mayor and council, upon receipt and review of a written application, shall increase the number of automobiles or vehicles allowed contingent upon the completion of proposed additional parking, after review of a detailed site plan showing such proposed parking including striping of parking spaces, upon making the following findings: 
(1)  The proposed parking complies with all parking and other requirements contained in the city Code as well as state and federal law. 
(2)  The proposed parking would have no adverse effect on any residential area. Such increase shall be limited so as to ensure that no adverse effects on any residential area occur. 
(Code 1994, § 50-53; Ord. No. 96-02, § 2(50-53), 6-10-1996; Ord. No. 03-01, § 2(50-53), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 20-57. - Exclusion from section 50-56. 
Section 50-56 shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person who is operating a junkyard, provided that said junkyard obtains an occupation tax certificate for the current year and that said junkyard is in compliance with the zoning regulations in chapter 42; and 
(2)  All persons that are in the business of selling or repairing heavy equipment. For purposes of this section, heavy equipment shall include bulldozers, front-end loaders, backhoes, dump trucks, and any truck or machinery for which a commercial driver's license would be required for its operation. 
(Code 1994, § 50-54; Ord. No. 96-02, § 2(50-54), 6-10-1996) 
Sec. 20-58. - Screening and fencing. 
(a)  No person exempted by section 50-57 shall store, keep, maintain or allow to be kept on property within the city limits any furniture, appliances, machinery, equipment, antiques, lumber, building materials, inventory, cordage, and similar items and materials, including junk automobiles, derelict automotive vehicles, and junk vehicles or automobiles or vehicles which are in a partially wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition unless such items are housed in a completely enclosed building or screened by opaque fencing which is a minimum of eight feet in height. 
(b)  All persons that are in the business of repairing or restoring junked automobiles or junked vehicles or automobiles or derelict automotive vehicles or vehicles which are in a partially wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition shall keep all such vehicles either housed in a completely enclosed building or screened by opaque fencing which is a minimum of eight feet in height. 
(Code 1994, § 50-55; Ord. No. 96-02, § 2(50-55), 6-10-1996; Ord. No. 03-01, § 3(50-55), 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 20-59. - Inspection; notice; hearing. 
(a)  Should the code enforcement officer or chief of police determine that any person is violating the terms of this article, he shall issue a written notice of code violation to such person and give five days in which to correct the violation. The notice of code violation shall be a prerequisite to the bringing of charges against an offender. 
(b)  Should the person to whom the notice of code violation is directed fail to comply with the corrective action set forth therein within the five-day period, the law enforcement officers of the city shall be authorized to proceed with the bringing of charges as for the violation of any city ordinance. Each day the violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any violation which remains on the same property for a period of 30 days after either a plea of finding of guilty shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the chief of police or his duly authorized agent or employee. For purposes of this section, a plea of nolo contendere shall constitute a finding of guilty. After removal, the chief of police shall determine whether or not the property has any value. If he finds it to have value, it shall be disposed of by sale as for other abandoned or other unclaimed property. If the chief of police finds the property to have no value, he shall immediately and personally see to its destruction. The chief of police shall also have the authority to charge the cost of removing said violations to the owner of any such property. The city clerk shall have full, ample and complete authority to issue execution in the name of the city, which shall issue and be levied as executions for taxes in the city are issued and levied. Such execution shall issue and constitute a lien upon the property so cleaned and against the owner thereof, provided a detailed, itemized statement of the cost of such work shall be attached to and form a part of the execution, and provided further that no execution shall issue against any landowner unless he shall have been served in person with written notice, as hereinabove provided, at least five days before such work is commenced by the city, and provided further that in the event that such a landowner is a nonresident, such written notice must be have been mailed to him, or to his last known address, at least ten days prior to beginning the work of the city. 
(d)  Violations of this article shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 50-56; Ord. No. 96-02, § 2(50-56), 6-10-1996; Ord. No. 03-01, § 4(50-56), 4-14-2003; Ord. No. 03-08, § 1(50-56), 6-9-2003) 
Secs. 20-60—20-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT TAX INCENTIVE PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-04, § 2, adopted June 11, 2018, repealed the former article IV, §§ 20-77—20-83, and enacted a new article IV as set out herein. The former article IV pertained to unfit structures and derived from Ord. No. 00-03, adopted February 14, 2000. 

Sec. 20-77. - Purpose. 
The existence of real property that is maintained in a blighted condition increases the costs to city budgets by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to social services, public safety services and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvements thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by article IX, section II, paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04, § 2, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 20-78. - Definitions. 
(a)  Blighted property, blighted, or blight means any urbanized or developed property that: 
(1)  Presents two or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structures; or 
b.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation; or 
c.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe that the governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; or 
d.  A site identified by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 9601, et. seq., or environmental contamination to the extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; or 
e.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
f.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal codes for at least one year after written notice of the code violation to its owner; and 
g.  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. 
(2)  Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of aesthetic conditions. 
(3)  Property shall not be deemed blighted for the purpose of this section's increase of ad valorem taxation if the property is a dwelling house which is being used as a primary residence of one or more persons. 
(b)  Building official. Person authorized to enforce provisions of the technical construction codes. 
(c)  Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or through local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
(d)  Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, that is established by the mayor and city council for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the city's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
(e)  Person. Any natural person, corporation, or unincorporated association. 
(f)  Public officer means the city manager or such other officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform duties and responsibilities hereafter set for the in this article. 
(g)  Structure. Anything constructed or erected which has, or the use of which requires, permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, or which is attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but not limited to, the following: buildings, gazebos, signs, billboards, tennis courts, radio and television antennae and satellite dishes (including supporting towers), swimming pools, light fixtures, walls, fences and steps. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04, § 2, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 20-79. - Levy on increased ad valorem tax on blighted real property. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on all real property within the city that has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven times millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the city, or other provided by general law (all properties that meet this definition will be subject to this article). 
(b)  Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the next tax bill cycle which begins July 1 of every year following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
(c)  Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and the finance director and used only for community redevelopment purposes, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair or demolish unfit buildings and structures. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04, § 2, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 20-80. - Official identification of property maintained in blighted condition. 
(a)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for inspection to be performed: 
a.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated by ordinance; or 
b.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may defer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels that may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this article for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
(2)  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (1) above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspections shall be made and will supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)  Following completion of the inspection report, the building official shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined in this article, and is subject to increased taxation. 
(4)  Said inspection report and supporting documents will be reviewed by the city manager for confirmation and approval of all findings and recommendations by the building official and concurrence that the property identified meets the definition of blighted area as defined under this article. At that point, the mayor and city council shall be notified in writing of the determination of blighted condition. 
(5)  The building official shall cause a written notice of this determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of the county as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon and parties in interest; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or persons chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(b)  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes and parties in interest shall notify such person and parties in interest of the building official's determination that the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person and parties in interest of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the building official's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons and parties in interest notified that the real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have 30 days from the receipt of notice in which to request an appeal hearing before the mayor and city council. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the building official and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for appeal hearing, the building official shall notify the city manager. 
(c)  Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for an appeal hearing, the building official shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days' notice to the person(s) and/or parties in interest requesting the hearing and the city manager. A notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisement appears in the county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(d)  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined in this article. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) or parties in interest requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the mayor and city council shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the mayor and council shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall be served upon the city tax collector and the county tax commissioner, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
(e)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the mayor and city council affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the county superior court for a writ of certiorari, within 30 days of issuance of the city council's written determination. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04, § 2, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 20-81. - Remediation or redevelopment to remove designation of blighted condition. 
(a)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property that has been officially designated pursuant to this article as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's building official that addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; and 
(2)  Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to article II of this chapter; and 
(3)  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this section) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(b)  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall case the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector, who by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the county tax commissioner. 
(c)  All corrective action plans shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the building official and city manager, and contain the following: 
(1)  The corrective action plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for that area; 
(2)  The corrective action plan shall set forth in a reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes. Where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
(3)  On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
(4)  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources that will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; and 
(5)  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04, § 2, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 20-82. - Decreased rate of taxation to be applied after successful remedial action or redevelopment of blighted property. 
Real property that has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.25 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the city or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending in the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every $40,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in the city ad valorem tax rate for more than two successive years. In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04, § 2, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 20-83. - Duty of public officer to provide notice to county tax commissioner. 
It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the city tax collector and the county tax commissioner in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map land lot and parcel number, as assigned by the county tax assessor's office. The public officer shall cooperate with the tax commissioner to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increase or reduced ad valorem taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04, § 2, 6-11-2018) 
Secs. 20-84—20-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOSPITALITY ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 20-110. - Food service regulations adopted. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference as if set out at length herein the latest editions of the county health department food service rules and regulations, as adopted and amended by the county environmental health department (hereinafter referred to as the "regulations"). 
(b)  All food service establishments of every kind or character maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in the city shall be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in accordance with the regulations, and no permit shall be issued for the maintenance, erection, building, repair, renovation or expansion of any food service establishments unless the same is to be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in the city shall be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in accordance with the regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with this subsection. 
(c)  At least one copy of the regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Where reference is made in the regulations to the duties of certain officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the regulations shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the regulations is concerned. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 2(art. V, § 18-200), 12-13-2004) 
Sec. 20-111. - Tourist court rules and regulations adopted. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference as if set out at length herein the latest editions of the county health department tourist court rules and regulations, as adopted and amended by the county environmental health department (hereinafter referred to as the "regulations"). 
(b)  All establishments described by the regulations of every kind or character maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in the city shall be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in accordance with the regulations, and no permit shall be issued for the maintenance, erection, building, repair, renovation or expansion of any such establishment unless the same is to be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in the city shall be maintained, erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in accordance with the regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with this subsection. 
(c)  At least one copy of the regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Where reference is made in the regulations to the duties of certain officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the regulations shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the regulations is concerned. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 2(art. V, § 18-201), 12-13-2004) 
Secs. 20-112—20-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VACANT BUILDING REGISTRY 

Sec. 20-136. - Registration of vacant buildings. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, whenever any building, dwelling or structure is vacant for more than 60 days and is in violation of this article, the owner, shall within ten days of written notice from the city of the existence of a vacant building, dwelling or structure, register, or caused to be registered, such building, dwelling or structure as a vacant building, dwelling or structure and submit a vacant building plan. 
(b)  Any building, dwelling or structure designed as a home dwelling that is vacant for a period less than 12 months shall be exempt from registration under this section, provided that the building, dwelling or structure is currently and continuously being marketed for sale and is not otherwise in violation of this article. At any time such building, dwelling or structure ceases to be marketed for sale or at such time as the building, dwelling or structure becomes vacant for a period greater than 12 months, then the owner of such building, dwelling or structure, shall within ten days of such event, register, or caused to be registered such building, dwelling or structure as a vacant building, dwelling or structure and submit a vacant building plan. 
(c)  The vacant building registration shall be completed through and approved by the code enforcement officer accompanied with a filing fee. Registration of a vacant building shall be valid for a period of six months. The filing fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(d)  If the building is vacant at the expiration of any registration period and the requirements of the vacant building plan have not been completed, the owner shall re-register such building and pay another filing fee. If the building is vacant at the expiration of any registration period and the requirements of the vacant building have been completed, the owner shall re-register such building, but shall not file a vacant building plan and shall not pay the filing fee. 
(e)  The owner registering a vacant building shall supply the following information on an authorized from provided by the city: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the owner; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of any responsible party, if applicable; 
(3)  Name, address, and telephone number of any local agent or representative of the owner; 
(4)  Name, address, and telephone number of all persons with any legal interest in the property, building or premises, including mortgagees and successors in interest; 
(5)  Legal description and tax parcel identification number of the premises on which the building is situated; 
(6)  The common address of the building; 
(7)  Date on which the building became vacant; and 
(8)  Vacant building plan. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 1(19-1), 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 20-137. - Establishment of vacant building plan. 
(a)  When a building is registered as required by this article, the owner shall submit, or caused to be submitted, for approval a vacant building plan. The plan shall contain the following: 
(1)  The reasonably expected period of vacancy; 
(2)  A plan to make the building ready for occupancy with sufficient detail regarding the proposed repair and/or rehabilitation of the building to enable the code enforcement officer to determine the adequacy of such plan; 
(3)  A letter of written consent by the owner allowing city officials to enter and inspect the property for the period in which the vacant building plan is in effect; 
(4)  For buildings, dwellings or structures which are identified as being or containing public nuisances, then the vacant building plan shall contain a plan of action to remedy such public nuisances; 
(5)  For each required plan, a time schedule shall be submitted identifying a date of commencement of repair and/or rehabilitation and schedule for completion of repair and/or rehabilitation for each building, dwelling or structure and identified nuisance; 
(6)  When the owner proposes to occupy, sell, lease or demolish the vacant building, then the owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such action; and 
(7)  A plan of action to secure, monitor and maintain the building and premises thereof in conformance with this article. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to collect a fee to the enable city to monitor or inspect the building and to review and approve the vacant building plan. The code enforcement officer shall have discretion to determine the number of inspections required to monitor the subject building upon submission of the plan based upon the type and condition of the property and the history of violations at the subject property. A standard schedule of fees shall be published by the code enforcement officer. 
(c)  The vacant building plan shall be recorded and indexed in the property records of the county and shall be released by the city when it has been determined that the property is no longer vacant. 
(d)  Failure by the owner to submit a vacant building plan or comply with a vacant building plan that has been approved by the city under this section or pay a fee as required under this section is a violation of this article and may be remedied by any of the following: 
(1)  An administrative penalty of up to $500.00 for the first citation; up to $750.00 for the second citation; and up to $1,000.00 for the third citation and any others after that; or 
(2)  Acquisition of the property by eminent domain in a manner consistent with section 20-138. 
(e)  If the property is subject to a vacant building plan and the plan has been properly recorded in the property records of the county, the transferee is subject to the terms of the vacant building plan. The transferee may apply to the city to be released from the requirements of the vacant building plan. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 1(19-2), 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 20-138. - Acquisition of vacant buildings by eminent domain. 
(a)  The city may acquire by eminent domain, pursuant to applicable state law, any property determined to be vacant and a persistent nuisance, and shall have the power to hold, clear, manage or dispose of property so acquired for residential, commercial, industrial and related use. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall not institute eminent domain proceedings pursuant to this section unless the code enforcement officer has certified that the property is vacant and a persistent nuisance. A property may only be certified to the mayor and council as vacant and a persistent nuisance after the code enforcement officer has determined that: 
(1)  The owner of the property or designated agent has been sent a notice or order by the appropriate agency of the municipality to eliminate the conditions which are in violation of local codes or law; 
(2)  The property is vacant; 
(3)  The property is a nuisance under the terms of article IV of this chapter; and 
(4)  The city has notified the property owner or designated agent that the property has been determined to be blighted or deteriorated and the time period for correction of such condition has expired and the property owner or agent has failed to comply with this notice. 
(c)  The findings required by subsection (b) of this section shall be in writing and included in the report prepared by the code enforcement officer to the mayor and council. 
(d)  The code enforcement officer shall notify the owner of the property or a designated agent that a determination that the property is vacant and a persistent nuisance has been made and that failure to eliminate the conditions causing such condition shall render the property subject to condemnation by the city under this article. Notice shall be mailed to the owner or designated agent by certified mail, return receipt requested. However, if the address of the owner or designated agent is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the commission in the exercise of reasonable diligence, copies of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected and notice shall be published the newspaper which is the official organ of the county in which the sheriff's advertisements appear. The written notice sent to the owner or the owner's agent shall describe the conditions that render the property blighted and deteriorated, and shall demand abatement of the conditions within 90 days of the receipt of such notice. 
(e)  An extension of the 90-day time period may be granted by the city if the owner or designated agent demonstrates that such period is insufficient to correct the conditions cited in the notice. 
(f)  No elected official, officer or employee of the city shall acquire any interest in any property declared to be vacant or a persistent nuisance. 
(g)  If any elected official, officer or employee owns or has a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any property certified to be vacant and a persistent nuisance, the officer or employee shall immediately disclose, in writing, such interest to the mayor and council, and such disclosure shall be entered in the minutes of the mayor and council. 
(h)  Failure to so disclose such interest shall constitute misconduct in office. 
(i)  No payment shall be made to any elected official, officer or employee for any property or interest therein acquired by the city from such elected official, officer or employee unless the amount of such payment is fixed by court order in eminent domain proceedings, or unless payment is unanimously approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 1(19-3), 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 20-139. - Enclosure of vacant lots. 
(a)  The code enforcement officer, at his discretion and based upon substantial evidence of the occurrence of criminal activities or offenses affecting the public health, safety and welfare in or on any vacant lot in the city, may order the owner or agent for the owner of such vacant lot to erect or cause to be erected a fence of a height and type permitted by the zoning code along all or any part of the perimeter of such vacant lot. 
(b)  A conviction of any person of failure or refusal to comply with an order of the code enforcement officer issued pursuant to this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 1(19-4), 3-12-2012) 
Chapter 22 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; compensation of municipal law enforcement officers to be by fixed salary only, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; municipality's liability for torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Chief of police. 
There shall be a person experienced and trained in law enforcement as the chief of the police department. The chief of police shall see that all penal sections of this Code are enforced; shall attend, in person or by duly authorized representative, all meetings of the mayor and council; and shall perform all other duties that may be required by the Charter, state law, this Code or otherwise as directed by the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 11-12; Code 1994, § 54-1; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 7, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 22-2. - Law enforcement officers and personnel. 
The chief of police, with approval and consent of the city manager, shall appoint police officers, marshals or other law enforcement officers as is deemed desirable and necessary, and budgeted. Such officers shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Code and shall perform such duties and acts as directed by the chief of police or as prescribed by this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 2-8; Code 1994, § 54-2; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 7, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 22-3. - Duties of officers; policy. 
The primary responsibility of the police department shall be to ensure the safety and security of the person and property of each of its citizens. Therefore, it shall be the duty of law enforcement officers while on duty to maintain a vigilant patrol of all areas of the city. While free, orderly and lawful traffic flow on principal thoroughfares is most desirable, law enforcement officers are specifically directed not to neglect to give residential areas periodic and unscheduled patrol. 
(Code 1972, § 11-11; Code 1994, § 54-3) 
Sec. 22-4. - Agreement for prisoner incarceration. 
The mayor and council shall be authorized to enter into agreements with the county or other municipalities for the incarceration of persons arrested by law enforcement officers of the city. When such contracts are made, the mayor and council is authorized to pay a reasonable sum to the other contracting party for the maintenance of facilities and caring of the prisoners. 
(Code 1972, § 11-17; Code 1994, § 54-4) 
Secs. 22-5—22-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-27—22-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 22-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
False alarm means any accident or occurrence wherein a private alarm system of any type is activated by any cause and which summons any public officer to the location of the alarm or which causes any public officer to begin traveling en route to the location of the alarm, when there in fact exists no emergency or other condition requiring the presence of such officer. 
(Code 1994, § 34-26; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1(a), 4-12-1993) 
Sec. 22-57. - Excessive number. 
It is declared by the mayor and council that more than two false alarms in any one month or more than six false alarms in any one year is excessive and constitutes a danger to the public safety by hindering public safety officials from performing their necessary and proper functions. 
(Code 1994, § 34-27; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1(b), 4-12-1993) 
Sec. 22-58. - Fees for excessive alarms. 
(a)  Any person who owns or occupies a building or lot upon which is located a private alarm system that experiences excessive false alarms shall be assessed a fee for each false alarm over and above those defined as excessive in amounts as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(b)  This fee is imposed whether the police department received the alarm by direct connection or any other source, such as an answering service or modified central station. No fee is imposed by this section when the choice is made to notify the police department directly by any person or in any situation. In determining whether an alarm is a false alarm, all circumstances shall be considered. 
(Code 1994, § 34-28; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1(c), (d), 4-12-1993) 
Chapter 24 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish, maintain and operate a municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; city courts generally, O.C.G.A. § 15-8-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Established. 
There is established, pursuant to 1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1247), page 3712 et seq., a municipal court which shall have jurisdiction over violations of such act and this Code and other ordinances of the city. The court shall be presided over by a judge. 
(Code 1972, § 13-1; Code 1994, § 62-1) 
Sec. 24-2. - Summons, accusation, affidavit and warrant. 
Forms for municipal court summons, accusation, affidavit and warrant shall be as directed and prescribed by the judge. 
(Code 1972, § 13-6; Code 1994, § 62-2) 
Sec. 24-3. - Copies of charges. 
All copies of charges requiring persons to appear in the municipal court shall be dated the day of issuance, shall specify the charge being made, shall notify the person summoned of the date and hour for his appearance and shall be signed by the officer making the case. 
(Code 1972, § 13-7; Code 1994, § 62-3) 
Sec. 24-4. - Docket. 
A municipal court docket shall be kept in the office of the city clerk on which shall appear the name of every defendant charged and the charges made. The judge or alternate judge shall make an entry on the docket of the punishment inflicted and the date of such. If a fine is imposed, the clerk shall make entries showing the date of collection and the disposition of the funds collected. 
(Code 1972, § 13-8; Code 1994, § 62-4) 
Sec. 24-5. - Bond schedule. 
The municipal judge shall establish a schedule of bonds to be posted by persons accused of offenses against this Code or other city ordinances to guarantee the appearance of the offender in the municipal court. Property bonds or cash bonds shall be accepted. The judge is authorized to forfeit a bond when the accused does not appear in court in accordance with the summons or copy of charges given him. The clerk of court or his designee shall be responsible for approving property bonds and accepting cash bonds. He shall be personally accountable for all funds received by him as cash bonds. It is the intent of the mayor and council that cash bonds shall be administered by the city as set forth in this section and in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 9-10-10, 17-6-4 and 17-6-10. 
(Code 1972, § 13-10; Code 1994, § 62-5) 
Sec. 24-6. - Technology surcharge. 
There shall be imposed by the municipal court a technology surcharge in the amount of $10.00 per offense for all offenses except those set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-8-76 and 40-8-76.1. Said technology surcharge shall be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by the municipal court. All revenue derived from the technology surcharge shall be utilized by the city to provide technology support for the police department and related court technology. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(62-6), 2-13-2012) 
Secs. 24-7—24-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUDGE 

Sec. 24-31. - Qualifications. 
To be eligible to serve as judge, one must be at least 21 years of age, a citizen of the state and the United States and must have had at least one year of legal practice in the state or three years' service as a judge, magistrate or any other higher judicial position, and an active member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(Code 1972, §§ 2-9, 13-2; Code 1994, § 62-26; Ord. of 2-25-1980) 
Sec. 24-32. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the discharge of any duties, the municipal judge shall take an oath administered by the mayor. The form of the oath shall be as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully discharge the duties imposed upon me as judge of the City of Lake City for as long as I serve in such capacity and that I will administer justice to the best of my skill and ability without favor or affection for any person, so help me God." 
(Code 1972, § 13-3; Code 1994, § 62-27) 
Sec. 24-33. - Authority; holding court. 
(a)  The judge shall have full authority as judge of the municipal court for the administration of its affairs. He shall prescribe the dates and times for holding court; provided, however, that court shall always be held in the same place where council meetings are held and court shall be held as often as necessary to dispose of the business pending before the court. 
(b)  The judge shall have all of the powers conferred upon municipal courts by the laws of the state, including committals, binding over, forfeiture of bonds and the power of an ex officio magistrate in criminal cases. 
(Code 1972, §§ 13-4, 13-9; Code 1994, § 62-28) 
Sec. 24-34. - Alternate judge. 
In the absence or disqualification of the judge, municipal court may be held by an alternate designated by the mayor and council. The alternate judge, when presiding, shall have all the duties, powers and authority of the judge. The mayor or mayor pro tem may be the alternate so designated. 
(Code 1972, § 13-5; Code 1994, § 62-29) 
Secs. 24-35—24-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INDIGENT DEFENSE ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Peace Officer, Prosecutor, and Indigent Defense Funding Act, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-70 et seq. 

Sec. 24-57. - Rules and procedures adopted. 
The mayor and council adopts the rules and procedures set forth in this article for the defense of indigent criminal defendants. This article is a recompilation of rules in effect as of the time of its promulgation. No rule or procedure prescribed herein will be construed to supersede nor limit the power of the municipal court to appoint counsel and to order compensation and reimbursement from public funds, as the proper administration of justice may require. 
(Res. No. 03-02, 2-10-2003) 
Sec. 24-58. - Program compliance; designation of administrator. 
(a)  The mayor and council elects to utilize the panel attorney system to provide indigent defense services. 
(b)  The program established by this article shall be designed and administered to ensure compliance with all applicable laws, rules of court, and with the program guidelines promulgated from time to time by the state supreme court upon recommendation of the state indigent defense council. 
(c)  The city manager is designated to serve as the indigent defense administrator (IDA) to be responsible to the mayor and council for the day-to-day operation of the program. 
(Res. No. 03-02, § I, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 9, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 24-59. - Panel attorneys. 
(a)  List. The IDA will maintain a list of attorneys designated by the mayor and council as eligible and willing to accept assignment of indigent cases. Application for inclusion of the panel shall be made on a form prescribed by the mayor and council and submitted through the IDA. 
(b)  General eligibility requirements. Attorneys wishing to be on the list for assignment of indigent cases must: 
(1)  Maintain membership in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia and with the Clayton County Bar Association; 
(2)  Comply with these rules and procedures, and in all ways conduct their practice in accordance with the requirements of law and in conformance with the highest ethical standards; 
(3)  Comply with the business licensing requirements applicable to the situs of their county office; and 
(4)  Be actively engaged in the practice of law in the county. For the purpose of this requirement, the term "practice of law in the county" is defined to include the following: 
a.  Maintenance of a private office for the attorney's exclusive, full-time use within the county. 
b.  Said office must be suitable for, and regularly used to meet with clients, witnesses, and other business visitors, and attorneys must regularly receive mail and telephone calls at said office. 
c.  Said office must contain, as a minimum, a desk and chair for the attorney's use on a full-time basis and is not to be shared with any other person. 
(c)  Applications and general administration. 
(1)  Application for inclusion on the panel for assignment of indigent cases shall include an affidavit of compliance with the general eligibility requirements as well as such specific indicia of compliance as the mayor and council may from time to time prescribe. The application will also include an agreement by the attorney to notify the mayor and council, through the IDA, of any change in information provided in the application. 
(2)  The IDA shall periodically require all panel attorneys to re-certify their eligibility by means of the application process. The IDA or any mayor and council member may require a panel attorney to re-certify eligibility at any time. 
(3)  Panel attorneys who wish to discontinue their service, either temporarily or permanently, must notify the IDA in writing giving the effective date. Attorneys will be required to complete all of their open cases unless relieved of this responsibility by the court before which a case is pending. In all such cases, panel attorneys must comply with all requirements set by statute or court rules pertaining to withdrawal as counsel of record. 
(4)  Panel attorneys taking temporary leaves of absence will notify the IDA in writing of the dates they will be unavailable to attend court events. 
(Res. No. 03-02, § II, 2-10-2003) 
Sec. 24-60. - Determination of indigency and entitlement to counsel at public expense. 
(a)  Financial eligibility shall be determined in accordance with paragraph 1.5 of the Guidelines of the Georgia Indigent Defense Council for the Operation of Local Indigent Defense Programs (hereinafter "guidelines"). 
(b)  The following persons are authorized to make eligibility determinations: 
(1)  The IDA, or a principal assistant when designated by the IDA to act in that capacity on a temporary basis; or 
(2)  Any judge or judicial officer of the municipal court. 
(c)  The IDA will establish procedures to ensure compliance with section 24-59 pertaining to availability of counsel. 
(Res. No. 03-02, § III, 2-10-2003) 
Sec. 24-61. - Assignment of cases to panel attorneys. 
(a)  Qualified cases will be assigned to panel attorneys on a rotational system. The IDA may make exceptions to this method of assignment in order to: 
(1)  Ensure balanced workload among panel attorneys; 
(2)  Assign complex cases to more experienced attorneys; and 
(3)  Serve the interests of justice. 
(b)  Panel attorneys are required to accept all cases as they are assigned unless prohibited from doing so by reason of conflict of interest or for other good cause. New charges against an indigent defendant upon whom a panel attorney has an open case will be assigned to that attorney, and attorneys who have open cases on an indigent defendant should respond to notices to appear on other charges concerning that same defendant. 
(c)  Panel attorneys are required to visit incarcerated defendants within 48 hours of assignment (weekends and county holidays excluded). 
(d)  Panel attorneys may, by prior agreement with the IDA, limit their practices to appeals only. No other limitations on practice are authorized. 
(e)  The mayor and council will normally require that newly admitted attorneys and those attorneys of limited experience in the practice of criminal law be assigned cases from a restricted category of offenses for the first year of their service on the panel. 
(Res. No. 03-02, § IV, 2-10-2003) 
Sec. 24-62. - Fee schedule and administration. 
(a)  Hourly rates: 
(1)  Out-of-court time spent in investigation and preparation, per hour: ..... $ 35.00 
(2)  Time spent in court, per hour: ..... 50.00 
(b)  Per diem rates (requires that attorney attend and actively represent a defendant in a hearing or other proceeding before a judicial officer): 
(1)  Municipal court: 
a.  Cases disposed by acquittal, nolo or guilty plea and sentence, and findings of guilty and sentence only: ..... 200.00 
b.  All other cases: ..... 100.00 
(c)  Dismissal, bench warrant, nolle pros, dead docket, or replacement by retained counsel subsequent to appointment, but prior to actual representation of defendant in court: ..... 100.00 
(d)  Maximum limitations of fees for misdemeanors: ..... 750.00 
(e)  Miscellaneous rules pertaining to fees: 
(1)  Panel attorneys are presumed to be knowledgeable of criminal law and procedure and will not normally be compensated for time spent researching or consulting on the law. Exception may be made for appeals and unusual circumstances fully documented and justified in the claim for compensation, or if approved and ordered by the judge hearing the case. 
(2)  All claims for compensation at the hourly rate will include a time sheet detailing the nature, dates, and time in hours allocated to services rendered. 
(3)  Time claimed at the hourly rate may not include travel time or in-court waiting time. 
(4)  Compensation at the hourly rate for attendance at calendar calls and status conferences will be limited to the lesser of one hour or time actually spent in court. 
(5)  Normally, a panel attorney will be expected to represent a defendant from the time the case is assigned through completion of direct appeal. Exceptions must be authorized by the assigned trial judge. A single claim for compensation will be submitted after final disposition of the case unless an exception is ordered by the judge hearing the case. 
(6)  All claims for fees and expenses will be presented to the IDA who shall forthwith adjudicate and pay the allowable amounts of such claims. If a claim exceeds the maximum limitation on fees allowable for the class of offense, it will be referred to the mayor and council for consideration of waiver and adjudication. 
(7)  A panel attorney dissatisfied with a determination of allowable fees and expenses made by the IDA may submit, to the IDA or to any mayor and council member, a written request for review by the mayor and council of the action taken by the IDA. The request for review must be received within 30 days of the date of the check issued in settlement of the claim, and it may contain any additional matter the attorney cares to present. It will indicate whether the attorney desires to attend the mayor and council's meeting in person. 
(8)  A panel attorney dissatisfied with the mayor and council's determination of allowable fees and expenses may request relief by petition to the court which heard the case. The court's determination will be final. 
(Res. No. 03-02, § V, 2-10-2003) 
Sec. 24-63. - Expenses. 
Panel attorneys will be entitled to recover items of unreimbursed expense necessarily incurred in the defense of the indigent, subject to the following: 
(1)  To recover expenses, panel attorneys must claim fees by hourly rate. Expenses will not be allowed in claims for compensation at the per diem rate. As an exception, and in order to encourage attorneys to accept a reasonable number of collect phone calls from incarcerated defendants only, actual costs up to a maximum amount of $25.00 per claim for such collect calls will be allowed on per diem claims. 
(2)  Incidental out-of-pocket expenses for such items as toll telephone calls and copying must be accompanied by a receipt or cash register tape if they exceed a unit cost of $10.00. 
(3)  Panel attorneys must obtain approval in advance, from the judge of the court before which a case is pending for the following types of expenses. The court order allowing the item of expense must accompany the claim for reimbursement. Failure to obtain prior judicial approval will result in the disallowance of the claimed expense and the attorney's personal liability to the service provider: 
a.  Employment of experts; 
b.  Stenographic or court reporting and transcribing services for proceedings not required by general law to be recorded, reported, or transcribed. 
(4)  Items of allowable expense may be advanced to the attorney or to the service provider only when specifically authorized by order of the court. Accounting for advances must accompany the attorney's final claim for reimbursement. 
(Res. No. 03-02, § VI, 2-10-2003) 
Secs. 24-64—24-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 

Sec. 24-85. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Lake City Office of the Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 1(art. III, § 62-30), 7-9-2012) 
Sec. 24-86. - Findings and intent. 
The ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted to address requirements made under state law for the city to pass an ordinance or resolution creating the office of the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court should the city choose to hire or have a prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. Under state law, in order to have a municipal court prosecutor, the city must pass this ordinance or resolution and provide to the state prosecuting attorneys' council a copy of the same. The city is also required to submit the name of the person appointed to be the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court within 30 days of such appointment in order to maintain the office of the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. It is therefore the intent of the city to comply with state law, particularly article 5 of chapter 18 of title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia, Annotated, and to enact the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 1(art. III, § 62-31), 7-9-2012) 
Sec. 24-87. - Establishment of office. 
The office of the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the city in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by state law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part-time position. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 1(art. III, § 62-32), 7-9-2012) 
Sec. 24-88. - Qualifications. 
Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of the state. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 1(art. III, § 62-33), 7-9-2012) 
Sec. 24-89. - Oath. 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Lake City." 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 1(art. III, § 62-34), 7-9-2012) 
Sec. 24-90. - Term of office. 
Unless otherwise provided by the city Charter, the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall serve a term as shall be prescribed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 1(art. III, § 62-35), 7-9-2012) 
Sec. 24-91. - Jurisdiction, duties, and authority. 
The office of the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the city Charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 1(art. III, § 62-36), 7-9-2012) 
Sec. 24-92. - Assistant prosecuting attorney. 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court may appoint one or more assistant prosecuting attorneys whose appointment shall be ratified by the mayor and council before becoming an assistant prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. Such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia or satisfy the provisions of the Third Year Practice Act, found in the O.C.G.A. § 15-18-22. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 1(art. III, § 62-37), 7-9-2012) 
Sec. 24-93. - Ratification. 
This article shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the office of the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court to date as authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 1(art. III, § 62-38), 7-9-2012) 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; abandoned motor vehicles generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in disorderly conduct within the corporate limits of the city. A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when such person does any of the following: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Without provocation, uses to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace (that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"); 
(4)  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace; or 
(5)  Recklessly or knowingly commits any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering or procession. 
(Code 1994, § 66-1; Ord. No. 91-02, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-1990; Ord. No. 98-04, 10-12-1998) 
Sec. 26-2. - Obscene, vulgar and profane language. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any obscene, vulgar or profane language in the hearing of others or commit any act of public indecency or quarrel in a manner calculated to disturb the public peace. 
(Code 1994, § 66-2; Ord. of 5-21-1970, § 11) 
Sec. 26-3. - Injuring, defacing public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or otherwise injure, deface, destroy, tamper or interfere with or remove real property or improvements thereto or moveable or personal property belonging to or under supervision or control of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 66-3; Ord. of 5-21-1970, § 12) 
Sec. 26-4. - Firearms discharge. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in the corporate limits of the city except in defense of person or property. This section shall not apply to authorized officers of the law. 
(Code 1994, § 66-4; Ord. of 5-21-1970, § 13) 
Sec. 26-5. - Slingshots; bows and arrows; air rifles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, discharge or shoot any slingshot, air rifle or gun discharged by the forcing of air, gas, pressure or any other manner or any bow and arrow in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 66-5; Ord. of 5-21-1970, § 14) 
Sec. 26-6. - Dangerous knives and implements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess or carry upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or in any public place any of the following implements, unless such are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for harmful use: 
(1)  A knife that has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. 
(2)  A knife that has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. 
(3)  A knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three inches. This is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives and knives that do not close and any type knife with the blade open. 
(4)  A razor or razor blade. 
(5)  An ice pick or similar device having a sharp point; except that this subsection shall not apply to any person delivering ice. 
(Code 1994, § 66-6; Ord. of 5-21-1970, § 15) 
Sec. 26-7. - Abandonment of iceboxes, refrigerators and airtight containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any container of any kind that has an airtight door or lock that may not be released for opening from the inside of the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind that has an airtight door with snap lock or other similar device on the door of the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Code 1994, § 66-7; Ord. of 5-21-1970, § 20) 
Sec. 26-8. - Open wells and excavations. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or person to permit any open well or hazardous excavation to remain or exist on the property under the control of such owner, occupant or person. 
(Code 1994, § 66-8; Ord. of 5-21-1970, § 21) 
Sec. 26-9. - Preventing of disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings, or processions. 
A person who intends to disrupt, by actions which substantially impair the ordinary conduct of activities or a meeting occurring at any house of worship, home for the elderly or property which is federally funded, state subsidized or owned by private nonprofit or private citizen, or any lawful meeting, gathering, or procession of others both inside/outside and/or surrounding properties around those previously described, is guilty of preventing or disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings, or processions. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, 10-12-1998) 
Sec. 26-10. - Graffiti. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Graffiti means any text, picture, drawing or other visual depiction placed upon any property without the written permission, either express or implied, of the property owner when such text, picture, drawing or other visual depiction is visible from any public right-of-way or any adjacent property. 
Graffiti implement or paraphernalia means any substance or material such as, but not limited to, aerosol paint containers, permanent ink markers, paint sticks, and etchers; also including, but not limited to, tips or nozzles which can be applied to aerosol paint containers. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the property of another. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of property upon which graffiti is placed to allow the graffiti to remain on the property more than seven days after receipt of written notice from the city of the placement of the graffiti on the property. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement or paraphernalia while in, on, at or about any public property, including, but not limited to, public parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, recreation facilities, schools, school district facilities, libraries, court houses, utility stations, storm drains or any other publicly owned, operated and/or maintained facility. This subsection shall not apply to any officer, employee or agent of the public entity that owns the property. 
(e)  Violations of this section shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 03-07, § 1(66.9), 6-14-2003) 
Sec. 26-11. - Public drunkenness. 
A person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language, is guilty of the offense of public drunkenness. 
(Ord. No. 98-03, 10-12-1998) 
Sec. 26-12. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, 10-12-1998) 
Secs. 26-13—26-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-43—26-72. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 26-73. - Hours when effective. 
No minor under the age of 17 years shall be or remain in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, public grounds, public places, public buildings, public places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised public places within the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
(Code 1994, § 66-41; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1(66-41), 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 26-74. - Exceptions. 
This division shall not apply to a minor accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor or when the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed or authorized by the minor's parent, guardian or such other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. 
(Code 1994, § 66-42; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1(66-42), 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 26-75. - Responsibility of parents. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 17 years to knowingly permit such minor to be or remain in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, public grounds, public places, public buildings, public places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised public places within the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. except when the minor is accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor or when the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed or authorized by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. 
(Code 1994, § 66-43; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1(66-43), 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 26-76. - Responsibility of officers. 
It shall be the right of any authorized officer or person to arrest and detain any minor violating the curfew established in this division and to keep the minor detained until the parent, guardian or custodian is notified. The minor may be released upon the receipt and execution by the minor and the minor's parent or guardian or custodian of a citation stating that such minor, together with the minor's parent, guardian or custodian will appear at a stated time before the proper authority to answer to the charges. 
(Code 1994, § 66-44; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1(66-44), 3-12-2007) 
Chapter 28 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5); authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

Sec. 28-1. - Establishment and maintenance of parks and recreational facilities. 
The mayor and council is authorized to establish and maintain parks and recreational facilities in the corporate limits. The mayor and council may contract with persons, firms or other political subdivisions for the furnishing of such facilities and services to the citizens of the city. The mayor and council shall have all of the powers in this regard as are granted to municipalities in the state, including but not limited to those powers granted by O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 
(Code 1972, § 9-1; Code 1994, § 70-1) 
Sec. 28-2. - Use of grounds, etc. 
(a)  Use of grounds and facilities in general. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, or corporation using the city parks, ball fields, facilities and grounds to fail to clean up debris, extinguish all fires when fires are permitted and leave the premises in as good an order and the facilities in as neat and sanitary condition as when they began use of facilities. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, or corporation using the city parks, ball fields, facilities or grounds to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Willfully mar, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any buildings, tables, benches, signs, notices, placards, permanent monuments, statues, boundary markers, structures, fixtures, equipment, facilities, park property or appurtenances thereof whatsoever, either real or personal; 
(2)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof; 
(3)  Bring in, dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in storm sewers, drains, waters or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided, and where not provided all rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the presence of such rubbish or waste, and properly disposed of elsewhere; 
(4)  Disturb the peace, or use any profane or obscene language; 
(5)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act; 
(6)  Take part in or abet the playing of any game involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects, such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, basketball, handball, and soccer is prohibited, except on fields, courts, or areas provided therefor; 
(7)  Vend, sell, peddle, or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park area or facility, unless authorized in writing by the city; 
(8)  Bring any dangerous animal or any dog into any park area except as provided by special permit when such activity is part of an approved special event; 
(9)  Ride or cause to be ridden any horse, mule, or pony on any property in the park areas except as provided by special permit when such activity is part of an approved special event; 
(10)  Drive or park any automobile or off-road vehicle, except on a street, driveway, or parking lot in any park; or to park or leave any such vehicle on any place other than one established for public parking; 
(11)  Set up tents, shacks, or other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used for such purposes, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, wagon, or the like in the park area after closing hours, unless authorized by the city; 
(12)  To tamper with, break into or enter any facility or park area that is secured by locks or padlocks; 
(13)  To have any motorized vehicle or bicycle on any jogging track or ball field; 
(14)  To carry or use firearms in any park; 
(15)  Throw, discharge or otherwise place or caused to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter, or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters; 
(16)  Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the city. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park area or on any highway, road, or street abutting or contiguous thereto; 
(17)  Have in his possession, custody or control, or consume any alcoholic beverage, drug or any illegal substance, unless as otherwise allowed by resolution of the mayor and council; 
(18)  Barbecue anywhere other than in barbecue pits provided by the city or in areas designated for the use of portable above-ground grills; 
(19)  Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatsoever, erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public lands, highways, or roads adjacent to a park; and 
(20)  Perform any act which is prohibited by this Code. 
(Code 1994, § 70-2; Ord. No. 96-4, § 1, 8-22-1996; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 8-22-1996) 
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved container means a receptacle or roll-top garbage or recycling container approved by the city or provided by the city's contractor. 
Bags means plastic or paper sacks designed to store and enclose yard trimmings, with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. The total weight of a bag with contents shall not exceed 40 pounds. 
Bulky waste means stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, automobile parts, washing machines, furniture and other waste materials other than construction debris, dead animals or hazardous waste, with the weights or volumes greater than those allowed for approved containers. 
Construction debris means waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations. 
Dead animals means animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten pounds in weight that have died from any cause, except those slaughtered or killed for human consumption. 
Garbage means waste paper and plastics, normal household disposable items, any or all dead animals of less than ten pounds in weight except for those slaughtered for human consumption; every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or vegetable matter, including, but by no way limited to, used tin cans and other food containers, and all putrescible or easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter. 
Hazardous waste means any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or an appropriate agency of the state to be hazardous, as that term is defined by federal or state law or regulations. 
Producer means an occupant of a residential unit who generates waste. 
Recycling materials means materials which would otherwise become solid waste which, if collected, separated, or processed are capable of being reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. Recycling materials shall include, but are not limited to, HDPE and PET plastics; clear, green and brown glass; old newsprint; and aluminum and bi-metal cans. 
Refuse means all ashes, bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, garbage, recycling materials, trash, and yard trimmings. 
Residential unit means a single-family or two-family dwelling within the city occupied by a person or group of persons. A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when water services, either public or private, are being supplied thereto. Each unit of an apartment or condominium dwelling, whether a single-level or multilevel construction, shall be treated as a residential unit; provided that any multifamily complex provided with dumpster service in lieu of approved containers for each housing unit shall be excluded from this definition. 
Trash means all waste wood, wood products, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, and any or all other waste materials not included in the definitions of "bulky waste," "construction debris," "dead animals," "garbage," or "hazardous waste." 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree limbs and prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscape development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations; provided, however, that the term "yard trimmings" shall not include limbs or other materials generated by commercial gardeners, tree services, and the like. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-1), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-2. - Collection by city required; exceptions. 
(a)  All garbage, recycling materials, and yard trimmings accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city or by the city's contractor except as otherwise expressly authorized in this chapter. Use of the city collection and disposal system shall be required of all residential units in the city. 
(b)  No person shall collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city, except as expressly authorized in this chapter or as allowed by pertinent and appropriate actions of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-2), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-3. - City garbage collection; container requirements. 
(a)  All garbage shall be deposited in approved containers. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of the premises where garbage is located shall utilize the receptacle or roll-top garbage container provided by the city's contractor or shall be responsible for providing approved containers as set forth in this chapter and a refusal to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Where more than one residential unit is located in a building, the container shall be marked so as to indicate the dwelling unit using the particular container. The container may be identified by placing the apartment number thereon or the name of the person having control of the disposal of the garbage in the unit. When containers are so identified, such containers may only be used by the person whose name or other identification is shown thereon. 
(d)  When, in the opinion of the city clerk or his designee, the amount of garbage generated by a multifamily building makes individual garbage collection impractical, the city clerk or his designee may require the owner of the building to install one or more dumpsters of such capacity as to be determined to be necessary to adequately containerize waste generated in the building and may discontinue individual collection services. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-3), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-4. - Accessibility of containers. 
(a)  Producers having authority to control the disposal of garbage, recycling material, or yard trimmings in any residential unit shall cause all such materials collected therein to be placed in an approved container and placed at the curb on scheduled collection days. Unless an exemption is granted from this requirement, approved containers shall be moved by producers to curbside no earlier than 4:00 p.m. on the day preceding collection and shall be returned to their storage location on the side or rear yard of the property no later than 9:00 a.m. on the day following collection. 
(b)  Exemptions from the requirement for placement of approved containers at curbside may be granted by the city clerk for a producer with physical limitations which prevent placement of the approved container at the curb, provided that such person submits a written request for an exemption and the exemption is approved in writing by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-4), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-5. - Deposit in containers. 
All garbage shall be daily deposited in the approved containers. Approved containers shall be kept tightly covered at all times except when it is necessary to lift the cover in order to deposit garbage in the approved container. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-5), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-6. - Maintenance of containers. 
It shall be the responsibility of the occupant of each residential unit to maintain the approved container serving his unit in a clean and sanitary manner, free of obnoxious odors, maggots, insects and rodents, or any other condition which may render the container unhealthy to the occupants of the premises or the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-6), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-7. - Disposal. 
All approved containers shall be emptied and disposition made of the contents thereof according to the city's collection schedule, but in no event less than one time per week. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-7), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-8. - Collection of bulky waste, construction debris, and other materials. 
(a)  Construction debris and similar materials resulting from the construction, alteration, repair or demolition of buildings or structures must be removed by the owner of the property or the person performing such work. 
(b)  Bulky waste must be removed by the owner or occupant of the property or shall be subject to special collections at terms and conditions specified by the city or the city's contractor. 
(c)  Waste products of industrial plants and spent oils or greases accumulated at garages, filling stations, or similar establishments must be removed by the owner of the property or occupant of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-8), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-9. - Recycling materials and yard trimmings. 
(a)  All recycling materials shall be placed in approved recycling containers and shall be emptied and disposition made of the contents thereof according to the city's collection schedule, but in no event less than one time per week. 
(b)  All yard trimmings shall be placed in bags and disposition made of the contents thereof according to the city's collection schedule, but in no event less than one time per week; provided, however, that limbs shall not be in excess of four feet in length and three inches in diameter, and that all limbs shall be secured in bundles and shall not exceed 40 pounds in total weight per collection day. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-9), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-10. - Items not collectible. 
The following items are not collectible by the city: 
(1)  Construction debris; 
(2)  Dirt or rocks; 
(3)  Heavy car parts; 
(4)  Tires; 
(5)  Hazardous waste, including, but not limited to, HTH, paint, oil, car batteries; 
(6)  Metal drums, 35-gallon size or larger; 
(7)  Dead animals; 
(8)  Items weighing in excess of 75 pounds; and 
(9)  Bulky waste. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-10), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-11. - Unlawful disposal. 
No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, or upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the city, unless it is placed in approved containers for collection as authorized in this chapter or under express written approval by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-11), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-12. - Unauthorized accumulations. 
Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a violation of this chapter. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse within 48 hours after being directed to do so by the city clerk shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-12), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-13. - Scavenging. 
No person, other than the owner thereof, or an agent of the city clerk, or any employee of an entity which has a franchise from the city for the collection of refuse, shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing refuse pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any such container from the location where the container has been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-13), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-14. - Commercial collection. 
(a)  All owners and occupants of commercial and industrial property, as well as owners of multifamily property not served by city collection crews, shall contract with a private refuse collector which has obtained a franchise from the city for the regular collection and disposal of refuse generated at their facility. 
(b)  All persons who collect, transport or dispose of refuse from commercial, industrial or multifamily property in the city shall obtain a franchise from the city to provide such service and shall conduct their activities in full compliance with state laws and regulations and city ordinances regulating the collection, transportation or disposal of such waste, and, upon failure to do so, shall be subject to prosecution for such violations. 
(c)  The city shall determine the size, capacity and location of both containers or dumpsters used for the storage of refuse on commercial, industrial or multifamily property pending collection. Where the volume of refuse generated on the premises exceeds the capacity of the bulk container or dumpster provided, the city may require a larger container to be installed. 
(d)  Owners and occupants of commercial, industrial and multifamily property serviced by bulk containers or dumpsters shall maintain the area immediately surrounding the container free of unsightly refuse at all times. Such owner or manager shall be responsible for instructing all employees in the proper method for the use of the container and shall ensure that all refuse is placed completely within the container, with all doors and lids to be closed at all times the container is not being loaded or emptied. 
(e)  All commercial, industrial and multifamily property utilizing bulk containers or dumpsters shall provide upon the premises an accessible hard-surfaced space of sufficient size to accommodate the container. The hard-surfaced area shall have sufficient driving area to permit reasonable ingress and egress by collection vehicles. No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector for new construction unless appropriate plans and specifications are submitted setting forth and meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-14), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-15. - Penalties. 
Failure to perform any act required by this chapter, or the performing of any act prohibited by this chapter, shall constitute an offense and shall subject the offender to prosecution in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1(86-16), 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 30-16. - Debris carried or dropped onto public streets by vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon any public street in the city any truck, wagon, or other vehicle, in and upon which sand, dirt, rocks, cement, garbage, trash, waste materials, or other debris or materials, is transported unless such vehicle shall be equipped with a cover or other device that will prevent such sand, dirt, rocks, cement, garbage, trash, waste materials, or other debris or materials, from falling from the vehicle onto the streets of the city. 
(b)  Any person performing work on private property which requires movement of vehicles from the public streets onto such private property shall be responsible for the cleanup of all dirt, mud, gravel or other debris tracked from the private property onto the public street by such vehicles. Cleanup of streets shall be completed no later than 5:00 p.m. of each day. 
(c)  No person conducting a business adjacent to a public street shall maintain a yard or lot, pavement or covering of gravel, or other substances in such a manner that the gravel or other substances are movable upon being walked upon or driven over by vehicles going to and from the place of business unless such materials are so placed and maintained that the gravel or other substances will not get into or upon the adjacent public street. 
(Ord. No. 90-54, § 1, 8-12-1991) 
Sec. 30-17. - Regulations adopted. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference as if set out at length herein the model litter control ordinance (hereinafter referred to as the "regulations"). 
(b)  At least one copy of the regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Where reference is made in the regulations to the duties of certain officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the regulations shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the regulations is concerned, and the term "jurisdiction" shall mean the city. 
(d)  Incorporation by reference. A copy of the regulations described in subsection (a) of this section is attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, §§ 1(86-10), 2, 6-13-2005) 
Sec. 30-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 86-10 pertaining to the sanitation tax as enacted by § 2 of Ord. No. 11-01, adopted Oct. 10, 2011, has been moved to appear under chapter 36, Taxation, as per the instructions of the city during the 2014 recodification of the city Code. Section 1 of Ord. No. 11-01, adopted Oct. 10, 2011, amended the entirety of section 8 of chapter 86 of the Code of Ordinances by removing all substantive text under the section and reserving the section. 
Chapter 32 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City has power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - House numbering. 
The mayor and council shall provide a uniform numbering system for all property in the city. It shall be the duty of each property owner to secure the correct number for his property from the code enforcement officer and thereafter to display the assigned number in a conspicuous place on the property so that the number is clearly discernible from the street. 
(Code 1972, § 15-3; Code 1994, § 90-1) 
Sec. 32-2. - Display of merchandise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to display any merchandise, product or equipment for sale, trade or barter on any public street, street right-of-way, sidewalk or park of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 15-5; Code 1994, § 90-2) 
Sec. 32-3. - Excavations in streets or sidewalks. 
(a)  No excavation shall be made in the right-of-way of any public street or sidewalk located within the city limits except by the city or, for utility installation or repair, a public utility company, a cable company, the Clayton County Water Authority (CCWA), or a franchisee of any of these entities. 
(b)  Any entity other than the city desiring to conduct an excavation (hereinafter referred to as "the entity") in the right-of-way of any public street or sidewalk located within the city limits shall obtain from the city a permit for excavation at least 48 hours before beginning excavation, except in the case of an emergency threatening life or property, in which case the entity shall contact the police department as soon as reasonably practicable and fulfill the requirements of a permit application as set out in this section within 24 hours of beginning excavation. 
(c)  In order to obtain a permit, the entity shall submit a written application to the city clerk, which application shall show the location where the excavation will occur, its purpose, the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut, an address at which the entity consents that the city may properly serve on the entity notice of any matter concerning the excavation, and the name of a representative (hereinafter referred to as "the representative") of the entity. The entity shall also comply with any conditions, including posting of a bond, required by the city clerk in writing. 
(d)  For the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare, the entity shall take such precautionary actions, including but not limited to the provision of markers, warning lights or barricades, as the circumstances dictate. 
(e)  All costs of excavation and compliance with this section shall be assumed by the entity, and the entity agrees, as a condition of the issuance of a permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including but not limited to attorney fees, for bodily injury or property damage arising out of the entity's excavation operations. 
(f)  Upon completion of the excavation, the entity shall restore the area excavated to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation. Additionally, all excess debris and refuse, including but not limited to excess pavement, concrete, bricks and lumber, shall be removed from the site by the entity. 
(g)  In the event the entity conducts an excavation pursuant to the emergency repair provision contained in subsection (b) of this section and the city determines that no emergency in fact existed, the entity responsible for such excavation shall be deemed to have failed to comply with this section. Additionally, any entity conducting an emergency repair designates as its representative any person performing such work. 
(h)  In the event the entity fails to comply with the requirements of this section, the representative of the entity, any person (whether an employee of the entity, a subcontractor of the entity, or an employee of a subcontractor of the entity) at the excavation site on behalf of the entity, and the entity itself shall be jointly and severally subject to a penalty as provided under section 1-8. 
(Code 1972, § 15-6; Code 1994, § 90-3; Ord. No. 99-02, § 1(90-3), 11-8-1999) 
State Law reference— Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 32-4. - Damaging streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or equipment on, over or upon any street, sidewalk or other public property when the vehicle or equipment causes damage to the street, sidewalk or other public property. 
(Code 1972, § 15-9; Code 1994, § 90-4) 
Sec. 32-5. - Public nudity prohibited. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nudity means showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple. 
Public place means all outdoor places owned by or open to the general public, all locations, whether indoor or outdoor, that are visible from any public right-of-way or any adjacent property, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including such places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied. 
(b)  The mayor and council find that public nudity creates a threat to the public health, safety, welfare and morals. Among the potential harmful effects of public nudity are: accidents in various situations, including traffic accidents, caused by the inherently distractive nature of public nudity; decrease in property values near places where public nudity occurs regularly; decrease in business at commercial establishments located near places where public nudity occurs regularly; risk of unsanitary deposit of human excrement. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally, in a public place, to appear in a state of nudity. 
(d)  The prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any child under ten years of age; or 
(2)  Any female exposing a breast in the process of nursing a child. 
(Ord. No. 03-03, § 1(90-5), 4-14-2003) 
Secs. 32-6—32-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 32-29. - Water drainage on sidewalks. 
No person shall erect or maintain any drain, gutter, downspout, valley or roof in such a manner as to allow such to drain or shed water on any sidewalk in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 15-7; Code 1994, § 90-26) 
Sec. 32-30. - Maintenance. 
It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any improved property which abuts a paved sidewalk to fail to keep the sidewalk clean and free from dirt, trash, grass, ice and snow or to place or cause to be placed thereon any object which interferes with the free and unfettered use of the sidewalk by the public or which interferes with surface water drainage. 
(Code 1972, § 15-8; Code 1994, § 90-27) 
Secs. 32-31—32-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREETS 

Sec. 32-49. - Dedication. 
No dedication to the city of property to be used as a street, alley or other public use shall be valid until such has been accepted in writing by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1972, § 15-1; Code 1994, § 90-51) 
Sec. 32-50. - Naming. 
The mayor and council shall have the power to name public streets, erect street signs and change the names of streets. 
(Code 1972, § 15-2; Code 1994, § 90-52) 
Sec. 32-51. - Obstructions. 
The city shall not and does not grant to any person the right to erect or maintain a structure or obstruction in a public street. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in any street or alley any dirt, lumber, building material, trash or other material or object so that such interferes with the free and unfettered use of the street or alley by the public or which interferes with surface water drainage. 
(Code 1972, § 15-4; Code 1994, § 90-53) 
State Law reference— Grant of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10. 
Sec. 32-52. - Debris carried or dropped by vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon any public street any truck, wagon or other vehicle in and upon which sand, dirt, rocks, cement, garbage, trash, waste materials or other debris or materials are transported unless such vehicle shall be equipped with a cover or other device that will prevent such sand, dirt, rocks, cement, garbage, trash, waste materials or other debris or materials from falling from the vehicle onto the streets. 
(b)  Any person performing work on private property which requires movement of vehicles from the public streets onto such private property shall be responsible for the cleanup of all dirt, mud, gravel or other debris tracked from the private property onto the public street by such vehicles. Cleanup of streets shall be completed no later than 5:00 p.m. of each day. 
(c)  No person conducting a business adjacent to a public street shall maintain a yard or lot, pavement or covering of gravel or other substance in such a manner that the gravel or other substance is movable upon being walked upon or driven over by vehicles going to and from the place of business unless such material is so placed and maintained that the gravel or other substance will not get into or upon the adjacent public street. 
(Code 1994, § 90-54; Ord. No. 91-3, § 1, 8-12-1991) 
Chapter 34 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Recording of maps and plats, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67 et seq.; subdivisions abutting state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.; the Zoning Procedures Laws, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-1. - Regulations adopted by reference. 
(a)  Except where such regulations may otherwise conflict with specific provisions contained within chapter 42, pertaining to zoning, the county subdivision regulations, as adopted and amended through May 22, 2008, are hereby adopted as the subdivision regulations of the city and are incorporated by reference into this chapter as fully as though set out at length herein. A current copy of the subdivision regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk where it shall be available for public inspection. 
(b)  Where reference is made in the county subdivision regulations to the duties of certain officials named therein, the city manager or his designee shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the city insofar as administrating and enforcing the provisions of the regulations is concerned. 
(c)  Where reference is made in the county subdivision regulations to the duties of certain county departments, boards, committees, or advisory groups named therein, shall be deemed to be the mayor and city council or their designee insofar as administrating and enforcing the provisions of the regulations is concerned. 
(d)  Where reference is made in the county subdivision regulations to a specific article or section of the county zoning ordinance, it shall be deemed to be a reference to similar subject matter as it appears in the corresponding article or section of the city's zoning regulations contained in chapter 42. 
(e)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the county subdivision regulations, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board of county commissioners means the mayor and council of the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
County means the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
County zoning ordinance means chapter 42 of the Lake City Code, pertaining to zoning. 
Jurisdiction means the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
Local enforcement authority means the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
Local government means the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
Local permitting authority means the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
(Code 1994, § 92-1) 
Sec. 34-2. - Conflicts. 
(a)  In the event that the county subdivision regulations in any way conflict with the provisions of chapter 42, pertaining to zoning, said chapter 42 shall prevail. 
(b)  Where general subdivision and construction requirements of the county subdivision regulations conflict with specific subdivision and construction requirements in the city Code, including but not limited to floodplain management, soil erosion and sedimentation control, grading, stormwater management, driveways, outdoor parking and display areas of businesses, stream buffer protection regulations, conservation subdivision development, house numbering, landscaping of commercial and professional building lots, and road construction for commercial and residential construction projects, then the provisions concerning the specific subdivision and construction requirements in the city Code shall prevail. 
Chapter 36 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(a) and (b)(2); ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1—36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAX 

Sec. 36-19. - Levy; sanitation tax. 
(a)  Levied. For the purposes of raising revenues and funds for the general administration of city government, there shall be levied and collected an annual ad valorem tax of five mills applied to a 40 percent valuation of fair market value upon all real and personal property, including money, notes, bonds and other evidences of indebtedness, money used in banking and every other species of property in the city owned or held therein subject to taxation. 
(b)  Sanitation tax. 
(1)  An annual sanitation tax for the collection and disposal of waste from improved single-family residential properties within the city is hereby levied and assessed against all improved single-family residential properties which are to be served or benefited by the city's removal of garbage therefrom and against the owners thereof within the city. Such sanitation tax shall be due in one annual payment and shall be assessed and collected by the city in the same manner, subject to the same penalties for late payment, and at the same time as other ad valorem taxes otherwise collected. 
(2)  The sanitation tax rate for each year until changed by ordinance shall be assessed against the real property and to the real property owner and shall be as follows: 
a.  Residential. Per single-family residential structure ..... $204.00 
(3)  For such sanitation tax, the city shall have a lien against such building lot and the improvements thereon and the owner thereof, which lien shall be prior and superior to any and all other liens except state and county tax liens, and except that it shall be equal to any liens the city may have against such property for city taxes. 
(4)  In lieu of payment of this sanitation tax, all properties which are exempt from ad valorem taxes under state law shall be billed for all sanitation service received from the city via a monthly bill to the registered address of the owner of such property. 
(Code 1972, § 16-1; Code 1994, § 94-26; Ord. No. 92-2, § 1, 4-13-1992; Ord. No. 11-01, § 2(86-10), 10-10-2011) 
Sec. 36-20. - Duties of chief of police. 
Under this article, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to: 
(1)  Keep a file of all newspapers in which his official advertisements appear. 
(2)  Keep an execution docket in which he shall enter a full description of all executions levied by him on any kind of property, showing the property levied on, the date of levy and the service of levy notice, together with all his acts and doings thereon. 
(3)  Keep a book in which shall be entered a record of all sales made by him, describing the property and the process under which sold, the date of the levy and sale and the name of the purchaser and the price. 
(4)  Keep the book required by subsection (3) of this section indexed for each entry therein. 
(Code 1972, § 16-16; Code 1994, § 94-27) 
Sec. 36-21. - Payment. 
All ad valorem taxes due the city on all property in the city subject to taxation shall be due and payable annually on or before November 20 in each year. All unpaid taxes shall bear interest at 12 percent per annum from the date when due. 
(Code 1972, § 16-2; Code 1994, § 94-28; Ord. of 8-8-1974) 
Sec. 36-22. - Execution for failure to pay. 
When any person shall fail to pay the ad valorem tax imposed by the city according to law, the city clerk shall issue execution for the tax. The execution shall be signed by the city treasurer, attested by the city clerk and directed to the chief of police to levy such on the goods, chattels, lands and tenements of the defendant or so much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the taxes and costs. This execution shall bind all the property, real and personal, of the defendant and the costs thereof shall be the same as on tax collector's executions under the laws of the state. Upon receipt of the execution or fieri facias, it shall be the duty of the chief of police, forthwith, to levy such upon the defendant's property. 
(Code 1972, § 16-10; Code 1994, § 94-29; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 8, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 36-23. - Notice and sale of real property. 
When the chief of police levies on real property under this article, notice of the levy in form substantially similar to O.C.G.A. § 48-3-10, shall be given to the property owner and record owner of each security deed and mortgage affecting such property. If the real estate is vacant property, such notice shall be served upon the owner of the property, if a resident of the city, personally, or by leaving the notice at his most notorious place of abode. If such property is vacant and the owner is not a resident of the city, notice of the levy shall be given to him at his last known address, by certified mail, return receipt requested. All notice required in this section shall be given at least 20 days before the property is sold. Real property levied upon shall be advertised for sale once a week for four weeks next preceding the date of sale in the official organ of the county and notice shall be provided to the property owner as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1. Sales shall be held on the first Tuesday in each month between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. at the place where the last city election was held. Sales shall be conducted by the chief of police at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash. 
(Code 1972, § 16-11; Code 1994, § 94-30; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 8, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 36-24. - Notice and sale of personal property. 
When the chief of police levies on personal property under this article, he shall give notice of the levy to the owner if known. If the owner is a resident of the city, such notice shall be personally given or by leaving a copy of the notice at his most notorious place of abode. If the owner is a nonresident, notice of the levy shall be given him at his last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested. The requirements as to term of notice, advertisement and sale as set forth in section 36-23 and applying to real property shall apply to personal property under this section. 
(Code 1972, § 16-12; Code 1994, § 94-31) 
Sec. 36-25. - Making title after sale. 
The chief of police is authorized to make proper bills of sale and deeds of title to real and personal property purchased at public sales pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1972, § 16-13; Code 1994, § 94-32) 
Sec. 36-26. - Purchase by the city. 
The city treasurer may, on behalf of the city, bid the amount of ad valorem tax and costs on property sold for tax by the chief of police, where no one else bids that amount. The city clerk shall keep a record of all such purchases made by the city and file deeds and bills of sale executed by the chief of police to the city. The chief of police shall put the city clerk in possession of the property purchased by the city, and the city clerk shall be authorized to rent out the property and deposit rentals collected in the city treasury. The clerk shall keep a record of all amounts thus received for rent. 
(Code 1972, § 16-14; Code 1994, § 94-33; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 8, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 36-27. - Redemption of property. 
(a)  An owner desiring to redeem real or personal property purchased by the city at tax sale may do so within one year from the date of sale by satisfying his debt to the city. 
(b)  Whenever any real property is sold under and by virtue of any tax execution issued in pursuance of the Charter and this Code, the owner thereof, his agent or attorney or the vendor of the land when the purchase money has not been paid shall have the right and privilege of redeeming the land thus sold within one year from the time of sale, by paying the purchaser thereof the amount paid by such purchaser for the land, with legal interest thereon, and a ten percent premium. 
(Code 1972, § 16-15; Code 1994, § 94-34) 
Sec. 36-28. - Sale of property purchased by the city. 
Property purchased by the city at the tax sales for city taxes and which has been held by the city under deed made in pursuance of the sale for one year shall be sold and disposed of by the city as follows: 
(1)  The city clerk shall present to the mayor and council at any regular or called meeting thereof a full description list of all property so purchased by the city and which has been so held by the city for one year. 
(2)  The mayor and council may then, by resolution, direct a sale of all or such portion of the property as in the judgment of the mayor and council should be sold. Such direction being given, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to advertise such property for sale once a week for four weeks before a regular sheriff's sale day, and to have notice of such sale served on the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, at their last known address. A return of the service of whatever notice is given shall be made by the chief of police or party giving the notice as in cases of regular tax sales, before the city hall door. The chief of police shall sell or have sold the property to the highest bidder for cash, and each piece of the property shall be sold separately. 
(Code 1972, § 16-17; Code 1994, § 94-35; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 8, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 36-29. - Title of property sold given by city. 
Purchasers at such sale as provided in section 36-28 shall receive from the city a quitclaim deed, to be executed by the mayor upon the payment of the purchase money to the city clerk or the chief of police. For failure to comply with the bids, the city shall have the same alternatives and remedies as prescribed by state law for sheriff's sales. 
(Code 1972, § 16-18; Code 1994, § 94-36) 
Sec. 36-30. - Reclaiming property sold. 
Whenever any personal property has been levied upon by the chief of police by virtue of any execution in favor of the city, the chief of police may, in his discretion, allow the defendant in fi. fa. to replevy the property under the same rules and conditions as prescribed for sheriffs and constables in the state, and the bonds thus taken shall be collectible in the same manner prescribed for the collection of forthcoming bonds taken by sheriffs and constables of the state or the chief of police may receive money in pledge instead of bond. 
(Code 1972, § 16-19; Code 1994, § 94-37) 
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cities are authorized to exercise power over parking facilities and traffic control devices, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4) and (11); power of local authorities with respect to uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial vehicle means every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property. 
Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Established place of business means the place actually occupied either continuously or at regular periods by a dealer or manufacturer where his books and records are kept and a large share of his business is transacted. 
Farm tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement, for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry. 
Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. 
Official time standard, whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, means standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the city. 
Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading and unloading of passengers. 
Registration means the registration certificate and registration plates issued under the laws of the state pertaining to the registration of vehicles. 
Road tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
Traffic control device means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed. 
Traffic division means the traffic division of the police department or, if a traffic division is not established, the police department. 
(Code 1972, § 17-1(6), (8), (11), (13), (15), (25), (30), (40), (43), (56), (57); Code 1994, § 98-1) 
Sec. 38-2. - Adoption of state law; penalty for violation. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are adopted as and for the traffic rules of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any section of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment of not more than 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1994, § 98-2; Ord. of 9-13-1983(1)) 
Sec. 38-3. - Police administration. 
Traffic control in the city shall be the direct responsibility of the chief of police and those officers employed in the police department assigned to duty in traffic control. In addition to any other duty imposed upon the police department in this Code, the department and the officers therein shall have the duty to: 
(1)  Enforce the street traffic rules of the city and of the state; 
(2)  Make arrests for traffic violations; 
(3)  Investigate accidents; 
(4)  Issue summons when justified; 
(5)  Cooperate with other officers and officials of the city and the mayor and council in the administration of traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions; and 
(6)  Carry out those duties imposed upon the department and the officers therein by this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 17-2; Code 1994, § 98-3) 
Sec. 38-4. - Traffic engineering. 
The city may, from time to time, require traffic engineering assistance in planning and studying traffic problems. The mayor and council may, when the need arises, contract for such services with a person offering such or may enter into a contract with the county or another municipality to provide such services. 
(Code 1972, § 17-3; Code 1994, § 98-4) 
Sec. 38-5. - Records of traffic violations. 
The police department shall keep a record of all violations of this chapter and of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. These records shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the person charged and shall be permanent records and public records. 
(Code 1972, § 17-4; Code 1994, § 98-5) 
Sec. 38-6. - Investigation of accidents. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Code 1972, § 17-5; Code 1994, § 98-6) 
Sec. 38-7. - Records of traffic accidents. 
The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. These records shall be permanent and public records. 
(Code 1972, § 17-6; Code 1994, § 98-7) 
Sec. 38-8. - Traffic accident studies. 
Whenever the traffic accidents at any particular location become numerous, the chief of police shall make a study of such location and such accidents and make a recommendation to the mayor and council for remedial measures. 
(Code 1972, § 17-7; Code 1994, § 98-8) 
Sec. 38-9. - Annual traffic safety report. 
Between January 15 and January 30 of each year, the chief of police shall prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the mayor. Such report shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The number of charges made for each category of traffic offense. 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated, the number of persons killed and the number of persons injured. 
(3)  The recommendations of the police department to improve traffic safety. 
(Code 1972, § 17-8; Code 1994, § 98-9) 
Sec. 38-10. - Authority of police and fire personnel. 
Officers of the police department are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, during a fire, an accident or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, such officers may direct traffic as conditions may require. Personnel of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1972, § 17-9; Code 1994, § 98-10) 
Sec. 38-11. - Reports to state department of public safety and other state agencies. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to see that timely reports are filed with the state department of public safety and other agencies of the state when required by law. 
(Code 1972, § 17-10; Code 1994, § 98-11) 
Sec. 38-12. - Coasters, roller skates and similar devices. 
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk. When so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1972, § 17-13; Code 1994, § 98-12) 
Sec. 38-13. - Crosswalks and safety zones. 
The chief of police, with the approval of the mayor and council, is authorized to: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections and elsewhere where in his opinion there is a danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 1972, § 17-15; Code 1994, § 98-13) 
Sec. 38-14. - Traffic lanes. 
The chief of police, with approval of the mayor and council, is authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(Code 1972, § 17-16; Code 1994, § 98-14) 
Sec. 38-15. - Traffic control devices. 
(a)  Authority to install. The chief of police, with the approval of the mayor and council, shall place and maintain official traffic control devices when and as required under this chapter to make this chapter effective and may place and maintain such additional official traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under this chapter or state law. 
(b)  Specifications. All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the specifications contained in the Georgia Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, as revised. All signs and signals required for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1972, § 17-17(A), (B); Code 1994, § 98-15) 
Sec. 38-16. - Stopping, standing or parking. 
(a)  The mayor and council may from time to time prohibit the parking, stopping and standing of vehicles in certain areas and along certain roadways where it is deemed such prohibition to be desirable to protect life, limb and property and to facilitate the orderly flow of traffic. When such limitations are established, the mayor and council shall adopt a resolution to that effect and cause signs to be erected warning the public of the prohibition. 
(b)  In addition to those areas where the parking, standing and stopping of vehicles are prohibited as provided in subsection (a) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
(1)  On a crosswalk or within ten feet thereof. 
(2)  Within any area marked as a coach or bus stop. 
(3)  On the roadway side of any other vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(4)  In any area along a street where the curb has been painted yellow, provided that such painting is authorized by the mayor and council. 
(5)  Along any street whereby the nature of the street as to width, grade or curvature would impede traffic and create conditions dangerous to life, limb and property. 
(6)  For the purpose of washing, greasing or repairing a vehicle except for the purpose of making emergency repairs. In such an emergency, such vehicle shall be moved or towed away with dispatch unless the vehicle has been involved in an accident in which event the vehicle shall not be moved except at the direction of an officer. 
(c)  When any police officer finds a vehicle standing, stopped or parked in violation of this section, such officer is authorized to move such vehicle or require the owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle to move the vehicle to a safe and lawful point. 
(d)  When any police officer finds a vehicle unattended and standing, stopped or parked in violation of this section, such officer is authorized to see to the removal of such vehicle to a lawful and safe place. 
(e)  The removal or moving of a vehicle under subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall not prevent or preclude prosecution for violating this section. 
(f)  Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found standing, stopped or parked in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by the city or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation on a form provided by the city for the driver to answer to the charge against him at a specified time and a specified place. In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or restriction governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or restriction, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where and for the time during which the violation occurred. 
(g)  The mayor and council may by resolution provide for the establishment, installation and maintenance of parking meters in the city. 
(h)  Specific parking restrictions. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section and in section 38-18, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any street; only off-street parking shall be permitted. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, including but not limited to the owner or user of any vehicle described herein or anyone owning, renting, leasing, or in possession of property described herein, to allow any vehicle on any property having frontage along a residential street to be parked on any surface other than an impervious surface under the entire base of the vehicle. 
(3)  Temporary parking. 
a.  Notwithstanding subsection (h)(1) and (2) of this section, this section shall not hinder any nonresident from temporarily parking his vehicle on a residential street during temporary visits to a residence which has all available impervious surface (e.g., concrete or asphalt) or gravel surface parking spaces utilized by other vehicles. 
b.  Notwithstanding subsection (h)(3)a of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to temporarily park any vehicle on a residential street for more than six hours at any time during the day or night. 
c.  Notwithstanding subsection (h)(3)a of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any street in such a manner as to reduce the width of the navigable portion of the street to less than 14 feet. 
(4)  For the purposes of this section, the term "residential street" shall include the following areas: Forest Hill Court, Laurel Circle, High Point Court, Laurel Street School Lane, Woodland Way, Ahyoka Drive, Wahsega Way, Trahlyta Terr., Tsali Trail, Sanders Drive, Ellington Street, Sanders Way, Helen Street, Eubanks Drive, Jones Court, Grove Court, Orchard Place, Lakeland Circle, Dellwood Circle, Huron Drive, Erie Place, Ontario Avenue. 
(i)  Violations of this section shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-8. 
(Code 1972, § 17-19(A), (B)5, 6, 13, 15—18, (C)—(G); Code 1994, § 98-16; Ord. No. 01-01, § 1(98-16), 3-12-2001; Ord. No. 03-09, § 1(98-16), 6-9-2003) 
Sec. 38-17. - Stop signs and yield right-of-way signs. 
(a)  The mayor and council may by resolution specifically designate certain streets or parts of streets as through streets. When such is done it shall be the duty of the chief of police to see to the placement and maintenance of a stop sign or a yield right-of-way sign at appropriate places at each intersection of such through street or part thereof. 
(b)  The mayor and council may by resolution direct the chief of police to see to the placement and maintenance of a stop sign or a yield right-of-way sign at any intersection in the city where it is determined that a hazardous condition exists and such sign is necessary to prevent loss of life, limb or property. 
(Code 1972, § 17-20(A), (B); Code 1994, § 98-17) 
Sec. 38-18. - Large vehicles. 
(a)  Parking in residential areas. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store on property having a residential zoning classification, any large vehicle, in excess of 10,000 pounds, gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR), provided that a person may temporarily park such a vehicle in a residential area while actually engaged in delivery of products or services, including loading and unloading operations, while the driver is on duty and remains with the vehicle. For the purposes of this section, the term "large vehicle" means tractors, trailers, cabs, trucks, busses, vehicle carriers, tow trucks, towing vehicles, and truck cabs, but shall not include pickup trucks with no special equipment and which are used for personal transportation only. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store in a residential area any parts of the vehicles described in subsection (a)(1) of this section or their accessories, including materials hauled by the vehicles, unless such storage has been approved by the mayor and council. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles, when parked in the rear yard on an impervious surface (e.g., concrete, asphalt) or a gravel surface permitted under section 38-16(h), are specifically excluded from the prohibition contained in this subsection. 
(4)  For the purposes of this subsection, the term "recreational vehicles" means vehicles that are used primarily for recreational purposes, are not used primarily for transportation, and are not used for commercial purposes. 
(b)  Moving across curb. No large vehicle, cab, trailer, truck or tractor trailer, as designated in subsection (a) of this section, shall be pulled, pushed or in any way moved across any curb in the city without prior permission from the police department. 
(c)  Servicing. It shall be unlawful to service a vehicle, as designated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, except for emergency service as may be rendered upon permission of the police department. 
(Code 1994, § 98-18; Ord. of 8-12-1980(1), § 17-26; Ord. No. 01-01, § 2(98-18), 3-12-2001) 
Sec. 38-19. - Off-road vehicles. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-7-5, the following shall apply within the city: 
(1)  No off-road vehicle shall be operated in an area zoned for residential use. 
(2)  Any area used for off-road vehicles must first be established for this use and approved by the mayor and council. 
(3)  No off-road vehicle shall be operated in an area adjacent to a zoned residential area, if the area of operation is within 1,000 feet of the zoned residential area. 
(4)  In areas where off-road vehicles are allowed to operate, the hours of operation shall be restricted to the hours between 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1994, § 98-19; Ord. of 5-22-1979) 
State Law reference— Off-Road Vehicle Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq.; enforcement and penalties, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-6. 
Sec. 38-20. - Use of traffic control signal monitoring devices; penalty. 
(a)  The city elects to use traffic control signal monitoring devices within the jurisdictional limits of the city as provided by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f). 
(b)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty of not more than $70.00 per violation if such motor vehicle is found, as evidenced by recorded images produced by a traffic control signal monitoring device, to have been operated within the city limits in disregard or disobedience of a circular red or red arrow signal in violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f). 
(c)  The police department shall send by first-class mail addressed to the owner of the motor vehicle postmarked not later than ten days after the date of the alleged violation: 
(1)  A citation for the violation, which shall include the date and time of the violation, the location of the intersection, the amount of the civil monetary penalty imposed, and the date by which the civil monetary penalty shall be paid; 
(2)  A copy of the recorded image; 
(3)  A copy of a certificate sworn to or affirmed by a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by a law enforcement agency for which such device is authorized and stating that, based upon inspection of recorded images, the owner's motor vehicle was operated in disregard or disobedience of a circular red or red arrow signal in violation of subsection (a) of this section and that such disregard or disobedience was not otherwise authorized by law; 
(4)  A statement of the inference provided by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(d) which is herewith incorporated by reference and of the means specified therein by which such inference may be rebutted; 
(5)  Information advising the owner of the motor vehicle of the manner and time in which liability as alleged in the citation may be contested in court; and 
(6)  Warning that failure to pay the civil monetary penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner shall waive any right to contest liability and result in a civil monetary penalty; 
however, only warning notices and not citations for violations shall be sent during the 30-day period commencing with the installation of a traffic control signal monitoring device at such location. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § (a)(98-20), 5-8-2006) 
Sec. 38-21. - Signage required for use of traffic control signal monitoring devices. 
(a)  Prior to placing any traffic control signal monitoring devices in use, the public works department shall erect a sign on every highway that comprises a part of the state highway system at that point on the highway which intersects the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
(b)  The department of public works shall also erect a sign on each public road on the approach to the next traffic control signal for such road when a traffic control device is monitoring such next signal for such road, subject to inspection. 
(c)  Such signs shall be at least 30 inches by 30 inches in measurement and shall warn motorists that traffic control signal monitoring devices are being employed. 
(d)  The city project manager shall inspect and certify the placement of all required signage before placing any traffic control signal monitoring devices in use and shall periodically inspect to ensure that the required signage has not been removed, modified or otherwise rendered ineffective. It shall be the duty of the city project manager to replace and re-erect such signage as required by law or this chapter during all times the traffic control signal monitoring device program is in effect within the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § (a)(98-21), 5-8-2006) 
Sec. 38-22. - Traffic control signal monitoring program. 
(a)  The city project manager shall operate a traffic control signal monitoring program using approved traffic control signal monitoring devices in strict accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-20(f) and 40-6-20 through 40-14-24. All definitions of terms used therein are expressly incorporated by reference for the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  The timing of any traffic control signal which is being monitored by a traffic control signal monitoring device shall conform to regulations promulgated by the state department of transportation pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50. The city project manager shall cause each traffic control signal monitoring device placed in operation within the city to be independently tested for accuracy by a qualified technician, other than its manufacturer, at regular intervals and record and maintain the results of each test. The test results log shall be a public record subject to inspection. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § (a)(98-22), 5-8-2006) 
Sec. 38-23. - Reporting of traffic control signal monitoring device use. 
The city project manager or his designee shall submit not later than February 1 of each year a report on traffic control signal monitoring device use during the preceding calendar year to the governor, the lieutenant governor, the speaker of the house of representatives, the board of commissioners, the city manager, and the judge of the municipal court. Such report shall include: 
(1)  A description of the locations where the traffic control signal monitoring devices were used; 
(2)  The number of violations recorded at each location and in the aggregate on a monthly basis; 
(3)  The total number of citations issued; 
(4)  The number of civil monetary penalties and total amount of such penalties paid after citation without contest; 
(5)  The number of violations adjudicated and results of such adjudications, including a breakdown of dispositions made; 
(6)  The total amount of civil monetary penalties paid; and 
(7)  The quality of the civil adjudication process and its results. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § (a)(98-23), 5-8-2006) 
Sec. 38-24. - Designation of city project manager. 
For purposes of administering this chapter and any traffic control signal monitoring program operated in accordance herewith, the chief of police is hereby designated as the city project manager. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § (a)(98-24), 5-8-2006) 
Secs. 38-25—38-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISPLAYING MOTOR VEHICLES FOR SALE 

Sec. 38-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Display for sale means to display or affix any sign, marking or other device on or to a motor vehicle in such manner as to be visible to passing motorists or pedestrians and which indicates the vehicle is available for alienation. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. Boats and trailers will be included in this category. 
Vehicle sales lot means an area maintained by a business, licensed for the sale of new or used motor vehicles, and upon which such vehicles are parked for display in conjunction with such business. 
(Code 1994, § 98-41; Ord. of 11-8-1988, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 38-53. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the parking of motor vehicles on vehicle sales lots. 
(Code 1994, § 98-42; Ord. of 11-8-1988, § 1(E)) 
Sec. 38-54. - Parking on private property. 
No person shall park any motor vehicle on private property in such a manner as to display it for sale, except in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The vehicle owner or his agent shall obtain a permit from the city clerk for display of each vehicle. The clerk shall charge such fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council for issuance of a permit. 
(2)  No person may display for sale more than one motor vehicle owned by him at one time. 
(3)  No person may display for sale more than three motor vehicles owned by him within any period of 12 consecutive months. 
(4)  No vehicle owner may display a motor vehicle for sale on property owned by another without the written consent of the property owner, and no property shall be used to display more than three motor vehicles for sale in any period of 12 consecutive months. 
(Code 1994, § 98-43; Ord. of 11-8-1988, § 1(B)) 
Sec. 38-55. - Parking on public property. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person shall park any motor vehicle on public property in such a manner as to display it for sale. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use or parking of a vehicle in conjunction with legitimate entertainment or shopping so long as the vehicle is lawfully parked in a parking space or lot available for such use and the duration of such parking does not exceed the time devoted to such entertainment or shopping. 
(Code 1994, § 98-44; Ord. of 11-8-1988, § 1(C), (D)) 
Secs. 38-56—38-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED LIMITS 

Sec. 38-84. - Maximum speed. 
Unless otherwise posted, the maximum speed that an automobile, truck, tractor, motorcycle or other motor-driven vehicle may be driven or operated on any street, highway or thoroughfare in the corporate limits shall be 30 miles per hour. However, the mayor and council may from time to time establish greater or lesser limits in school zones, in areas of congestion and in areas where the mayor and council deem the operation at 30 miles per hour to be dangerous to life, limb and property or in areas where a greater speed is authorized as a result of traffic and road conditions. When such greater or lesser limits are established, the mayor and council shall adopt a resolution to that effect and shall cause signs to be erected warning the public of the differing speed restriction. 
(Code 1972, § 17-18; Code 1994, § 98-66) 
Sec. 38-85. - Speed zones. 
(a)  The following speed zones are established: 
(1)  For on-system zones, with signs to be erected by the state department of transportation, see the latest state speed zone order for the county as effected and issued by the state departments of transportation and public safety. The state speed zone order is adopted in this subsection by reference thereto for those sections of state routes located within the city limits. 
(2)  Off-system zones, with signs to be erected by the city, shall consist of the following segments and the maximum speed for each segment: 

 
Ratteree Drive, from Forest Parkway to Burks Drive, a distance of 0.30 mile\35 
Forest Parkway, from a point 300 feet west of Victory Boulevard to North Parkway, a distance of 0.40 mile\50 
Forest Parkway, from North Parkway to State Road 54, a distance of 1.10 miles\45 
Harper Drive, from Rex Road to Northlake Drive, a distance of 0.50 mile\40 
Harper Drive, from Northlake Drive to State Road 54, a distance of 0.40 mile\35 
Huie Road, from State Road 54 to Reynolds Road, a distance of 0.30 mile\35 
Kenyon Road, from White Drive to State Road 54, a distance of 0.50 mile\35 
Laurel Street, from Phillips Drive to Forest Hills Court, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
North Parkway, from Forest Parkway to Harper Drive, a distance of 0.80 mile\40 
Northlake Drive, from Forest Parkway to Harper Drive, a distance of 0.70 mile\35 
Phillips Drive, from a point 300 feet north of Warner Street to Kenyon Road, a distance of 0.35 mile\30 
Phillips Drive, school zone, from Woodland Drive to Kenyon Road, a distance of 0.25 mile, from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:45 p.m., school days only, for Lake City Elementary School\25 
Rex Road from Trammell Road to North Parkway, a distance of 0.80 mile\40 
Rex Road, from Northlake Drive to State Road 54, a distance of 0.40 mile\35 
Reynolds Road, from a point 0.10 mile south of Huie Road to White Drive, a distance of 0.60 mile\35 
Trahlyta Terrace, from White Drive to dead end, a distance of 0.25 mile\25 
Tsali Trail, from White Drive to dead end, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
White Drive, from Reynolds Road to Kenyon Road, a distance of 0.25 mile\35 
Woodland Drive, from Phillips Drive to Helen Street, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
(b)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Code 1994, § 98-67; Ord. No. 93-2, 4-12-1993) 
Chapter 42 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Preamble. 
For the several purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or the general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city; of improving the city's appearance; lessening congestion in the streets; furthering traffic safety; securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land, avoiding both undue concentration of population and urban sprawl; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; protecting property against blight and depreciation; encouraging the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and other structures throughout the city; securing economy in government expenditures; and for other purposes, all in accordance with a land use plan for the development of the city, the mayor and council do hereby ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Res. of 3-12-1985, art. I; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-2. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Lake City Zoning Regulations." 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Res. of 3-12-1985, art. II; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-3—42-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROVISION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP; ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 42-23. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The city is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(b)  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor and attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in the Lake City Zoning Regulations," together with the date of adoption of the resolution from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Res. of 3-12-1985, art. III, § 3.1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-24. - Amendments to maps. 
(a)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map periodically after the amendment has been approved by the mayor and council, with an entry in the minutes of such council meeting as follows: "On ____________ , 20 ____________ , by official action of the mayor and council, the following (change) changes (was) were made to the official zoning map: (brief description of nature of changes or changes)," which entry shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. No amendment to this chapter is official until such change and entry is made on said map. 
(b)  No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the office of the city clerk shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Res. of 3-12-1985, art. III, § 3.2; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-25. - Replacement of official zoning map. 
(a)  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the mayor and council may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map, and shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted the date of ____________ , 20 ____________ , as part of the Lake City Zoning Regulations." 
(b)  Unless the previous official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant remaining parts thereof, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Res. of 3-12-1985, art. III, § 3.3; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-26. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of the boundaries of any zoning district in the city, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a militia district line, a land lot line, a lot line or the centerline of a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway, or a railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary lines. 
(2)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as being set back from a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway or a railroad right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such zoning district boundary line shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of the street, county road, state highway, interstate highway or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto. 
(3)  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the lot lines. In this situation, the requirements of the zoning district in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall apply to the balance of the lot except that such extension shall not include any part of a lot that lies more than 50 feet beyond the zoning district boundary line. 
(4)  Where zoning district boundaries are in doubt, the mayor and council shall determine such boundaries using the appropriate scale from the official zoning map. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Res. of 3-12-1985, art. III, § 3.4; Ord. No. 01-02, § 1(3.4), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-27. - Districts listed. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the incorporated land area of the city is divided into zoning districts designated as follows: 
(1)  RS-200 Single-Family Residence: 20,000 square foot lot district; provides for low density single-family residential uses. 
(2)  RS-150 Single-Family Residence: provides for the development of single-family residences on individual lots. 
(3)  RM Multiple-Family Residence: provides for moderate-high residential densities not to exceed ten dwelling units per acre. 
(4)  RMH Mobile Home or Manufactured Home Park Residence: provides for mobile home or manufactured home parks. 
(5)  OI Office/Institutional: provides a location for offices, institutions and limited, related retail businesses and services. 
(6)  BN Neighborhood Business: provides a location for convenience and service establishments or individual lots or within planned shopping centers when serving the day-to-day need of residents of adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
(7)  BG General Business: provides for a wide range of retail, service and related commercial establishments. 
(8)  M Manufacturing: provides for heavy commercial and light industrial uses which are compatible with land use plan objectives. 
(9)  SCR Shopping Center Reuse: allows the repurposing of an existing development of land to provide for a wide range of retail, service and wholesale establishments. 
(10)  G-1 Gateway Village Development: established as part of a collaborative partnership between the City of Lake City, Georgia, City of Morrow, Georgia, and Clayton College and State University (CCSU) for the purpose of establishing architectural and site design standards for the regulation of new development and construction as well as the creation of a Gateway Village Master Plan. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-28. - Annexation. 
Any land annexed into the city shall, upon such annexation and unless otherwise zoned upon such annexation, automatically be classified in the RS-200 Single-Family Residence District and remain so zoned until an amendment to this chapter shall place such annexed land into a different district. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Res. of 3-12-1985, art. III, § 3.6; Ord. No. 01-02, § 2(3.6), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-29—42-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 42-60. - Uniformity. 
The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-61. - Applicability to land, buildings and open space. 
No building, structure, land or open space shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-62. - Height and density. 
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
(1)  To exceed the height or bulk limits of this chapter; 
(2)  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
(3)  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; 
(4)  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; 
or in any other manner be contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-63. - Lot size and occupancy. 
No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots in the same ownership at the time of passage of the resolution from which this chapter is derived, shall be reduced in size so that lot width or size of yards of lot area per family or any other requirements of this chapter are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-64. - Yard and other spaces. 
No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading spaces required about any one building shall be included as a part of the yard or off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building, except as specifically provided for herein. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-65. - One principal building on a lot. 
For residential development, only one principal building and its accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any one lot, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-66. - Minimum lot sizes for residences using septic tank systems. 
No single-family residence shall be permitted on a lot of less than 25,000 square feet in a new subdivision which is to be served by septic tanks, regardless of the zoning district classification. With respect to existing platted lots, the county board of health will evaluate each individual request for a permit on a case-by-case basis. This restriction on lot size does not apply to residential development served by community sewer systems. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Editor's note— As of the publication date of the 2015 Code of Ordinances, the square footage requirement for the above section from 20,000 to 25,000 square feet, pursuant to City Code 1994 § 92-1 (Regulations adopted by reference) which adopted by reference the entirety of the Clayton County Subdivision Regulations (§ 86-161(b), Sanitary Sewer Standards, adopted May 22, 2008). 
Sec. 42-67. - Street frontage requirement. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on a lot that does not abut for at least a distance of 25 feet upon a public street, a publicly approved street or a publicly maintained street. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-68—42-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 42-93. - Continued. 
(a)  Within the zoning districts established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted there exists: lots, structures, uses of land and structures; which were lawful before the resolution from which this chapter is derived was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(b)  Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of the resolution from which this chapter is derived. 
(c)  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption of the resolution from which this chapter is derived. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-94. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory building may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the resolution from which this chapter is derived, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than these applying to area or width, or both, of the lots shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
(b)  If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of the resolution from which this chapter is derived, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-95. - Nonconforming structures. 
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the resolution from which this chapter is derived that could not be built under the terms of this chapter due to restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
(2)  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-96. - Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in combination. 
If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of $1,000.00 or more, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the resolution from which this chapter is derived, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the mayor and council either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the mayor and council may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(4)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months (except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. The intent, and any evidence thereof, of any owner and/or user of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, to discontinue or abandon the use shall be irrelevant in determining whether discontinuance or abandonment shall be based upon such objective evidence as would lead a reasonable observer of actual use of the structure, or structure and premises in combination, to believe that discontinuance or abandonment of the use has in fact occurred. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-97. - Repairs and maintenance. 
(a)  On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming portion of the structure, as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
(b)  If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-98—42-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 42-123. - Interpretation. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following interpretations shall apply: 
(1)  All words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(2)  All words in the plural number include the singular number, and all words in the singular number include the plural number, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. 
(3)  The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. 
(4)  The word "used" shall be deemed also to include "designed, intended or arranged to be used." 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-124. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory apartment means a dwelling unit created within an existing single-family home or on the same lot. An accessory apartment is an independent unit, but it may share an entrance, yard and parking with the principal unit. 
Accessory use means a use or structure on the same lot, and of a nature customarily and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. Examples of accessory uses include free standing garages, tennis courts, swimming pools and satellite dish antennas. 
Automobile means any motor vehicle including, but not limited to, cars, trucks, vans, and motorcycles. 
Automobile broker means a business or person who, for a commission or with the intent to make a profit or gain of money or other thing of value, negotiates or attempts to negotiate the sale of a new or used automobile on behalf of another without taking possession of the vehicle. Such term shall not mean any person engaged in the solicitation, negotiation, or advertising of the sale of used automobiles or any owner of real property who allows the display of a used automobile on such property if the sale of such vehicles is made by a used car dealer or a financial institution. 
Automobile dealer means a person or business who brokers, deals, or engages in the purchase, sale, lease, or exchange of five or more used automobiles within a twelve-month period or two or more used automobiles at any one point in time. 
Automobile repair means major or minor repair of automobiles as follows: 
(1)  Minor automobile repair service means replacement of parts, tires, tubes, or batteries; diagnostic services; minor maintenance services such as grease, oil, spark plug, or filter changing; wheel alignment or tire balancing; engine tune-ups; emergency road services; replacement of starters, alternators, hoses and brake parts; automobile washing or polishing; performing emission testing or other required inspections and making any minor repairs necessary to pass said inspections; maintenance servicing of air-conditioning or exhaust systems; or similar servicing or repairs that do not normally require any significant disassembly or storing of automobiles on the premises overnight. This definition does not include any major repair service. 
(2)  Major automobile repair service means general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of an automobile's engine or transmission system; collision service such as body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; automobile painting services; steam cleaning, undercoating or rust proofing; customizing; or any similar servicing, rebuilding, or repair that normally requires significant disassembly or storing of automobiles on the premises overnight. This definition includes any minor repair service which is offered addition to, or in conjunction with, any major repair service. 
Automobile repair garage means any building or land area, or any portion thereof, used for the provision of any major automobile repair service. 
Automotive retail establishment means any building or land area, or any portion thereof, used for the direct retail sale to the public on the premises of products necessary for automobile service or maintenance, provided that all such products are new and not previously used. Products necessary of automobile service or maintenance include, but are not limited to, engine fuels, motor oil and lubricants, grease for the purpose of operating an automobile, tires, batteries, brakes, and shock absorbers. The phrase "automotive retail establishment" does not include any building or land area, or any portion thereof, used for the storage of automobiles or for the provision of any major automobile repair service or any minor automobile repair service. 
Automobile sales establishment means a place of business where a manufacturer, authorized business or dealer engages in the sale, lease, or exchange of new and used automobiles where a majority of the sales inventory is new. 
Automobile salvage shop means any building or land area, or portion thereof, where a person, a business, or other entity destroys, dismantles, disassembles, recycles, or stores for later dismantling, destruction, disassembling, or recycling any automobile or part thereof and may engage in the sale of used automobile parts or scrap in connection with the provision of major repair services or minor repair Services. An automobile salvage shop is not a junk or salvage yard. 
Automobile service station means any building or land area, or any portion thereof, used for the provision of any minor automobile repair service. 
Boardinghouse or roominghouse means a dwelling in which meals or lodging or both are furnished for compensation to more than two but not more than ten non-transient persons. 
Buffer means a planted area of width to be determined by the mayor and council, the purpose of which is to insulate existing uses from new or expanding incompatible or marginally compatible land uses. 
Buildable area means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
Building means any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building inspector means the official appointed by the city and charged with the responsibility of issuing permits and certificates of zoning compliance. 
Building, height of, means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. 
Building, principal, means a building or structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
Certificate of zoning compliance means a permit issued by the zoning administrator indicating that the use of the building or land in question is in conformity with this chapter or that there has been a legal variance therefrom as provided by this chapter. 
Clinic means an establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one physician or dentist or a group of physicians or dentists practicing medicine. 
Club means a building or facilities owned or operated by and for special educational or recreational purposes, but not primarily for profit, or to render a service that is customarily carried on for gain. 
Conditional uses means a use which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions contained in this chapter or required by the mayor and council. 
Condominium means the ownership in fee simple title of a single unit in a multi-unit structure and undivided ownership, in common with other purchases, of the common elements of the structure and including the land and its appurtenances. 
Convenience store means any building or land area, or any portion thereof, used primarily for the retail sale or offering of sale to the public of a range of everyday items such as groceries, snack food, candy, toiletries, soft drinks, tobacco products and newspapers and includes any incidental retail dispensing, sale or offering of sale of motor fuels to uses or motor vehicles. The phrase "convenience store" does not include any building or land area, or any portion thereof, used for the storage of automobiles or for the provision of any major automobile repair service or any minor automobile repair service. 
County street means a street which is owned and/or maintained by Clayton County. 
Drive-in restaurant means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment, or beverages in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may eat or drink the food, or beverage on the premises. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family, two-family, multiple-family dwellings, roominghouses and boardinghouses, fraternities, sororities, and modular dwellings, but not including hotels or motels. 
Dwelling, mobile home or manufactured home, means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building or portion thereof designed for three or more dwelling units, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a detached residential unit other than a mobile home or manufactured home, hotel or motel, designed for and occupied by one family only. 
Dwelling, single-family attached, means a structure subdivided by a coincidental property line and wall which separates the structure into a maximum of two dwelling units, each occupying its own lot. The two lots created by the coincidental property line and wall shall each contain at least 50 percent of the minimum lot area in the zoning district in which they are located, 50 percent of the minimum lot width in the zoning district in which they are located, and 50 percent of the minimum gross floor area in the zoning district in which they are located. An attached single-family structure must meet all front, rear and side yard setback requirements in the zoning district in which it is located, except for the coincidental property line and wall. Each unit must be separately metered for all utilities, and the coincidental property wall must be fire-rated and extend from the foundation to the roof decking of the structure. Otherwise, an attached single-family structure must meet all standards that would be required for two family dwellings in the zoning districts in which they are located. 
Dwelling, two-family, means a detached residential building containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families living independent of each other. 
Dwelling unit means one room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment of owner occupancy, for rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities. 
Family means one or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that, unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family shall contain over five persons, but further provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
Flea market means any event or area at which two or more persons or entities offer merchandise for sale or exchange, and either a fee is charged by the owner or operator of the event or area to such persons or entities for the privilege of offering such merchandise for sale or exchange, or a fee is charged to prospective buyers from for admission to the area or event at which merchandise is offered or displayed for sale or exchange. The term "fee" refers to any compensatory arrangement between the owner/operator of a flea market and the owner/operator's vendor. 
Floor area means the floor area is the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a structure, exclusive of carport, basement, attic and open porches. 
Gasoline service station means any building or land area, or any portion thereof, used primarily for the retail dispensing, sale or offering of sale of motor fuels to users of motor vehicles and includes any incidental retail sale of a range of everyday items such as groceries, snack food, candy toiletries, soft drinks, tobacco products and newspapers or of minor accessories necessary for the operation of a motor vehicle such as oil, antifreeze or windshield wipers. The phrase "gasoline service station" does not include any building or land area, or any portion thereof, used for the provision of any major automobile repair service or any minor automobile repair service. 
Ground coverage means the area of a lot occupied by all buildings expressed as a percentage of the gross area of the lot. 
Home occupation means a business, occupation or profession carried on within a single-family residential dwelling by the resident thereof, as regulated in section 42-152. 
Inoperable vehicle means any motorized vehicle incapable of immediately being driven. 
Junk or salvage yard means a place where waste, discarded or salvaged metals, building materials, paper, textiles, used plumbing fixtures, used cars or trucks in inoperable condition are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled or cleaned. 
Loading space, off-street, means space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to the size of delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a building or use, and any accessory building and use incidental to it, and including open space not less in extent than that required by this chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a public street. 
Lot, corner, means a lot situated at the intersection of two streets, or bounded on two or more adjacent sides by street right-of-way lines. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot having frontage on two non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot frontage means that portion of a lot adjacent to a street. 
Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot or a through lot. 
Lot line means a boundary of a lot. The term "lot line" is synonymous with property line. 
Lot of record means an individual lot or a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county; or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum front yard setback line. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term "manufactured home" includes any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
Mini-warehouse means a building or portion thereof used for dead storage, mainly of the excess personal property of an individual or family, but also of small amounts of goods or merchandise for businesses or individuals. The term "mini-warehouse" shall not include retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any other commercial use. 
Mobile home or manufactured home park means a tract of land that is used, designated, maintained, or held out for rent to accommodate three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes. Mobile homes or manufactured home located in a mobile home or manufactured home park are used only to provide living and sleeping accommodations. A mobile home or manufactured home park does not include an automobile or mobile home or manufactured home sales lot on which unoccupied mobile homes or manufactured homes are parked for inspection or sale. 
Modular home means a factory-fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a structure to be used for residential purposes. 
Nonconforming use means any building, structure, or use of land lawful at the time of passage of amendment of the resolution from which this chapter is derived which does not conform, after the passage or amendment of the resolution from which this chapter is derived, with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Nursing home means a home for the aged, chronically ill, or incurable persons in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are kept or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation; The term "nursing home" does not include hospitals, clinics, or other similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
Parking space, off-street, means an off-street parking space consisting of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room, design standards for which are contained in this chapter. 
Pawn shop means any establishment engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods (as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130(5)), or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on a condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this paragraph. 
Principal permitted use means that use of a lot which is among the uses allowed as a matter of right under the zoning classifications. 
Private deed restrictions or covenants means private deed restrictions or covenants imposed on land by private landowners. Private deed restrictions bind and restrict the land in the hands of present owners and subsequent purchasers and are enforced only by the landowners involved and not by the city or other public agency. 
Right-of-way means access over or across a particularly described property for a specific purpose. 
Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments having a building composition that is an architectural unit and is not a miscellaneous assemblage of stores; planned, developed, analyzed as a unit, related in location, size and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves, and providing on-site parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of stores. 
Signs means any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located. 
Stable, private, means a stable with a capacity of not more than two horses, mules or other draught animals. 
Stable, public, means a stable other than a private stable with a capacity of more than two horses and mules or other draught animals. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it, provided that a room, suite, or story, with more than one-half of its height below grade shall not be considered a story for the purposes of height regulations. 
Street means a right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, drive, expressway, boulevard, lane, place, circle, alley, or otherwise. Various classifications of streets shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Arterial. An arterial street is a street which is used primarily for fast and heavy traffic flow; is of considerable continuity; and is used as a traffic artery for intercommunication among large areas. 
(2)  Major collector. A major collector street is a street which carries traffic from activity centers and minor collector streets to arterial streets and streets of higher classification. 
(3)  Minor collector. Minor collector streets are principal entrance streets to subdivisions and the main streets for circulation within a subdivision which serve a network of four or more local streets. Minor collector streets are designed so that traffic circulation in a subdivision would cause such a street to be used as a link between local streets and major collector or arterial streets. 
(4)  Local. A local street is a street used primarily in residential subdivisions for access to abutting properties as opposed to the collection and dispersion of traffic. 
(5)  Cul-de-sac. A cul-de-sac is a local street with only one outlet, closed and terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(6)  Marginal access. A marginal access street is a street which is parallel to, and adjacent to an arterial street or highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, the term "structure" includes buildings, gasoline pumps, mobile homes or manufactured homes, walls, fences, billboards, signs, and satellite dish antennas. 
Tattoo parlor means a permanent structure or building on a fixed foundation wherein the performing of the action known as tattoo (as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1) occurs. 
Townhouse means a type of dwelling that is one or more stories in height which has outside, individual front and rear entrances, is separated from other dwellings by fire-rated common party walls extending from the foundation to the roof decking, and is part of a contiguous group of at least three townhouses and shall be considered a multifamily structure. 
Townhouse, fee simple, means a townhouse unit that has the common wall between it and the adjoining townhouse unit as its property line between that unit, that has individual meters for all utilities, that has access to a public street, and meets the standards described herein. 
Trailer (motor home) means a motorized vehicle, designed and/or maintained for use as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for travel or recreation purposes exclusively, having no foundation other than wheels or jacks. 
Trailer (travel) means a non-motorized vehicle, pulled by an automobile or truck, designed and/or maintained for use as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for travel or recreation purposes exclusively. 
Trailer park means a parcel of land which is used solely for the rental or lease of lots for transient campers, trailers, motor homes or temporary parking of any other recreational vehicle that is not a mobile home or manufactured home. 
Use means the purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, or intended, or to which said land or building is occupied, maintained or leased. 
Used automobile means any pre-owned, leased, or second-hand motor vehicle to which a certificate of title and license plates have been issued and which at a prior time the motor vehicle has been registered for use on the highways by a consumer or by an automobile dealer, and any used or second-hand vehicle, defined as any vehicle required to be titled, trailer coaches, and trailers weighing over 2,500 pounds. 
Used automobile sales establishment means a place of business where a business or automobile dealer engages in the sale of used automobiles. 
Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this chapter, a variance is authorized only for height, area and size of a structure or size of yards and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district. 
Yard means a required open space located on the same lot as the principal building, unoccupied and unobstructed except for accessory uses and for shrubs and fences. 
Yard, front, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and situated between the front lot line and the principal building line projected to the side lines of the lot, the depth of which shall be the least horizontal distance between the front lot line and the building line. 
Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear most line of the principal building projected to the side lines of the lot and the rear lot line, the depth of which shall be the least horizontal distance between the rear line of the principal building and the rear lot line. In all cases, the rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
Yard, side, means a yard between the principal building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the side lot line to the principal buildings. 
Zoning enforcement officer, administrative officer, or zoning administrator means the individual selected by the mayor and council whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, §§ 3(6.2), 4(6.2), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2015-3, §§ 1, 2, 10-12-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, §§ 1, 2, 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 2, 1-8-2018) 
Secs. 42-125—42-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 42-147. - Accessory uses or structures. 
(a)  Accessory uses or structures shall be permitted only in rear yards, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. An accessory use or structure shall be set back not less than ten feet from any lot line. 
(b)  No accessory building shall be erected on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(c)  Accessory uses or structures shall be permitted if they meet the following: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, only one accessory building shall be permitted on a lot, and it shall be located in the rear yard. 
(2)  Accessory uses shall be set back not less than five feet from any lot line. 
(3)  An accessory building located on a typical subdivision lot shall not be any larger than 16 feet by 20 feet. However, a free-standing garage may be as large as 22 feet by 24 feet, provided it is used solely to house automobiles in full operating condition. 
(4)  Up to three accessory buildings, not exceeding a total cumulative area of up to 5,000 square feet of floor area, may be located on any lot with an area in excess of four acres. 
(5)  Accessory buildings shall not be used for any type of commercial operation, whether permanent, part-time or as part of a limited home occupation, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(6)  The height of an accessory building shall not exceed 15 feet. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-148. - Approvals for business and industrial developments on state highways. 
For all business and industrial developments fronting on a state highway, no building permit shall be issued until approval of the state highway department has been obtained by the applicant on entrances and exits, curb radii, drainage and other matters that are the appropriate concern of the department. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-149. - City and county approvals that are required. 
All city and county approvals that are required for the use of land and structures and for the location and operation of businesses and industries shall be obtained by the applicant and transmitted by him with his request for a building permit, an occupancy permit, a zoning amendment, a special exception or a variance. Except as otherwise required by state law, no local action shall be taken and no public hearings shall be held until the approvals required by this section have been obtained by the applicant. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-150. - Minimum floor area requirements. 
All single-family residential structures, in all zoning districts of the city, shall have a minimum floor area of 1450 square feet of heated and living floor space. This space is not to include a porch, garage or carport. In the RM Multiple-Family Residence District, all apartments shall have a minimum floor area of 950 square feet per family for a two-bedroom unit, 750 square feet for a one-bedroom unit, and 450 square feet for an efficiency unit. This space is not to include a porch, garage, or carport. In the event that a subdivision covenant requires a larger square footage in a residence than this chapter requires, then the subdivision covenant shall be followed as minimum square footage in that subdivision. As used in this section, the term "square footage" means heated and living floor space. This space does not to include a porch, garage, or carport. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-151. - Commercial and industrial buildings. 
(a)  On all arterial, major collector and minor collector streets, and on all other streets where buildings or parts thereof are visible from these arterial and collector streets, all exposed exterior wall sidings shall be composed of the following maximum and minimum percentages of materials, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, in each classification. The percentages apply to the siding on each exposed exterior wall of each building visible from the street on which such building is located. 

 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the material classifications denoted in subsection (a) of this section shall consist of the following substances: 
(1)  Type "A" material consists of face brick, granite, stone, marble, terrazzo or other ceramic tile, architecturally treated reinforced concrete slabs either fluted or with exposed aggregate, insulated window wall panels or stainless steel, porcelain treated steel, anodized or other permanently finished aluminum. 
(2)  Type "B" material consists of metal panels with a baked on enamel or acrylic finish which must be expected to retain its appearance without substantial maintenance for a period of ten years, stucco, dryvit, concrete block with either sculptured treatment or stack bond with sculptured treatment or split faced decorative block. 
(3)  Type "C" material consists of asbestos board, plain reinforced concrete slabs, concrete block with either sculptured treatment or stacked bond and raked joints. 
(4)  Type "D" material consists of corrugated steel and aluminum without finish prescribed in subsection (b)(2) of this section, plain concrete block, redwood or other decorative wood, masonite, and particle board. 
(c)  Materials not listed may be presented to the mayor and council for classification. 
(d)  Buildings having walls over 20 feet high may be given special material percentages by the mayor and council. 
(e)  Where buildings located on streets other than arterial and collector are visible from the arterial and collector streets, the mayor and council may, at their discretion, approve alternative methods of obscuring the view of such buildings from the arterial and collector streets. These methods may include, but are not limited to, fencing, planted landscape, buffer screens, berms, etc. 
(f)  The mayor and council, in their discretion, may grant a variance of up to 50 percent of the requirements of this section. In determining whether to grant such a variance, the mayor and council shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be developed in accordance with the terms of this chapter; 
(2)  The aesthetic effect of the noncompliance as it relates to the property and to the surrounding area; 
(3)  The extent to which the intent and purposes of this chapter will be preserved if the variance is granted; and 
(4)  Whether options are available which would support the granting of a conditional variance under this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 97-01, § 1(7.5), 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-152. - Home occupations. 
A business, occupation or profession carried on within a single-family residential dwelling by the resident thereof that is designated as a home occupation shall conform to the following criteria: 
(1)  The occupation carried on within the dwelling unit shall be restricted to the heated floor space of the dwelling, shall not involve the sale of those articles on the premises, and shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling by a member of the family in residence only. 
(2)  The occupation carried on within the dwelling unit shall not occupy in excess of 15 percent of the heated floor space within the structures; shall not be the primary source of income; and said occupational use shall be clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes. 
(3)  There shall be no external display of products or storage of equipment or other externally visible evidence whatsoever of the occupation, business or profession. 
(4)  There shall be no emission of smoke, dust, odor, fumes, glare, noise, vibration, electrical or electronic disturbance detectable at the lot line or beyond. 
(5)  There shall be no stock of goods or materials on the premises with the exception of literature and brochures appurtenant to the occupation, business or profession. Said literature and brochures shall remain in that part of the residence designated for home occupation purposes. 
(6)  There shall be no chemical, mechanical or electrical equipment on the premises other than that normally found in a purely domestic residence. 
(7)  Contact with customers and clients shall be made by telephone or mail. No on-street parking of business-related vehicles shall be permitted at any time. No business vehicle larger than a van, panel truck or pickup truck shall be permitted to remain on the premises other than a vehicle owned by the resident. 
(8)  Music lessons given to one pupil at a time and cultural, art or dance instruction given to as many as four pupils at one time is a home occupation. 
(9)  Child care, but not for more than five children at a time, is a home occupation. 
(10)  Beauty salons, barbershops and similar businesses are not home occupations. 
(11)  The above-listed requirements of a home occupation shall not be construed to restrict the sale of garden produce grown on the premises, provided that this exception shall not extend to allow the operation of a commercial greenhouse or nursery or the existence of stands or booths for display of said produce. 
(12)  Any business, occupation or profession, the operation of which does not meet the aforementioned requirements of a home occupation shall not be interpreted to be a home occupation despite the fact that it might attempt to operate in a single-family residence. 
Secs. 42-153—42-172. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS 

Sec. 42-173. - Height exceptions; general rule. 
Any structure hereafter erected or altered shall comply with the height limitations of the zoning district in which it is located, except as specified herein. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-174. - Structures excluded from height limitations. 
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, flag poles, monuments, cupolas, domes, ornamental towers, nor to observation towers not intended for human occupancy, water towers, transmission towers, radio or television towers or aerials. These exclusions shall not apply in the vicinity of airports. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-175. - Lot area exception; existing platting. 
(a)  A single-family dwelling may be built on any platted lot of record containing 75 percent of the required lot area for the district in which the lot is located if said lot was in separate ownership and separate control at the effective date of the resolution from which this chapter is derived, provided the front, side and rear yard requirements for the district in which the lot is located are met and provided dwellings are permitted in the district in which the lot of record is located. It is not the intention of this exception to allow building as a matter of right on a platted parcel which was never intended as a building site, but rather was numbered on a plat for identification purposes under a scheme in which multiple lots were intended to provide one building site. 
(b)  In the case of such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width one-family dwelling, the mayor and council is hereby authorized to grant a variance reducing the side yard requirements for such lot the minimum amount necessary for a reasonable dwelling, but in no case shall each of the side yards be less than five feet in width. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-176. - Group projects. 
In the construction of group projects (residential, commercial, industrial, educational, medical, religious and civic) where two or more buildings are to be placed on a plot of land not subdivided into customary streets and lots and which will not be so subdivided, the mayor and council shall determine the distances that shall be necessary to allow sufficient space between buildings and from adjoining property lines, taking into consideration appearance, play area, fire safety, traffic patterns and flow, parking and buffer zones, planted or otherwise. This provision is made to give the mayor and council flexibility in determining front, rear, and side yard requirements in such group projects. However, the maximum lot coverage by buildings in such projects shall never exceed the requirements of the zoning district in which such project is located. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 5(8.4), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-177. - Temporary buildings. 
A temporary building, sign, or buildings for use in connection with a construction project or land subdivision development shall be permitted on the land of the project during the construction period. Temporary buildings related to a subdivision development shall be removed when 80 percent of all lots are occupied by completed homes or within four years, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-178. - Fences and hedges—Corner visibility. 
Except in districts allowing the construction of buildings or structures to the property line, there shall be provided an unobstructed view across the triangle formed by joining points measured 20 feet distant along the property line from the intersection of two streets or 15 feet along both the street and alley line from the intersection of a street and an alley. Within said triangle, there shall be no sight-obscuring wall, fence or foliage higher than 30 inches above grade or in the case of trees, foliage lower than eight feet. Vertical measurement shall be made at the top of the curb on the street or alley adjacent to the nearest side of the triangle or if no curb exists, from the edge of the nearest traveled way. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-179. - Same—Exception. 
The mayor and council may approve, or may direct as a condition for granting rezoning approval, that fences or plantings of a height in excess of these regulations be placed as buffers between different uses, or between like uses upon agreement between the parties affected thereby, provided that no such approval shall have the effect of reducing corner visibility as provided for herein. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-180. - Structures to have access. 
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-181. - Parking, storage, or use of major recreational equipment. 
For purposes of these regulations, the term "major recreational equipment" includes boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. Such major recreational equipment may be parked or stored in side yards or rear yards or in a carport or enclosed buildings; provided, however, that such equipment may be parked anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed 24 hours during loading or unloading. In the case of a corner lot, no vehicles may be parked or stored in the side yard on the street side of the lot. No such equipment parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-182. - Parking and storage of certain vehicles. 
Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates or in inoperable condition shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in completely enclosed buildings. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-183—42-202. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS ADOPTED 

Sec. 42-203. - District regulations adopted. 
District regulations shall be set forth in the schedule of district regulations, hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-204. - Uses common to all residential districts. 
(a)  There exist certain uses of land which are compatible and acceptable when located in a residential district, provided that each use conforms to the use and space limits of the particular residential district. 
(b)  Unless otherwise stated, the following uses are allowed in all residential districts subject to the restrictions imposed by the district regulations: 
(1)  Permitted uses: 
a.  Single-family dwellings. 
b.  Local, state and federal government buildings. 
c.  Home occupations. 
(2)  Accessory uses: 
a.  Accessory structures, provided that an accessory structure shall be located entirely within the rear yard and shall not be closer than ten feet from any property line. Accessory structures shall not be larger than 16 by 20 feet and shall not exceed a height of 15 feet. 
b.  Carports and garages when not otherwise provided. 
c.  Subdivision recreation areas owned, operated and maintained by homeowners' associations exclusively for the use of residents and their guests. 
d.  The parking of one unoccupied travel trailer, motor coach or pleasure boat subject to provisions of this chapter. 
e.  Railroad through and spur tracks, but not sidings and/or terminal facilities. 
(3)  Conditional uses: 
a.  Churches, synagogues, chapels and other places of religious worship and instruction and church-related recreational activities when located on a major thoroughfare having minimum street classification of a collector street and having a minimum frontage of 200 feet. The minimum site area shall be three acres, and all buildings shall be located not less than 50 feet from any property line. A planted buffer strip of not less than 20 feet in width shall be provided along all side and rear property lines. 
b.  Cemeteries. 
c.  Publicly owned and operated parks and recreation areas. 
d.  Country clubs including golf courses, swimming pools, tennis clubs and neighborhood clubhouses, all of which shall be located on a site of at least one acre and open only to paid memberships. Sleeping quarters for other than one caretaker, manager, employee or security guard shall be prohibited. 
e.  Public, parochial and private schools and colleges including dormitories, convents and monasteries, when such facilities are located on the same site of the school or college. Any such facility shall front on a thoroughfare having minimum frontage of 200 feet. The minimum site area shall be three acres. 
f.  Nursery schools and kindergartens, provided that at least 150 square feet of outdoor play area and 35 square feet of indoor space is provided for each child. The outdoor play areas shall be enclosed by a decorative fence at least four feet in height. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-205. - RS-200 Single-Family Residence District. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the RS-200 Single-Family Residence District is to provide for the development of single-family residences on individual lots. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Those permitted uses common to all residential districts are permitted in the RS-200 district. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Those accessory uses common to all residential districts are accessory uses in the RS-200 district. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Those conditional uses common to all residential districts are conditional uses in the RS-200 district. 
(e)  Space limits. Space limits in the RS-200 district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 60 feet on major thoroughfare and 50 feet on minor or local street. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard: 40 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: 15 feet, but if a corner lot, the minimum setback shall be 25 feet. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(7)  Maximum ground coverage: 25 percent. 
(8)  Minimum floor area: 2,000 square feet. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 00-02, § 1(9.3), 1-10-2000; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-206. - RS-150 Single-Family Residence District. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the RS-150 Single-Family Residence District is to provide for the development of single-family residences on individual lots. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Those permitted uses common to all residential districts shall be permitted uses in the RS-150 district. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Those accessory uses common to all residential districts shall be accessory uses in the RS-150 district. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Those conditional uses common to all residential districts shall be conditional uses in the RS-150 district. 
(e)  Space limits. Space limits in the RS-150 district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 60 feet on major thoroughfare and 40 feet on minor or local street. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard: 40 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: 10 feet, but if a corner lot, the minimum setback shall be 20 feet. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(7)  Maximum ground coverage: 30 percent. 
(8)  Minimum floor area: 1,450 square feet. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-207. - RM Multiple-Family Residence District. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of the RM Multiple-Family Residence District to accommodate development of a multiple-family character and other uses of compatible nature on smaller lots where public water and sewer systems are provided. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the RM district: 
(1)  Attached single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings when located on a street having minimum classification of major collector. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Those accessory uses common to all residential districts shall be accessory uses in the RM district. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Those conditional uses common to all residential districts shall be conditional uses in the RM district. 
(e)  Space limits. Space limits in the RM district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet for two-family residences, and 4,000 square feet per dwelling unit for multiple-family residences. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 60 feet on major thoroughfare and 40 feet on minor or local street. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard: 30 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: ten feet, but if a corner lot, the minimum setback shall be 20 feet. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 35 feet 
(7)  Maximum ground coverage: 30 percent. Utility easements and floodplains are excluded from density calculations in multiple-family projects unless such lands are to be utilized for recreational purposes, provided that recreational uses are constructed prior to leasing of any dwelling units. 
(8)  Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet per dwelling unit for two-family residences, 950 square feet per dwelling unit for multiple-family residences with two bedrooms, 750 square feet for multiple-bedroom, and 450 square feet for efficiency residences in a multifamily building. 
(f)  Miscellaneous provisions. The following miscellaneous provisions apply to the RM district: 
(1)  To facilitate innovative siting of buildings in attached single-family, two-family and multiple-family developments, the entire parcel shall be considered as one lot when determining setback requirements. 
(2)  The minimum distance between attached single-family, two-family and multiple-family residential buildings shall be 20 feet. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-208. - RMH Mobile Home or Manufactured Home Park Residence District. 
(a)  Purpose. The RMH Mobile Home or Manufactured Home Park Residence District is comprised of certain lands within the city which are intended for use by mobile home or manufactured home parks, such as premises to be offered for rent to mobile home or manufactured home owners. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the RMH district: 
(1)  Mobile home or manufactured home parks having a minimum of 80 mobile home or manufactured home lots. 
(c)  Accessory uses. The following are accessory uses in the RMH district: 
(1)  One office/maintenance building incidental to use by residents of the mobile home or manufactured home park. 
(2)  No mobile home or manufactured home sales or repair facilities of any type (including automobile repair) shall be permitted. 
(d)  Conditional uses. There are no conditional uses in the RMH district. 
(e)  Space limits. Space limits in the RMH district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum site area for mobile home or manufactured home park: ten acres. 
(2)  Minimum site width for mobile home or manufactured home park: 400 feet fronting on a street having minimum classification of a major collector. 
(3)  Minimum area for mobile home or manufactured home lot: 5,000 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum width for mobile home or manufactured home lot: 60 feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard: 40 feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear yard: 30 feet. 
(7)  Minimum side yard: ten feet. 
(8)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(9)  Maximum ground coverage: 40 percent. 
(10)  Minimum floor area: 600 square feet. 
(f)  Miscellaneous provisions. The following miscellaneous provisions apply in the RMH district: 
(1)  All mobile homes or manufactured homes locating in a mobile home or manufactured home park subsequent to the date of adoption of the resolution from which this chapter is derived shall provide documentation of compliance with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act or compliance with specifications presented by the American National Standards Institute. Existing mobile homes within city mobile home or manufactured home parks not in compliance with either of these standards are nonconforming. 
(2)  No mobile home or manufactured home or accessory structure shall be located within 100 feet of the right-of-way line of any federal or state highway or within 50 feet of the right-of-way line of any other street. 
(3)  No mobile home or manufactured home or accessory structure shall be located within 40 feet of any exterior boundary of a mobile home or manufactured home park. 
(4)  Each mobile home or manufactured home space within a park shall be clearly delineated and shall abut a paved street or driveway. All streets and driveways shall be properly designed and shall have a minimum pavement width of 24 feet. 
(5)  Mobile home or manufactured home park site plans shall comply with regulatory requirements of this Code, the Clayton County Code, and to the provisions of the Clayton County Zoning Ordinance that relate to mobile home or manufactured home parks. 
(g)  Location of mobile homes or manufactured homes. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or locate a mobile home or manufactured home or house trailer, whether used as a residence or not, in the city, except on property specifically zoned for such purpose, without first obtaining permission of the mayor and council. The mayor and council may grant only temporary permission, not to exceed nine months, and only when: 
(1)  Such mobile home or manufactured home or house trailer is to be used as a construction office and is to be moved upon job completion. 
(2)  Such mobile home or manufactured home or house trailer is to be used as a temporary classroom or office for public school purposes when the use of the mobile home or manufactured home or house trailer is brought about by overcrowding of the main structure. 
(3)  Such mobile home or manufactured home or house trailer is to be used temporarily for religious purposes in conjunction with an already established church that has become overcrowded. 
(4)  Due to special circumstances, to deny permission to use such mobile home or manufactured home or house trailer would, in the discretion and opinion of the mayor and council, work a special hardship on some person. 
(h)  Mobile home or manufactured home parks. Mobile home or manufactured home parks shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  A site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the mayor and council prior to development or expansion. No mobile homes or manufactured homes shall be placed in the new area of an existing park or a new park until the final site plan is approved by the mayor and council. 
(2)  The maximum overall mobile home or manufactured home park density shall not exceed five units per gross acre. 
(3)  No additions shall be made to a mobile home or manufactured home park or mobile home or manufactured home that will violate setback requirements. All additions shall be approved by the building inspector. 
(4)  Each mobile home or manufactured home unit shall be installed on a concrete block foundation, of which the base block shall be solid and equal in size to the pier block size (a minimum of eight inches by eight inches by 16 inches). Top course of such parts of foundation shall be a solid cap block with a minimum dimension of four inches by eight inches by 16 inches. The mobile home or manufactured home unit shall be installed true and plumb. The tongue and wheels shall be removed and an approved permanent skirting shall be installed. 
(5)  All streets and driveways within the mobile home or manufactured home park shall be lighted between sunset and sunrise with electric lights emitting light at an intensity of at least 5,000 lumens, and the light poles shall be no more than 250 feet apart. 
(6)  An adequate supply of pure, potable water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and mobile home or manufactured home spaces within the park. Each mobile home or manufactured home stand shall be provided with an approved cold water connection and a tap (hydrant) constructed in accordance with the plumbing standards adopted by the city. 
(7)  The following conditions regarding sanitation shall be complied with: 
a.  The area around and underneath each mobile home or manufactured home unit shall be kept clean and free from collection of refuse, rubbish, glass bottles or other unsightly material. 
b.  Refuse control shall be provided by either of the following methods: 
1.  Centrally located trash dumpsters. One such refuse collection station shall be provided for each 20 mobile home or manufactured home spaces, or fraction thereof, conveniently located to serve tenants, not more than 200 feet from any space served, and shall be conveniently located for collection. Such station shall be constructed with a concrete floor and appropriate enclosure methods. 
2.  A centrally located trash compactor. Regardless of the method to be utilized, plans for trash disposal are subject to approval by the mayor and council before approval is granted for development. 
c.  No mobile home or manufactured home park shall be served by a privy. 
d.  Every mobile home or manufactured home park shall be equipped at all times with fire equipment in good working order and of such type, size, number and location as to satisfy applicable fire regulations of the city. No open fires or burning of leaves or other refuse shall be permitted within the boundaries of any mobile home or manufactured home park. 
(8)  Each mobile home or manufactured home in a mobile home or manufactured home park shall be provided with safety tie-downs in conformance with the city's building code requirements. 
(9)  A minimum of 15 percent of the gross acreage of the mobile home or manufactured home park shall be set aside for recreational use by residents of the mobile home or manufactured home park. Such recreational park shall be one contiguous tract or several tracts each no smaller than one-half acre and located within the mobile home or manufactured home park in such a manner as to be convenient to all its residents. The recreational park shall be located on land suitable for park development and shall contain a sufficient amount of play equipment designed for elementary school age children. 
(10)  Mobile home or manufactured home parks shall be surrounded by planted buffers at least 25 feet in depth on the sides and rear; provided, however, that no side and rear buffer is required between adjacent mobile home or manufactured home developments. 
(11)  Coin-operated laundries for the use of the residents of the mobile home or manufactured home park shall be permitted within enclosed buildings inside the park. Building structures containing such laundries may also contain vending machines and recreational rooms and activities. More intensive commercial uses than those specified herein are strictly prohibited. 
(12)  The regulations governing mobile home or manufactured home parks prescribed by the health department, as well as other city, county or state regulations, shall be complied with. 
(13)  Each mobile home or manufactured home space shall have the following: 
a.  A concrete patio at least four inches thick with minimum dimensions of 40 feet by eight feet within each trailer space; 
b.  A wooden deck having a surface area of at least 320 square feet; or 
c.  A combination of a concrete patio at least four inches thick and a wooden deck, built to building code standards provided the combined surface area (excluding steps) is at least 320 square feet. 
(Code 1972, § 4-10; Code 1994, §§ 58-1, 58-2, 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
State Law reference— Classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. VII, § I, ¶ III; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.; issuance of mobile home location permits; display of decals, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492; the Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq. 
Sec. 42-209. - OI Office/Institutional District. 
(a)  Purpose. The OI Office/Institutional District is intended to encourage development of suitable business and professional enterprise, hospitals, medical and dental facilities of a character and density deemed compatible with the primary purpose of this district. Limited retail uses normally appurtenant to office/institutional uses are also permitted. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the OI district: 
(1)  Churches and similar religious facilities. 
(2)  Clubs and lodges of a business character. 
(3)  Colleges and universities, business colleges, vocational-technical schools. 
(4)  Hospitals and clinics, but not veterinary facilities. 
(5)  Libraries, museums and art galleries. 
(6)  Medical and dental clinics and offices. 
(7)  Nursing and rest homes. 
(8)  Professional and business offices, provided that wholesale or retail merchandise is not offered for sale. 
(9)  Public and governmental buildings and offices. 
(10)  Retail uses in conjunction with, and normally appurtenant to, office/institutional uses to include florist shops, cafeterias and snack shops located within office or medical pharmacies and gift shops. 
(11)  Other uses as may be determined by the mayor and council to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses. The following are accessory uses in the OI district: Parking lots and parking structures of a commercial nature. 
(d)  Conditional uses. There are no conditional uses in the OI district. 
(e)  Space limits. Space limits in the OI district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 75 feet on major thoroughfare and 60 feet on minor or local street. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: 20 feet, but 30 feet if a corner lot. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 40 feet. 
(7)  Maximum ground coverage: 40 percent. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 6(9.8), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-210. - BN Neighborhood Business District. 
(a)  Purpose. The BN Neighborhood Business District provides a location for limited retail and service uses to satisfy the common and frequent needs of the residents of nearby residential neighborhoods. It is the intent of this district to encourage such uses to be a part of a neighborhood convenience (a continuous architectural unit) center on a street having minimum classification of a collector when proximate to the neighborhood to be served. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the BN district: 
(1)  Apparel stores. 
(2)  Banks, including drive-in banks, provided that both the teller's cage and vehicles awaiting service are located completely off the public right-of-way and provision is made to accommodate a minimum of five waiting vehicles per service window. 
(3)  Bakeries, whose entire products are sold at retail on the premises. 
(4)  Barbershops, beauty parlors and similar personal service establishments. 
(5)  Books, stationary and card shops. 
(6)  Business and professional offices. 
(7)  Convenience stores, but not including those that dispense gasoline or petroleum products. 
(8)  Drug stores and apothecary shops. 
(9)  Florist and gift shops. 
(10)  Gift and card shops. 
(11)  Grocery, fruit, vegetable, and meat markets, including supermarkets, when located as part of a continuous architectural unit (shopping center). No killing, eviscerating, skinning, plucking or smoking of food products is permitted. 
(12)  Hardware and appliance stores selling at retail. 
(13)  Jewelry stores. 
(14)  Laundromats. 
(15)  Loan offices. 
(16)  News and tobacco stores. 
(17)  Photographic processing facilities where processing is not accomplished on the premises. 
(18)  Reserved. 
(19)  Radio/television repair, including the sale of supplies and equipment. 
(20)  Shoe repair shops. 
(21)  Shopping centers. 
(22)  Tailors and clothing shops. 
(23)  Other retail and service uses as may be determined by the mayor and council to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses. There are no accessory uses in the BN district. 
(d)  Conditional uses. There are no conditional uses in the BN district. 
(e)  Space limits. Space limits in the BN district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: None. 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 75 feet on major thoroughfare and 60 feet on minor or local street. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: 20 feet, but 30 feet if a corner lot. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(7)  Maximum ground coverage: 40 percent. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 7(9.9), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2017-2, § 1, 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 42-211. - BG General Business District. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the BG General Business District is to provide for a wide range of retail, service and wholesale establishments requiring a location accessible to large segments of the population. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the BG district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the BN district. 
(2)  Automobile retail establishments. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Bicycle sales and repair shops. 
(5)  Bowling alleys. 
(6)  Bus terminals. 
(7)  Business and commercial schools. 
(7.1)  Convenience stores. 
(8)  Dancing schools including group instruction. 
(9)  Drive-in configurations of any business otherwise permitted in this district, provided that any such establishment shall provide adequate off-street space for the maneuvering and storage of patrons' vehicles, and further provided that there be a sturdy, close woven or solid fence suitable for the retaining of any discarded paper or other material on all sides of the parking area except the front, and provided no music or loud speaker system shall be installed or operated that can be heard at neighboring residential, motel or motor hotel properties, and providing all lighting shall be directed and shielded so as to light only the property of such establishment. 
(10)  Dry cleaners and laundries employing not over five persons exclusive of drivers. 
(11)  Feed and seed stores. 
(12)  Funeral homes. 
(13)  Furniture and antique stores including used furnishings. 
(14)  Gasoline service stations. 
(15)  Greenhouses and nurseries. 
(16)  Professional type assembly and repair of such items as eyeglasses, custom jewelry, prosthetic devices and other similar services and manufacture. 
(17)  Music stores. 
(18)  Reserved. 
(19)  Painting and decorating stores. 
(20)  Parking lots and structures. 
(21)  Reserved. 
(22)  Pet shops. 
(23)  Printing, job, when mechanical operation is not visible from a street, and employing not more than four persons. 
(24)  Radio and television stations, except transmission towers over 35 feet high. 
(25)  Restaurants. 
(26)  Shopping centers. 
(27)  Stationery and office machines sales and service. 
(28)  Theaters (indoor). 
(29)  Upholstery shops. 
(30)  Reserved. 
(31)  Warehouses with no outdoor storage. 
(32)  Wholesale stores, but not establishments operated primarily as a warehouse. A wholesale store shall not be distinguished from a warehouse if there is at least one square foot or more of office, sales and display space for each square foot of warehousing space, and the building is so arranged as to encourage walk-in trade. 
(33)  Other uses as may be determined by the mayor and council to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the BG district are those determined by the mayor and council to be customarily appurtenant to those uses permitted in this district. 
(d)  Conditional uses. The following shall be conditional uses in the BG district: 
(1)  Ambulance service. 
(2)  Auction gallery. 
(3)  Animal hospital or clinic, provided there are no outside runs or pens. 
(4)  Auto laundry. 
(5)  Building and lumber supply establishments. 
(6)  Campgrounds for travel trailer or motor coaches. 
(7)  Churches and their customary related uses. 
(8)  Clubs and lodges. 
(9)  Mortuaries and crematoriums. 
(10)  Outdoor amusement enterprises, including pony riding, miniature golf, carnivals and bazaars. 
(11)  Outdoor theatres. 
(12)  Trade shops. 
(13)  Mini-warehouses. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the BG district: 
(1)  Pawn shops, as defined in section 42-124. 
(f)  Space limits. Space limits in the BG district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: None. 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 75 feet on major thoroughfare and 60 feet on minor or local street. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard: five feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: five feet but 30 feet if a corner lot. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 40 feet. 
(7)  Maximum ground coverage: 80 percent. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 9(9.10), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2015-3, § 2, 10-12-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, §§ 3, 4, 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 42-212. - M Manufacturing District. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the M Manufacturing District is to provide for heavy commercial and light industrial uses, all of which shall be nuisance free and not generators of hazardous wastes. It is intended that light manufacturing uses shall be located on either arterial or major collector streets or within industrial parks having access to such thoroughfares. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the M district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the BG district. 
(2)  Any commercial or industrial use which involves manufacturing, processing or assembly operations or the storage and sale of heavy materials, products or equipment; but not including uses which may cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard or other objectionable conditions to nearby areas. 
(3)  Airports and landing areas. 
(4)  Automobile brokers. 
(4a)  Automobile dealers. 
(4b)  Automobile repair garages. 
(4c)  Automobile sales establishments. 
(4d)  Automobile salvage shops. 
(4e)  Automobile service stations. 
(4f)  Used automobile sales establishments. 
(5)  Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing prepared foods and miscellaneous food products. 
(6)  Bottling plants. 
(7)  Cabinet shops. 
(8)  Clinics, cafeterias, employee credit unions and recreational facilities for employees only. 
(9)  Cold storage, ice plants and freezer lockers. 
(10)  Dairy plants and ice cream manufacturing. 
(11)  Distribution of products and merchandise. 
(12)  Dry cleaning and laundering establishments. 
(13)  Education and training facilities. 
(14)  Electrical appliances and equipment, sales and repairs. 
(15)  Electronic manufacturing and assembly plants. 
(16)  Fabricating shops such as woodworking, upholstery and sheet metal shops. 
(17)  Flea markets. 
(18)  Garages, repair shops and machine shops. 
(19)  Offices and administrative facilities. 
(19a)  Pawn shops. 
(20)  Plumbing shops and other contractors, but excluding open storage. 
(21)  Printing, publishing and reproducing establishments. 
(22)  Sign painting and fabricating shops. 
(22a)  Tattoo parlors. 
(23)  Textile manufacturing plants. 
(24)  Tire recapping and retreading shops. 
(25)  Truck and bus terminals. 
(26)  Wholesaling or warehousing. 
(27)  Other uses as may be determined by the mayor and council to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the M district shall be those determined by the mayor and council to be customarily appurtenant to those uses permitted in this district. 
(d)  Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the M district: Carnival rides for periods not to exceed 30 days. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the M district: 
(1)  Junk or salvage yards, as defined in section 42-124. 
(f)  Space limits. Space limits in the M district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 75 feet on major thoroughfare and 60 feet on minor or local street. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: 20 feet, but 30 feet if a corner lot. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 60 feet. 
(7)  Maximum ground coverage: 60 percent. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 8(9.11), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 06-03, § 1(9.11), 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 2015-3, § 4, 10-12-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, §§ 5—7, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-213. - SCR Shopping Center Reuse District. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the SCR Shopping Center Reuse District is to allow the repurposing of an existing development of land to provide for a wide range of retail, service and wholesale establishments. It is the intent of the mayor and council that this district be utilized by owners and developers of existing developments, currently configured for a market that no longer exists, so as to allow them to subdivide the property into ownership interests that can be bought and sold on the open market. The anticipated use of this district shall allow the reuse of economically distressed strip malls and shopping centers, with significant unused parking areas, to be subdivided into smaller fee simple interests that can be used by smaller retailers and other businesses. While there are no front or side yard setbacks, the fundamental requirement of this district is that all lots must have frontage on a public street, which street shall, in all respects, meet the minimum requirements of street construction for streets to be dedicated to the city. In zoning properties to this use, the mayor and council should be expected to treat each individual proposal as unique, and may attach additional conditions related to the property including, but not limited to, landscaping, use of common areas, parking requirements, setbacks, permitted uses, and other such common zoning requirements, so as to allow maximum flexibility to fashion a result which balances the interests of the owner/developer with those of the public. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the G-1 district shall be permitted in the SCR district. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the SCR district shall be those determined by the zoning administrator to be customarily appurtenant to those uses permitted in the SCR district. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Any conditional use permitted in the G-1 district shall be permitted in the SCR district. 
(e)  Space limits. The following limits apply only to existing developments in the SCR district: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: None. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 20 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard: none. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: none. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(7)  Maximum ground coverage: none. 
(f)  Miscellaneous provisions. The following miscellaneous provisions apply in the SCR district: 
(1)  All lots must have the minimum lot width on a public street, which street meets minimum city standards. This section may not be utilized for new vertical development not existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, there shall be no minimum parking requirements. Prior to the subdivision of any existing lot pursuant to this section, the owner thereof shall submit to the city attorney sufficient proof that reciprocal easements and reciprocal covenants will be attached to all parking and drive areas so as to insure the adequacy of parking and of common area maintenance. No building may be enlarged without the consent of the mayor and council. 
(2)  For purposes of compliance with the sign provisions of article XVII of this chapter, all parcels contiguous to property any other property within this zoning classification shall be treated as one planned center. 
(Ord. No. 2014-2, § 1(9.12), 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 42-214. - G-1 Gateway Village Development District. 
(a)  Background and map. The City of Lake City, Georgia, City of Morrow, Georgia, and Clayton College and State University (CCSU) have established a collaborative partnership for the purpose of creating a "Gateway Village Master Plan." The plan will encourage and shape private development proposals within the Gateway Village Development District. The Gateway Village Development District is a zoning tool that will be used to implement the Gateway Village Master Plan. The boundaries are shown on the official zoning map of the City of Lake City, Georgia. The official zoning map identifying the Gateway Village Development District is provided in Appendix M-1, and is hereby made a part of the official zoning map of the City of Lake City, Georgia, pursuant to this chapter. While the master plan is collaborative with the City of Morrow and CCSU, the failure of those two entities to enact similar rules and regulations will not invalidate this legislation within the city limits of the City of Lake City, Georgia. 
(b)  Purpose. The G-1 Gateway Village Development District is established as part of a collaborative partnership between the City of Lake City, Georgia, City of Morrow, Georgia, and Clayton College and State University (CCSU) for the purpose of establishing architectural and site design standards for the regulation of new development and construction as well as the creation of a Gateway Village Master Plan. The plan fosters and guides private development proposals within the Gateway Village District. The G-1 district is a zoning classification that will be used to implement the Gateway Village Master Plan. The plan is adopted and incorporated as if fully set out herein as Appendix M-2. However, if the plan in any way conflicts with the provisions of this section, this section shall prevail. 
(c)  Definitions. Terms appearing in this section are defined as follows. Terms not defined herein shall be assigned the definitions contained in this chapter, as applied to properties found within the jurisdiction of the city, or if not so defined, shall be assigned the meanings found in standard English dictionaries. If any conflict occurs between a definition found in the City of Morrow, Georgia, ordinances and those of the City of Lake City, Georgia, the definitions found in the City of Lake City ordinances shall prevail for applications on properties located in the City of Lake City, Georgia. Definitions found in the ordinances of the City of Morrow, Georgia, will govern any conflicting definitions for applications on properties located in the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
Addition means a non-original element placed onto an existing building, site or structure. 
Alteration means any act or process which changes the exterior, architectural appearance of a building. 
Appropriate means suitable to or compatible with what exist in the surrounding context or setting. 
Build-to line means the mark that represents the distance a structure must be set back from the boundary line of a lot, measured at the foundation of the structure. 
Building type. A definition based on floor plan, height and roof shape, related to architectural style. 
Building materials means substances used in construction of a building, specifically the exterior elements, which influence character, appearance and durability. 
Character means those individual qualities of buildings, sites and districts that differentiate and distinguish them from other buildings, sites and districts. 
Compatible means of such character as to not detract from surrounding elements, buildings, sites or structures; consistent and appropriate with the surrounding context and setting. 
Component means an individual part of a building, structure, site or district. 
Contemporary means a product of the current period; modern. 
Context means the setting in which a historic element or building exists. 
Design review commission means a body consisting of five members who review all applications for development in the G-1 Gateway Village Development District, suggest any necessary plan changes which are consistent with this section, and offer non-binding recommendations of approval or denial of applications to the mayor and council of the governing authority in which the development applied for is located. 
Directional emphasis means the proportion and orientation of a building, characterized as having either a vertical or horizontal emphasis or the orientation of the building facade, either toward the street or other axis. Directional emphasis is determined by the size and placement of elements and openings on a building's facade as well as overall shape. 
Dormitories means a building designed with sleeping chambers for 20 or more beds affiliated with a preparatory or high school, or an institution of higher learning. 
Element means an individual defining feature of a building, structure, site or district. 
Facade means the front of a building; height to width ratios and proportional consistency with structures of influence are typical characteristics to be considered. 
Fenestration means the arrangement, size, proportion and design of windows and doors on a building facade. 
Gateway Village Development District means a geographic area zoned in such a manner as to encourage and provide standards for private building proposals which is included in the Official Zoning Map of the City of Lake City, Georgia, designated Appendix M-l and fully incorporated as if set out in its entirety herein. 
Ground coverage means the portion of a lot occupied by the building footprint and all impervious surfaces with the sole exception of sidewalks. 
Massing means the ratio of solid wall space to window and door openings on a building footprint and all impervious surfaces with the sole exception of sidewalks. 
New construction means construction of a new element, building or structure. 
Node means a geographic area of concentrated traffic usually commercial in nature and often found at the intersection of two transportation routes. 
Orientation means direction on a lot followed by the building's dominant lines (i.e., front-to-back or side-to-side). 
Pedestrian priority zone means a method to enhance geographic areas so that the area works as a comfortable, functional environment for people on foot as well as in cars or other motorized transportation devices. 
Placement means building siting or positioning on a lot, as determined by its setbacks. The term "placement" also refers to the positioning of individual elements on a building. 
Proportion means the dimensional relationships of a building facade, particularly the height and width dimensions of window and door openings. 
Rhythm means the recurrence of lines, shapes, forms and colors on a building. The term "rhythm" may refer to openings on a building or streetscape elements and buildings themselves which establish a rhythmic pattern. 
Scale means the size, both height and width, of a building or structure. Scale is influenced by patterns, shapes and sizes of materials, components and openings. Two forms of scale are used to characterize the built environment: the way in which these elements relate to human size or human scale, and the way buildings relate to one another in terms of scale within a particular setting. 
Setting means the immediate, physical environment of a building, structure, site or district. 
Shape means surfaces and edges of building and individual elements. 
Site means a parcel, lot or tract of land on which an event occurred or a building or structure was or is located. 
Siting means orientation and placement of a building on a parcel or lot. 
Streetscape means all physical elements that may be viewed along a street frontage. 
Structures of influence means those structures comprising the setting in which new construction is proposed. 
Style means the visual appearance of a building, structure, site or district depicting the influence of shape, materials, detailing or other features associated with a particular architecture. 
Substantially characteristic means that the material in question, such as brickwork, stonework, or roofing material, reflects visual qualities that are sufficiently characteristic of those found in the chosen architectural style to allow a trained observer to confirm that the new construction is consistent with said architectural style. 
Substantially proportional means that the building element in question, such as roof pitch, scale, mass, or height, is sufficiently proportional to that found in the chosen architectural style to allow a trained observer to identify the new construction as originating from said architectural style. 
Transit oriented development means urban design based on a regional transportation hub, usually rail, which allows corporate suburban offices and mixed communities, including housing and retail structures, accessible by walking. 
Volume means the combination of three dimensions of a building or individual element, that is, the length, width and height. Volume is a primary factor in assessing building mass. 
(d)  Geographical boundaries. The geographical boundaries of the G-1 Gateway Village Development District are provided in Appendix M-l, and all property shown thereon as lying and being within the district on said map is hereby rezoned to G-1 Gateway Village Development District. This is not an overlay district, but instead is to be understood as a separate zoning district as set out herein. The map attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived as Appendix M-1 shall be adopted and made a part of the official zoning map of the Code. Further, the Official Zoning Map of the City of Lake City, Georgia, is also adopted as set forth herein as Appendix M-1. All buildings, structures, improvements, and uses which exist on this date and which do not conform to the requirements of this section are hereby declared to be nonconforming and may not be expanded, improved, modified or changed in any fashion except as to become conforming to this section. 
(e)  Allowable uses. The following uses are allowed as either permitted uses, accessory uses or conditional uses. 
(1)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the G-1 Gateway Village Development District: 
a.  Office, corporate center and institutional uses. Office, corporate center and institutional uses, including the following: 
1.  University or corporate research and development facilities. 
2.  Offices. 
3.  Colleges, universities, business colleges, and vocational-technical schools. 
4.  Hospitals and medical clinics, not including veterinarian facilities. 
5.  Libraries, museums and art galleries. 
6.  Retail and personal service uses normally appurtenant to office and institutional uses including cafeterias and snack shops, florists, gift shops and pharmacies. 
7.  Business incubators. 
8.  Local, state and federal government buildings. 
9.  Places of worship, provided that the use is conducted on a lot with a minimum area of three acres. 
10.  Passenger rail terminals. 
b.  Hotels. Hotels, but not motels, without cooking facilities located in rooms designed or used for guest occupancy. Executive conference and classroom facilities appurtenant to hotels are also permitted. 
c.  Commercial uses. Retail uses and facilities intended primarily to provide retail goods and food services, including the following: 
1.  Apparel stores. 
2.  Banks. 
3.  Bakeries, provided that all goods are sold at retail on the premises. 
4.  Barbershops, beauty shops and similar personal service establishments. 
5.  Books, stationery and card shops. 
6.  Dry cleaners, provided that no more than five persons are employed, excluding drivers. 
7.  Grocery stores, fruit, vegetable and meat markets, including supermarkets, when part of a continuous building in a shopping center. Slaughtering, eviscerating, skinning of animals or smoking of food products is prohibited. 
8.  Indoor theaters. 
9.  News stands and tobacco stores. 
10.  Photographic studios. 
11.  Shopping centers. 
12.  Tailors and clothing shops. 
13.  Music stores. 
14.  Restaurants, excluding restaurants which include a drive-in or drive-through component. 
d.  Residential uses. 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings, subject to minimum development standards of the RS-150 Single Family Residence District. 
2.  Single-family attached dwellings, subject to minimum development standards of the RS-150 Single-Family Residence District. 
3.  Multifamily dwellings, subject to development standards of the RM Multiple-Family Residence District. 
4.  Dormitories, used to house persons actually attending a state or private university or college. 
e.  Mixed uses. A combination of the above uses shall be permitted, either within a single development tract or a single structure. Examples of such appropriate mixed uses are the following: 
1.  Residential uses on the upper floors or the building containing office, commercial, retail or institutional uses on the main floor. 
2.  Office or institutional uses in combination with commercial or retail establishments. 
3.  Parking decks or garages with retail uses. 
(2)  Accessory uses and structures. The following uses shall be accessory uses in the G-1 Gateway Village Development District: 
a.  Buildings and structures accessory to permitted residential uses as provided in section 42-204. 
b.  Home occupations. 
c.  Parking lots and parking structures of a commercial nature accessory to a retail, office or institutional use. 
d.  The following uses accessory to dormitories: 
1.  Group dining facilities serving dormitory residents; 
2.  Laundry facilities serving dormitory residents; 
3.  Meeting facilities serving dormitory residents; 
4.  Related sports or recreation facilities, limited to a size appropriate to the number of occupants in the dormitories; and/or 
5.  Sleeping quarters for on-premises resident managers, caretakers or security guards. 
(3)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be conditional uses in the G-1 Gateway Village Development District: 
a.  All conditional uses as provided in section 42-204. 
b.  Day care centers. 
c.  Commercial parking garages or lots, provided that no such use shall be located on property fronting on Highway 54, and provided, further, that all conditions regulating parking structures under section 42-147. 
(f)  Space limitations and architectural design guidelines. The following standards shall control development within the G-1 Gateway Village Development District: 
(1)  Building appearance. 
a.  Buildings or other improvements shall be compatible with the orientation, directional emphasis, shape, volume, massing, proportion, rhythm, scale and materials of the context, setting and streetscape of the site. Further, the buildings and structures proposed within Gateway Village shall comply with design guidelines included in the "Gateway Village Plan" included as part of the ordinance from which this section is derived and adopted as Appendix M-2. 
b.  It is the intent of this section to preclude the conversion of existing single-family structures to other, nonresidential uses, without compliance with the architectural standards and other regulations imposed in this chapter. It is believed that few, if any, existing single-family structures will qualify for any use other than single-family residential. 
(2)  Building exterior. All exterior elevations shall be brick, concrete stucco, stone, wood, glass in combination with metal or similar, durable architectural materials. Vinyl siding, synthetic stucco and other materials found to be other than durable products are specifically prohibited. The side and rear building elevations shall be substantially consistent with the front building elevation. 
(3)  Design style. All new and remodeled buildings constructed in the G-1 district shall adhere to a single, consistent architectural theme, as approved by the design review commission. 
(4)  Mechanical systems and equipment. Placement of air conditioning units and satellite dishes shall be accomplished without detracting from the architectural integrity of the building or site. Generally, such equipment must be installed to the rear of the building or on the side, provided the view is partially obstructed. Rooftop equipment shall be completely screened from view from the public right-of-way as well as adjoining properties. 
(5)  Building siting and access. Siting and access provisions concerning the principal building on a lot shall conform to the concept of "pedestrian priority zones" which shall be defined for the purposes of this chapter as a method to enhance geographic areas so that they function as a comfortable, practical environment for pedestrians and motorists. Developments must consider designs for vehicular and pedestrian traffic moving in and around individual, retail and office properties that facilitate creation of destination environments for shoppers and employees. 
a.  Buildings entrances shall face directly onto a public sidewalk unless site features prohibit such building configuration. All principal entries to building shall provide direct pedestrian access to the sidewalk within a public right-of-way or along a dedicated street. All building facades shall conform to the build-to line denoted in the "Gateway Village Plan" document. 
b.  Site access for vehicles shall be configured such that pedestrians shall be able to walk on sidewalks and are not required to traverse parking areas or vehicular drives to access the building. 
c.  All retail establishment entrances within the G-1 district shall front directly on the sidewalk unless site features prohibit such building configuration. 
d.  All buildings shall provide direct pedestrian access from on-site parking areas to the building. 
e.  Parking decks, attached parking structures, garages and other parking facilities shall be designed so that users will be able to travel along a sidewalk or pedestrian walkway from the parking area to the traveler's destination. Travelers will be able to enter all buildings from public sidewalks. 
(6)  Restrictive covenants. While restrictive covenants are private contractual agreements and are not enforceable by the city, use of such covenants is encouraged. 
(7)  Dimensional requirements. Unless otherwise provided below, the standards of the applicable zoning district shall apply to all construction in the G-1 Gateway Village Development District: 
a.  All buffer requirements of article X of this chapter. 
b.  Build-to lines are designated in the "Gateway Village Plan" document, adopted as Appendix M-2. 
c.  No minimum rear or side yard shall apply to commercial development in Gateway Village. 
d.  Multifamily dwellings and dormitories shall be limited to a maximum of 20 stories in height. 
(g)  Parking standards. The parking standards of the G-1 Gateway Village Development District are designed to minimize the role of the automobile within the district as well as create opportunities for shared parking and reduction in paved area. All other parking requirements of this chapter shall apply, with the exception of the following provisions: 
(1)  A minimum of one parking space for every 300 square feet of commercial floor area available to the public shall be provided on all retail commercial developments within Gateway Village. 
(2)  Parking located between the front of any commercial building and the public right-of-way in the G-1 district shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the required parking. Such parking shall not be located in front of the building entrance or in a manner that blocks a direct pedestrian path from the building to the public right-of-way. Gasoline service stations, convenience stores, parking lots and parking garages which constitute nonconforming uses are exempt from this entire subsection. 
(3)  Parking requirements for developments which are located within 400 feet of a municipal or private parking area may be reduced by one-half, provided sidewalks link such parking areas directly to the main entrances of all buildings on the site. 
(4)  All parking facilities in the G-1 district shall be landscaped in conformance with design guidelines, and all portions of such parking facilities bordering the public right-of-way shall be screened with an appropriate screening device as specified in the design guidelines, except those at gasoline service stations, convenience stores, car dealers, parking lots and parking garages that constitute nonconforming uses. 
(5)  All paved surfaces shall be considered as parking areas whether or not identified by striping. Parking areas in excess of ten percent of the minimum requirement shall be subject to approval by the design review commission. 
(6)  Gasoline service stations, convenience stores, car dealers and parking lots or parking garages that are in existence at the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall operate as nonconforming uses in G-1 district and are specifically exempted from subsections (g)(2) and (4) of this section. 
(7)  Insofar as possible, all required parking for Gateway Village shall be located on the interior of parcels in a courtyard configuration, limiting parking area frontage on public rights-of-way and reducing the visibility of those areas, and apparent size from public rights-of-way. 
(h)  Utilities. 
(1)  All electrical, cable, telephone and other such services shall be installed underground. 
(2)  All transformers and other facilities and equipment, including telecommunications equipment shall either be screened through the use of architectural materials compatible with the architectural materials present on the site or, alternatively, through landscape screening. Such screening shall be adequate to completely screen such facilities from the view of the public traveling on city rights-of-way. 
(i)  Site lighting. 
(1)  All site lighting shall be directed onto the site and in no case shall such lighting project into the public right-of-way. Site lighting shall also be directed downward with the exception of sign, building, landscape elements or other site features designed to be accented through lighting in order to promote "dark sky" objectives. 
(2)  Lighting in parking areas shall provide area lighting sufficient to achieve a minimum illumination of 2.4 footcandles of light as measured at grade level and recommended in the IESNA Lighting Handbook. 
(3)  All building entrances, walks and vehicular access shall be lit. 
(4)  The following lighting guidelines shall apply. Variances from these guidelines shall be subject to approval by the design review commission: 
a.  Walk and access lighting: 12-volt halogen, 20 to 50 watts. 
b.  Architectural and landscape lighting: 120-volt halogen, 50 to 100 watts. 
(j)  Commercial signs. All signs shall be controlled by the provisions of the Code except as provided below: 
(1)  Developments shall be limited to one freestanding monument sign per public street frontage. Individual buildings or business store fronts signs (wall signs) shall also be limited to one sign per street frontage. 
(2)  All signs in the G-1 district, not actually placed on walls, shall be monument-style signs, and shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(3)  Sign illumination, where direct or indirect, shall not exceed 75 footcandles; provided, however, that signs with dark surfaces may require lighting in excess of 75 footcandles. The design review commission may approve such increases upon demonstration that in the absence of excess lighting the sign cannot be properly viewed. In no case shall the permitted candle power exceed 100 footcandles. 
(k)  Transportation networks. 
(1)  General organization. The street system shown in the plan is organized on the scale of the traditional city block (generally, about 400 feet by 400 feet) in order to permit efficient automobile circulation and create a viable pedestrian environment. The streets are grouped into three categories: primary routes, secondary routes and neighborhood streets. Jonesboro Road (U.S. Highway 54) is the only primary route in the village area. Secondary routes are Main Street (presently CCSU Avenue) Huie/Harper Road, North Lee Street, Kenyon Road and Forest Parkway. Neighborhood streets shall be used to divide the blocks into smaller, more accessible areas. 
(2)  Redundant modes and routes. Redundant modes of transportation and routes may be designed to provide travelers with diverse choices for movement throughout the district. 
(3)  Pedestrian priority. Village nodes will be located at the crossing of major thoroughfares. These nodes will be designed to provide safe, convenient pedestrian access. Pedestrian travel shall be emphasized over vehicular travel in the nodes. The pedestrian system should be: 
a.  Spacious. Sidewalk widths should be adequate for the planned volume of pedestrians, and street furnishings and utility structures may not be placed so as to interfere with movement. Sidewalk widths shall be a minimum of five feet wide in residential areas and eight feet wide in commercial areas. 
b.  Comprehensive. The sidewalks shall link travelers to all points in the village and to destinations nearby (CCSU, the Reynolds Nature Preserve, and associated bikeways). 
c.  Buffered. Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be designed so that they are buffered from traffic and clear of obstructions. 
d.  Lighted. Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be lit so that they may be safely used during evening and night hours. 
(4)  Traffic calming. Motorists will be encouraged to travel through the village at moderate velocities and to negotiate intersections more carefully than they normally do in suburban situations by use of traffic calming devices such as landscaped medians and flanking curb trees and shrubbery. 
(5)  Parking. Designated parking on road shoulders shall be used where possible to reduce the amount of pavement needed. Curbside parking will be designed to create traffic buffers particularly along the front facades of businesses. 
(l)  Application and review procedures. 
(1)  Application procedures. 
a.  All applicants for new development, occupational tax receipt, and/or construction permits which expand the use or building footprint shall apply for site plan approval through the administrative officer or his designee. Application forms available from the city must be submitted, together with a scaled site plan depicting the proposed improvements. 
b.  Applications shall be filed with the administrative officer or his designee 30 days prior to the meeting of the design review commission as reflected on the calendar provided with all application forms. No construction or site work of any kind shall be permitted prior to approval of plans and specifications by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Application requirements. Applications for development under this section shall be accompanied by a scaled drawing of not greater than one inch equals 50 feet depicting: 
a.  Lot size and dimension; 
b.  Proposed project, including building footprint, height, materials and front, rear and side building elevations; 
c.  Pedestrian circulation; 
d.  Vehicular access and parking facilities; 
e.  Landscaping; 
f.  Site lighting; 
g.  Furnishings; 
h.  Proposed signs; 
i.  Dumpsters; and 
j.  Adjoining uses. 
Information concerning the latter shall indicate the architectural relationship of the proposed project or improvement to the surrounding context and shall be in the form of sketches or photographs. 
(3)  Review procedures. 
a.  All applications regulated under this section shall be reviewed by the design review commission. Such review shall ensure proposal consistency with the purposes of this section and conformance to the standards contained herein. Site plan review by the design review commission shall precede any action by the mayor and council. The findings and recommendations of the design review commission shall be provided to the mayor and council, which may incorporate such findings and recommendations in their consideration of the proposal. The design review commission shall be empowered to issue non-binding approvals or denials of site development, construction or alteration matters. All applications require final action by the mayor and council. 
b.  Applications proposing construction or site work which, in the opinion of a majority of the design review commission members, does not comply with the standards of this section shall be presented to the mayor and council as nonconforming, and the design review commission shall recommend denial to the mayor and council of the appropriate government. 
c.  Applications which may be approved by the mayor and council shall be forwarded to the administrative officer/building official, and necessary permits issued. Should the applicant be unable or unwilling to comply with the recommended changes suggested to reach compliance with this section, no permits shall be issued. All recommended changes shall comply with the goals and standards set out herein. 
d.  The findings of the design review commission shall comprise only non-binding recommendations to the mayor and council, and the governing body shall be empowered to approve or deny the application based on those recommendations and application of this section. 
(m)  Creation of a design review commission. 
(1)  A design review commission is hereby created consisting of five members, two of which are appointed by the City of Lake City and City of Morrow, and one of which is appointed by Clayton College and State University (CCSU). Members appointed by the City of Lake City, unless employed by the City of Lake City, must be residents of the City of Lake City. No more than two-thirds of the commission shall be residents of either city. Members shall serve a term of two years and shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson. These offices shall not be filled by residents of the same city. If the City of Morrow or CCSU fail to appoint members to the committee, the City of Lake City may appoint any unoccupied seat to complete the commission. Members of the design review commission shall receive training as prescribed by the three appointing entities. 
(2)  The design review commission shall publish a monthly calendar of meetings and application submittal dates and shall assemble as necessary to review plans and otherwise fulfill their duties as provided herein. 
(n)  Procedure. Decisions of the design review commission are non-binding and shall be presented to the mayor and council for final decision on matters within the geographical boundaries of the City of Lake City. Special exceptions shall be heard by the mayor and council of the City of Lake City for special exceptions requested in any geographic area located within the City of Lake City, Georgia. All judgments made by bodies regulated under this section shall be bound by the guidelines contained and incorporated herein, and by the standards of review contained or incorporated into this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 00-01, §§ 6(514.1)—(514.13), 7, 1-10-2000; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-215—42-236. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-237. - Flood hazard district. 
(a)  Within the city there exists land which is subject to periodic flooding and inundation. Development of these lands is regulated by provisions contained in the floodplain ordinance which is made a part of this chapter by reference. 
(b)  The flood hazard boundary maps (FHBM) and the flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) are also made part of this chapter by reference and shall be used to determine the location and extent of floodprone areas. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-238—42-267. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LANDSCAPING OF COMMERCIAL AND PROFESSIONAL BUILDING LOTS 

Sec. 42-268. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial and professional buildings means all buildings that are intended or used for any business, occupation, profession, trade or any other commercial or industrial enterprise. This definition shall not apply to buildings used primarily for permanent residential purposes. 
(Code 1994, § 102-26) 
Sec. 42-269. - Enforcement. 
This division shall be mandatory for all commercial and professional buildings constructed in the city after April 12, 1988. Failure to provide and adhere to the commercial or professional building landscaping requirements shall be grounds for denial of request for building permit for such buildings, the issuance of a stop work order on proposed developments or the revocation of a certificate of occupancy issued, all in the discretion of the code enforcement officer. 
(Code 1994, § 102-27; Ord. of 4-12-1988, § 4.12.6) 
Sec. 42-270. - Landscape plan required. 
Commercial and professional buildings shall be required to provide a landscaping plan to be submitted with the application for a building permit for review and approval by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1994, § 102-28; Ord. of 4-12-1988, § 4.12.1) 
Sec. 42-271. - Trees. 
The landscape plan required in section 42-270 shall provide for a minimum of one tree with a minimum caliper diameter of two inches per 1,500 square feet of floor space or, in the alternative, two trees with a minimum of one-inch caliper diameter per 1,500 square feet of floor space of the building for which application for a building permit has been made. 
(Code 1994, § 102-29; Ord. of 4-12-1988, § 4.12.2) 
Sec. 42-272. - Shrubbery. 
The landscaping plan required in section 42-270 shall provide for the following for every commercial or professional building: 
(1)  One bush per three feet of building frontage for a building with a setback line of 50 feet or less. 
(2)  A minimum of two bushes per three feet of building frontage for a building with a setback line of 50 to 99 feet. 
(3)  A minimum of three bushes per three feet of building frontage for a building with a setback line of 100 to 199 feet. 
(4)  A minimum of five bushes per three feet of building frontage for a building with a setback line of 200 feet or more. 
(Code 1994, § 102-30; Ord. of 4-12-1988, § 4.12.3) 
Sec. 42-273. - Ground cover. 
(a)  The landscape plan required in section 42-270 shall provide that an area equal to or greater than ten percent of the gross floor space of the proposed building shall be dedicated to grass or ground cover. Landscaped areas wherein trees or shrubs have been planted may be included in the computation of the minimum area to be planted in grass or ground cover. 
(b)  All areas required to be landscaped shall be visible from the street. There is no prescribed design or formation of the landscape area; however, the area should be consistent with the architectural scheme of the building project and complement the plan for sediment and erosion control of the property. 
(Code 1994, § 102-31; Ord. of 4-12-1988, § 4.12.4) 
Sec. 42-274. - Specifically approved trees, shrubs and covers. 
The following trees, shrubbery and ground covers are specifically approved for this division; however, developers may, with permission of the mayor and council, substitute other varieties as appropriate. 
(1)  Trees. 
a.  Oak. 
b.  Red maple. 
c.  Sugar maple. 
d.  Willow. 
e.  Aristocrat pear. 
f.  Magnolia. 
g.  Dogwood. 
h.  Bradford pear. 
(2)  Shrubbery. 
a.  Juniper. 
b.  Barberry. 
c.  Ottoluyken. 
d.  Azalea. 
e.  Yaupon. 
f.  Eleagnus. 
g.  Nandina. 
h.  Kuanzancherry. 
i.  Yoshino cherry. 
j.  Crape myrtle. 
k.  Holly. 
l.  Ligustrum. 
m.  Privet. 
n.  Hydrangea. 
(3)  Ground covers. 
a.  Ivy. 
b.  Liriopee. 
c.  Fern. 
d.  Cotoneaster. 
e.  Pachysandra. 
f.  Vinca. 
g.  Ajuga. 
h.  Euongmus. 
i.  Juniper. 
j.  Thrift. 
(Code 1994, § 102-32; Ord. of 4-12-1988, § 4.12.5) 
Secs. 42-275—42-296. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BUFFER AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 42-297. - Buffer required. 
It is recognized that the location of commercial or industrial land uses directly adjacent to single-family, two-family or multiple-family residential uses can create an incompatible situation. Additionally, the location of two-family, multiple-family residential land uses or mobile homes or manufactured homes directly adjacent to single-family residential land uses can be an incompatible situation. Accordingly, in commercial and industrial districts, when a principal structure is expanded or modified, a planted screening buffer shall be provided along all side and rear property lines contiguous with a residential district. In two-family, multiple-family residential or mobile home or manufactured home districts, when a new principal structure is built, or an existing principal structure is expanded or modified, a planted screening buffer shall be provided along all side and rear property lines contiguous with a single-family residential district. The mayor and council may require a similar buffer strip between other districts and land uses deemed to be incompatible. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 10(11.1), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-298. - Purpose and general requirements. 
(a)  A landscaped buffer strip is required to protect single-family, two-family and multiple-family residential land uses from excessive heat, dust, wind, light spill, unsightly views, odors, and other characteristics commonly associated with commercial and industrial land uses and related vehicular and pedestrian traffic, which can adversely impact the quality of residential life. The required buffer shall provide necessary visual and acoustical privacy for the conduct of residential lifestyles in an undisturbed environment, and shall provide for the protection and preservation of property values in residential districts. 
(b)  Required buffers shall be established and maintained by the owner of the incompatible land use. The required buffer must: 
(1)  Be depicted in detail (the type and location of natural and planted vegetation are to be illustrated) on each site plan or plat prior to approval, and shall be designated as a permanent easement. 
(2)  Not be disturbed by grading, property improvements or construction activities except where necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin such natural growth, where too dense to permit normal growth, or to remove diseased, misshapen, or dangerous and decayed timbers. Any contemplated disturbance shall first be brought to the attention of the mayor and council and formal approval secured prior to initiating activity within required buffer areas. 
(3)  Utilize existing vegetation where it has been determined that existing vegetation is appropriate for inclusion within the buffer strip, or when required be supplemented with approved, additional plantings. 
(4)  Retain the natural topography of the land, except when a portion must be cleared and graded as required by the local law to prevent soil erosion or sedimentation. 
(5)  Be completely installed in accordance with the approved plan prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(6)  Not be used for temporary or permanent parking or loading, other than for provision of drainage improvements as mandated by the local law or for a structure other than a fence. 
(7)  Attain a minimum height of six feet within three years of the planting date. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 11(11.2), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-299. - Minimum buffer specifications. 
(a)  As different types of land uses generate varying degrees of incompatibility, it follows that rigid width for a buffer strip could, in some instances, create undue hardship on the property owner. Therefore, the amount and type of planting required to accomplish adequate screening and insulation shall be variable, and in each instance shall be determined by the intensity and extent of the use judged incompatible. The following specifications of buffer strip widths will be used by the mayor and council to determine buffer strip requirements: 
(1)  Where a commercial or industrial district is contiguous with a single-family residential district, the width of the required buffer strip shall not be less than 40 feet, nor more than 75 feet. 
(2)  Where a commercial or industrial district is contiguous with a two-family, multiple-family residential district or a mobile home or manufactured home district, the width of the required buffer strip shall not be less than 30 feet, nor more than 75 feet. 
(3)  Where a two-family, multiple-family district or a mobile home or manufactured home district is contiguous with a single-family residential district, the width of the required buffer strip shall not be less than 15 feet nor more than 40 feet. 
(b)  In other instances where an incompatible situation is created, the width of the buffer strip shall be recommended by the mayor and council, but shall not be less than 15 feet nor more than 75 feet. The buffer strip required can include the minimum yard area as specified in the appropriate zoning district. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 12(11.3), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-300. - Composition of buffer. 
(a)  In those instances where the natural vegetation and topography are insufficient to achieve the desired level of screening as determined by the mayor and council, a planted buffer shall be provided and shall consist of plant material of such growth characteristics as will provide an acoustical and visual screen. The following plants are approved for use as part of the screening buffer: 
(1)  Trees. 
a.  American Holly. 
b.  Arizona Cypress Redbay. 
c.  Eastern Red Cedar. 
d.  Laurel Cherry. 
e.  Loblolly Pine. 
f.  Virginia Pine. 
g.  White Pine. 
h.  Yaupon Holly. 
(2)  Shrubs. 
a.  California Privet. 
b.  Cleyera. 
c.  Euonymus. 
d.  European Privet. 
e.  Japan Yew. 
f.  Japanese Privet. 
g.  Northern Bayberry. 
h.  Pittosporum. 
i.  Southern Waxmyrtle. 
(3)  Ground cover. 
a.  Evergreen Candyturf. 
b.  Lippia. 
c.  Periwinkle. 
d.  Short Juniper. 
(b)  Other evergreen plant materials having the same growth characteristics as the aforementioned may be substituted, subject to approval by the mayor and council prior to installation. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 13(11.4), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-301. - Maintenance. 
The screening buffer planting and any required landscaped open space planting shall be guaranteed for the life of the commercial, industrial or residential development. Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be performed by the property owner providing the buffer to maintain the health of the plant materials, to provide aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to assure that the buffer actually serves the purpose for which it is intended. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-302. - Other screening requirements. 
Certain uses, such as junk or salvage yard operations and other commercial and industrial operations requiring the storage of inoperative equipment or vehicles for prolonged periods of time, could present unsightly views or health hazards. To preclude this from occurring, the mayor and council shall require owners of such properties to completely enclose such operations by a fence which completely obscures views of the property from adjacent sidewalks and streets, built to a height greater than that of the height of the highest piece of equipment or vehicle stored on the property. Such fences shall be constructed of solid materials. Construction of cyclone fencing which utilizes metal inserts as screening shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 14(11.6), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-303—42-322. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 42-323. - Off-street parking and loading spaces required. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter that all buildings, structures and uses of land shall provide off-street parking and loading space in an amount sufficient to meet the needs caused by the building or use of land and that such parking and loading spaces be so oriented that they are in fact readily usable for such purposes. 
(b)  Each use of land and each building or structure hereafter constructed or established, and each addition to a structure in excess of 200 square feet shall provide off-street parking and loading according to the standards set forth herein. When an addition is made to a building containing less than the required parking or loading requirements, a conforming amount of parking or loading shall be supplied based upon the size of the addition. No addition to an existing building shall be constructed which reduces the number of spaces, area or usability of existing parking or loading space unless such building and its addition conform with the regulations for parking and loading contained herein. 
(c)  Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be required. Existing uses providing off-street parking shall have 12 months from date of adoption of the resolution from which this chapter is derived to comply with handicapped parking requirements. New uses providing off-street parking shall incorporate handicapped spaces into the design of parking facilities. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-324. - Design standards. 
(a)  Off-street parking spaces and driveways. The following are the design requirements for off-street parking spaces and driveways: 
(1)  Required dimensions for each parking space. Each full-size automobile parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide and 20 feet deep. Adequate interior driveways shall connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
(2)  Interior driveways. Where 90-degree parking is utilized, all interior driveways shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width. If 60-degree angle parking is used then interior driveways shall be at least 12 feet in width for one-way traffic and 24 feet in width for two-way traffic. In the instance where parallel parking is utilized or there is no parking, interior driveways shall be a minimum of ten feet in width for one-way traffic and 20 feet in width for two-way traffic. 
(3)  Surfacing, drainage and lighting. All off-street parking spaces, access and interior driveways shall be provided with a paved, dust free surface. If the off-street parking facilities are used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles and for security. The lighting shall be designed so as not to reflect onto or cause glare in any adjacent residential district. For single-family residences, off-street parking areas shall be paved at minimum for the entire width of the right-of-way. 
(4)  Sharing of required off-street parking spaces. One-half of the off-street parking spaces required by a use whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be shared with a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. The combined parking requirements for two or more uses participating in a cooperative parking arrangement may be partially reduced by the city manager or their representative, provided that the uses will not conflict in time of operation or need for the parking spaces and provided that the parking needs of each use at a given time of day may be adequately met through the parking arrangements. 
(5)  Handicapped spaces. Parallel spaces for the handicapped adjacent to a walk shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width by 24 feet in length. If a walk is at an elevation different from the elevation of the parking space, a 1:6 ramp shall be provided up to the walk. For 90-degree or angled spaces the minimum width of a stall shall be nine feet. An aisle, having a width of not less than three feet six inches, shall be identified by pavement markings and by appropriate signage. 
(b)  Off-street loading stalls. The following are the design requirements for off-street loading stalls: 
(1)  Required dimensions for each loading stall. Each loading stall shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 18 feet in length, except that for wholesale and industrial use, loading stalls shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 50 feet in length. 
(2)  Access. All off-street loading stalls shall have access from an alley, or if there is no alley, from a public street. 
(3)  Surfacing, drainage and lighting. All off-street loading stalls and access shall be provided with a paved, dust-free surface. 
If loading stalls are to be used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety of pedestrians and vehicles and for security. Lighting shall be designed to preclude light spill onto adjacent properties. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-4, § 3, 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-325. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
The following are the minimum number of off-street parking spaces and loading stalls required by type of permitted uses. For any use not listed, the mayor and council shall determine the proper requirements by classifying the proposed use among the uses specified herein as to assure equal treatment. In making any such determination, the mayor and council shall follow the principles set forth in the beginning of this article. 

 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 15(12.3), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-4, § 4, 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-326. - Handicapped parking requirements. 
Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in the closest proximity to major building entrances, but in no event shall such spaces be located more than 100 feet from a major building entrance. Handicapped parking shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 

 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-327. - Paving of parking areas. 
Every person operating a business within the city shall include areas for the parking of customers and staff sufficient to meet the standards of this chapter. All such parking areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. However, with approval of the mayor and council, a business utilizing a new facility may be permitted to utilize a graveled parking area for customers and staff for a period not to exceed six months. Should a six-month exception to the paving requirements be requested, the business and property owner shall be required to sign a letter of agreement with the city indicating their knowledge of the requirement that the area be paved within six months of operation and agree that if such paving is not completed, the city may proceed to revoke the business license of the business and prohibit its further operation at that location. 
(Code 1994, § 38-116; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 42-328. - Paving of outdoor display or storage areas. 
All areas used for the outdoor display or storage of motor vehicles or other equipment located between a public right-of-way and the primary structure on the premises shall be paved either with asphalt or concrete. Areas reserved for the outdoor display or storage of motor vehicles or other equipment which are located adjacent to or to the rear of the primary structure on the premises may be gravel surfaced upon approval of the mayor and council in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The perimeter of such graveled area is protected in such a manner that gravel does not escape onto adjacent property. 
(2)  The movement of vehicles or other equipment across such gravel is not such that dust raised by that movement has a detrimental effect upon adjacent property occupied by residential, commercial or industrial uses. 
(3)  The graveled lot is maintained in such manner that weeds and tall grass are not permitted to grow on the lot. 
(Code 1994, § 38-117; Ord. No. 93-4, § 2, 6-21-1993) 
Secs. 42-329—42-359. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 42-360. - Designation of zoning enforcement officer. 
(a)  A zoning enforcement officer shall be designated by the mayor and council. The zoning enforcement officer shall administer and enforce this chapter, carry out the duties required, and have the authority to interpret any provisions under this chapter. The zoning enforcement officer may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the mayor and council may direct. 
(b)  If the zoning enforcement officer shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, notification shall be given in writing to the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Such written notice shall not be a necessary condition precedent to enforcement of this chapter. The zoning enforcement officer shall order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-361. - Building inspector. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a building inspector or contract for such services. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-362. - Building permits required. 
(a)  No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a building permit being issued by the building inspector. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in quadruplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot, of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use, and the location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  If no substantial construction progress has been made within six months of the date of the issuance of the building permit, the permit becomes void. Building permits shall not be transferable. 
(d)  The building inspector shall maintain a record of all building permits issued. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-363. - Certificate of zoning compliance. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued by any officer, department or employee of the city unless the application for such permit has been examined by the zoning administrator, certifying that the proposed building, structure or alteration complies with all provisions of this chapter. Any building permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(b)  The certificate of zoning compliance shall be in addition to all other permits, including use permits for conditional uses required by this chapter. 
(c)  An application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be submitted upon such form and accompanied by such additional information, including a plat of the property, as the zoning administrator shall prescribe. 
(d)  All certificates of zoning compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit. Said certificate shall be issued within ten days after the erection or alteration shall have been approved as complying with the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use any dwelling, building, or other structure, within the purview of this chapter until a certificate of zoning compliance has been properly issued. 
(e)  A record of all certificates of zoning compliance shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator and a copy shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-364. - Construction and use to be as provided in applications, permits and certificates of zoning compliance. 
Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the building inspector authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-365—42-386. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - APPEALS 

Sec. 42-387. - Established. 
An appeals procedure is hereby established, whereby the mayor and council shall hear all appeals, consider the appeal and approve or disapprove the appeal. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-388. - Hearings, appeals, notice. 
(a)  Appeals to the mayor and council concerning interpretation or administration of this chapter may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the mayor and council affected by any decision of the zoning enforcement officer. Such appeals shall be taken within reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days by filing with the zoning enforcement officer and with the mayor and council a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning enforcement officer shall forthwith transmit to the mayor and council all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-389. - Stay of proceedings. 
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning enforcement officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the mayor and council after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the mayor and council or by a court of record on application, on notice to the zoning enforcement officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-390. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall have the following powers and duties in cases of appeals: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning enforcement officer in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Variances; conditions governing applications; procedures. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the mayor and council unless and until: 
a.  A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating conclusively: 
1.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other land, structures, or buildings in the same district; 
2.  That literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter; 
3.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
4.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
b.  Applications for a variance shall be filed with the city clerk at least 20 days prior to the date of the hearing. Each application shall be accompanied by a plat showing property lines, the location of buildings and structure, easements, and the variance required. 
c.  Notice of public hearing shall be given. 
d.  The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney. 
e.  The mayor and council shall make findings that the requirements of section 42-390(a)(2)a have been met by the applicant for a variance. 
f.  The mayor and council shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
g.  The mayor and council shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(b)  In granting any variance, the mayor and council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Under no circumstances shall the mayor and council grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in said district. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-391. - Council has powers of zoning enforcement officer on appeals; reversing decision of zoning enforcement officer. 
(a)  In exercising the powers mentioned in section 42-390, the mayor and council may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the zoning enforcement officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(b)  The concurring vote of four members of the mayor and council shall be necessary to reverse any order requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning enforcement officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variation in the application of this chapter. 
(c)  If an application for an appeal or variance is denied by the mayor and council a re-application may not be made earlier than 12 months from the date of the original application. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-392. - Duties of zoning enforcement officer, mayor and council and courts on matters of appeal. 
It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the zoning enforcement officer, that such questions shall be presented to the mayor and council only on appeal from the decision of the zoning enforcement officer, and that recourse from the decisions of the mayor and council shall be to the courts as provided by law. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-393. - Administrative variances. 
The zoning enforcement officer shall have the power to grant variances from the development standards of this chapter, where, in his opinion, the intent of this chapter can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a variance. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited, with one exception, to variance from the following requirements: 
(1)  Front yard or yard adjacent to public street: variance not to exceed five feet. 
(2)  Side yard: variance not to exceed two feet. 
(3)  Rear yard: variance not to exceed four feet. 
(4)  Height of building: variance not to exceed five feet. 
The one exception would cover structures that preceded the adoption date of the resolution from which this chapter is derived and do not conform to this chapter as written. Consideration for a variance would be given when ownership was changing and the mortgage company required conformity to this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-394. - Schedule of fees, charges and expenses. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of occupancy, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the zoning enforcement officer, and may be altered or amended only by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-395—42-416. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 42-417. - Established. 
Several of the zoning districts contained herein permit certain uses subject to compliance with conditions. The evaluation of conditional use requests and determination of compliance shall be the responsibility of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 16(art. XV(intro.)), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-418. - Conditional use procedure. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall accept applications for conditional uses, and a report and detailed site plan of the proposed use shall be submitted by the applicant documenting specifically how the conditions of the zoning district will be complied with. The report shall also document impacts of the proposed use upon community facilities and/or adjacent properties. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall consider all of the following in rendering a decision on conditional uses: 
(1)  The report submitted by the applicant. 
(2)  That all specific conditions imposed relative to the conditional use have been met. 
(3)  That the applicant has made a binding agreement for any specific limitations or conditions necessary to protect the public interest and assure the continued beneficial use and enjoyment of nearby properties or that no special limitations are necessary to protect the public. 
(4)  That the conditional use with specific limitations and design features as may have been required will further the aims of the land use plan and will not be unduly detrimental to nearby properties. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall have no more than two regular agenda meetings to either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request. Additional conditions may be imposed by the mayor and council in the interest of ensuring the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 17(15.1), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-419—42-449. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 42-450. - Established. 
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-451. - Zoning regulations and official zoning map amendment procedure. 
(a)  This chapter, including the official zoning map, may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The following procedure shall be followed for the consideration of a zoning change: 
(1)  Any person desiring to submit an application requesting a change in zoning shall file such application, with a plat of the affected property attached thereto, together with a payment of the amount determined by the mayor and council as an appropriate fee for same to cover administrative costs, with the city clerk. 
(2)  The application shall include a correct legal description of the property in question. 
(3)  The application shall include a legible site plan depicting the proposed use of the property, including: 
a.  A correct scale and north arrow; 
b.  The proposed land use as it would appear should the rezoning application be approved; 
c.  The present zoning classification of all adjacent parcels; 
d.  The as-built location, configuration entrances and exits to and from all buildings to be located on the site and the gross square footage of buildings, and the number of employees and total seating when such information is necessary to determine parking requirements; 
e.  The location of all driveways and entry/exit points for vehicular traffic, using arrows to depict direction of movement; 
f.  The location of required off-street parking and loading spaces to include number of spaces and space and driveway dimensions; 
g.  Required yard setbacks appropriately dimensioned; and 
h.  The location and extent of required buffer areas, depicting extent of natural vegetation and type and location of additional vegetation, if required. 
(4)  The completed rezoning application is to be returned and required fees paid not less than 15 days prior to the hearing date before the mayor and council. 
(5)  Before the mayor and council enacts the resolution from which this chapter is derived or an amendment hereto, it shall hold a public hearing thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in compliance with title 36, chapter 66 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(6)  The city shall erect on the property involved, at least 15 days before the public hearing of the mayor and council, a sign giving the date of the public hearing. Failure to erect and maintain the sign as specified above shall not invalidate the amendment procedure. 
(7)  The public hearing shall be held by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 01-02, § 18(16.1), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-452. - Lapse of time requirement for reapplication. 
If an application for an amendment to the zoning regulations or to the official zoning map is denied by the mayor and council, a reapplication for the same amendment may not be made earlier than 12 months from the date of the original application. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-453. - Reversion to prior zoning status. 
Upon favorable action by the mayor and council on a petition for an amendment (rezoning) to this chapter, the owner or subsequent owners of the property involved shall be required to make substantial progress to develop the property in its new status within a period of 12 months from the date of such action. Substantial progress shall mean the obtaining of a building permit and the beginning of construction to the extent that an initial inspection is made by the building inspector. Should the building inspector discover that such substantial progress has not been made, he shall notify the mayor and council to that effect. The mayor and council shall then notify the property owner that he is required to show cause before them, on a date set by the mayor and council, why the property should not revert to the zoning status it enjoyed prior to the amendment. Upon the failure of the owner to show adequate reason why substantial progress has not been made, the mayor and council shall cause the property zoning classification to so revert. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-454—42-474. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Advanced Broadband Collocation Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-66B-1 et seq. 

Sec. 42-475. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Telecommunications Towers and Antennas Ordinance." 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18.0), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-476. - Purpose, findings, goals. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the siting of telecommunications towers and antennas, and the facilities whereon such towers or antennas are located. 
(b)  Findings. The mayor and council recognize that the city is to provide for the siting of telecommunications towers and antennas pursuant to the mandates of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. While mandated to make such provisions, the mayor and council also recognize that telecommunications towers and antennas can negatively impact the aesthetic appearance of the city, and can reduce the property value of lots proximately located to such towers, particularly when they are sited adjacent to residential areas. 
(c)  Goals. The goals of this article, therefore, are to: 
(1)  Express the intent of the mayor and council that the construction of new towers be an option of last resort and, to the extent feasible, location of antennas on existing towers, building rooftops, and other suitable structures should first be sought; 
(2)  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
(3)  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; 
(4)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(5)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to construct them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers or antennas; 
(6)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; 
(7)  Develop an inventory of existing sites with specific information about the load capacity of each existing site, remaining developable land area available at the site, and any terms or conditions of the lease which would affect the possibility of collocation at the site; and 
(8)  Provide for the disposition of towers which are abandoned by all users, and set forth the time period within which the requirements would apply and responsibility for the removal of abandoned towers. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18.1), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-477. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Building inspector means the building inspector for the city. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Guy tower means a tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
Height, when referring to a tower, antenna, or other structure, means the distance measured vertically from the highest point when positioned for operation to the lowest point which is defined as the average ground elevation along the structure being measured at either roof or ground level, whichever is applicable. The height of a tower shall include the height of any antenna positioned for operation attached or which may be attached to the highest point on the tower. 
Lattice or self-supporting tower means a tower that has open-framed supports on three or four sides and is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Preexisting towers and antennas means any tower, antenna, or monopole for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Telecommunications facility means a telecommunications tower, a monopole tower, an antenna or any and all buildings, structures, or other supporting equipment used in connection with a telecommunications tower, a monopole tower, or an antenna. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers or guy towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like, but specifically excludes monopole towers. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-2), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-478. - Conditional use permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, relocate, construct, or maintain within the city any telecommunications facility without first obtaining a conditional use permit in the manner set forth in this article or otherwise complying with the terms herein. 
(b)  District height limitations. The requirements set forth in this article shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of, the height limitations specified for each zoning district. The height limitations applicable to such structures, as specified in each zoning district, shall not apply to antennas, monopoles and towers. 
(c)  The guidelines set forth in this article shall control the installation of all antennas and the location of all towers governed by this article; provided, however, that the mayor and council may waive or vary the terms of these requirements during the conditional use permit application review process if it determines that the goals of this article are better served thereby. In considering a conditional use permit, the city may impose additional conditions to the extent the city concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect the proposed antenna or tower may have on adjoining properties. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-3), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-479. - Contents of applications for conditional use permits—General information required of all applicants. 
(a)  Applications for conditional use permits to erect a telecommunications facility shall be made upon blanks provided by the building inspector, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  Address of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the telecommunications facility is to be attached or erected; 
(3)  Name of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting the telecommunications facility; 
(4)  Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or land to which or upon which the telecommunications facility is to be erected; 
(5)  A site plan showing existing vegetation to be removed from the site, and vegetation to be replanted to replace the vegetation that will be removed; 
(6)  A certified statement prepared by an engineer licensed to practice in the state that the installation and operation of the antenna, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other telecommunications service enjoyed by adjacent properties; and 
(7)  Written certification from the FAA, the FCC, and any appropriate state review authority stating that the proposed telecommunications facility complies with regulations administered by that agency or that the facility is exempt from those regulations. In particular, an applicant must submit written certification that all emissions from the antenna will comply with FCC frequency emissions standards and that the telecommunications facility has received written clearance from the FAA. 
(b)  Each application for a conditional use permit for the installation of an antenna shall be accompanied by a permit fee. Each application for a conditional use permit for the construction of a tower or monopole shall be accompanied by a permit fee. The permit fee will be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-4), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-480. - Same—Antennas. 
In addition to the information required to be submitted as set forth in section 42-479, applications for conditional use permits to install an antenna shall contain or have attached thereto three sets of accurate scale drawings including a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation including, but not limited to, the method of construction and attachment to the building or structure for the antenna. The plans for the antenna construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer licensed in the state as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable federal, state, and city codes. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-5), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-481. - Same—Towers. 
In addition to the information required to be submitted as set forth in section 42-479, applications for conditional use permits to construct a tower shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Three sets of accurate scale drawings including a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation including, but not limited to, the method of construction and attachment to the ground for the tower. The plans for the tower construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer licensed in the state as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable federal, state, and city codes, and shall show the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the city to be necessary to assess compliance with this article. In addition, the report from the structural engineer must contain: 
a.  Tower height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design. A cross section of the tower structure shall be included; 
b.  Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
c.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
d.  Failure characteristics of the tower and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris; 
(2)  An inventory of the applicant's existing telecommunications towers, antennas, or monopole towers that are either within the city or within one mile of the city limits, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower, antenna, or monopole. The city may share such information with other applicants applying for conditional use permits under this article or other organizations seeking to locate telecommunications towers, antennas or monopoles within the city; provided, however, that the city is not, by sharing such information, representing or warranting in any way that such sites are available or suitable for telecommunications towers, antennas or monopoles; 
(3)  An inventory of existing telecommunications towers or monopoles which are owned by persons other than the applicant and are either within the city or within one mile of the city limits, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each facility. In preparing such an inventory, the applicant shall provide the following information: 
a.  Identification of each existing facility by location, tax lot number, existing uses, and height of the facility; 
b.  Whether such facility could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna without requiring structural changes be made to the facility. To enable the owner to respond, the applicant shall provide each such owner with the height, length, weight, and other relevant data about the proposed antenna; 
c.  Whether each such facility could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural changes were made, not including totally rebuilding the facility. If so, the owner of the facility shall specify in general terms what structural changes would be required, and the cost of such changes; 
d.  If structurally able, whether shared use by such existing facility would be precluded for reasons related to radio frequency (RF) or electromagnetic interference. If so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in either the existing or proposed antenna would be required to accommodate the proposed antenna, if any; and 
e.  If shared use is possible, the fee an owner of an existing facility would charge for such shared use. Shared use is not precluded because a reasonable fee for shared use is charged, or because of reasonable costs necessary to adapt the existing and proposed uses to a shared facility. The city may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fee and costs are reasonable. Costs exceeding the cost of development of a new telecommunications facility are presumed unreasonable. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-6), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-482. - Same—Monopole towers. 
In addition to the information required to be submitted as set forth in section 42-479, applications for conditional use permits to construct a monopole tower shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Three sets of accurate scale drawings including a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation including, but not limited to, the method of construction and attachment to the ground for the monopole. The plans for the monopole construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer licensed in the state as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable federal, state, and city codes, and shall show the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, monopole height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the city to be necessary to assess compliance with this article. In addition, the report from the structural engineer must contain: 
a.  Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated; and 
b.  Failure characteristics of the monopole tower and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris; 
(2)  An inventory of the applicant's existing telecommunications towers, antennas, or monopole towers that are either within the city or within one mile of the city limits, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower, antenna, or monopole. The city may share such information with other applicants applying for conditional use permits under this article or other organizations seeking to locate telecommunications towers, antennas or monopoles within the city; provided, however, that the city is not, by sharing such information, representing or warranting in any way that such sites are available or suitable for telecommunications towers, antennas or monopoles; 
(3)  An inventory of existing telecommunications towers, antennas, or monopoles which are owned by persons other than the applicant and are either within the city or within one mile of the city limits, including specific information about the location, height and design of each facility. In preparing such an inventory, the applicant shall provide the following information: 
a.  Identification of each existing facility by location, tax lot number, existing uses, and height of the facility; 
b.  Whether such facility could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna without requiring structural changes be made to the facility. To enable the owner to respond, the applicant shall provide each such owner with the height, length, weight, and other relevant data about the proposed antenna; 
c.  Whether each such facility could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural changes were made, not including totally rebuilding the facility. If so, the owner of the facility shall specify in general terms what structural changes would be required; 
d.  If structurally able, would shared use by such existing facility be precluded for reasons related to RF or electromagnetic interference. If so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in either the existing or proposed antenna would be required to accommodate the proposed antenna, if any; and 
e.  If shared use is possible, the fee an owner of an existing facility would charge for such shared use. Shared use is not precluded because a reasonable fee for shared use is charged, or because of reasonable costs necessary to adapt the existing and proposed uses to a shared facility. The city may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fees and costs are reasonable. Costs exceeding the cost of development of a new telecommunications facility are presumed unreasonable. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-7), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-483. - Conditional use permits; issuance standards; denial; appeal. 
(a)  The following factors shall be considered in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit to construct or install a telecommunications tower, antenna, or monopole: 
(1)  Height of the proposed tower, antenna, or monopole; 
(2)  Proximity of the tower, antenna, or monopole to residential structures and residential district boundaries, as measured from the base of the tower, monopole, or structure on which the antenna is located to the boundary of a residentially zoned lot; 
(3)  Nature of uses on adjacent and surrounding properties; 
(4)  Surrounding topography; 
(5)  Whether the telecommunications facility has a solid opaque fence or solid vegetative buffer to screen the tower, antenna, monopole, or telecommunications facility completely to a height of six feet from adjacent properties and rights-of-way; 
(6)  Design of the tower, antenna, or monopole, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(7)  Proposed ingress and egress; 
(8)  Whether the applicant meets the standards of this article and has complied with the conditions to obtain a conditional use permit as set forth in this article; and 
(9)  Availability of suitable existing towers, monopoles and other structures for the placement of an antenna. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing telecommunications facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  No existing towers, monopoles or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Existing towers, monopoles or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  Existing towers, monopoles or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause RF or electromagnetic interference with antennas on the existing structures, or the antenna on the existing tower, monopole or structure would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing facility or to adapt an existing facility for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower or monopole development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(b)  Procedure for issuance or denial of conditional use permit for location of antenna on existing building, structure, tower, or monopole. 
(1)  The building inspector shall determine whether a conditional use permit for location of an antenna on an existing building, structure, tower or monopole should be issued or denied under the standards of this article within 45 days of the receipt of a complete application. 
(2)  Any decision by the building inspector to deny a conditional use permit application for the location of an antenna on an existing building, structure, tower or monopole shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The building inspector's decision to deny an application may be appealed to the city clerk by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the denial. Failure to file a notice of appeal within ten days of the denial shall constitute a waiver of the applicant's appeal rights. 
(3)  The city clerk shall hold a hearing within 45 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. In the event the city clerk affirms the building inspector's decision to deny the application, the decision of the city clerk shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The decision of the city clerk shall be final. 
(c)  Procedure for issuance or denial of conditional use permit for tower or monopole. No conditional use permit for the construction of a tower or monopole shall be issued until the same shall have been submitted to the building inspector. The building inspector shall transmit his report either recommending approval or disapproval of a complete application within 60 days after referral to him. In addition to such recommendation for approval or disapproval, the building inspector may make suggestions as to conditions or limitations to be attached to any recommended approval. Upon receipt of the building inspector's report, or at the expiration of the 60-day period, the mayor and council shall place the application on the next available agenda and shall proceed to approve or deny the issuance of a conditional use permit In the event the mayor and council deny the application, the decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The decision of the mayor and council shall be final. 
(d)  In granting a conditional use permit for the construction of a tower, antenna, or monopole, additional zoning conditions may be imposed to the extent necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower, antenna, or monopole on surrounding properties. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-8), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-484. - Zoning requirements for location of telecommunications towers, antennas, and monopole towers. 
(a)  No conditional use permit to construct a monopole or to locate an antenna on an existing building, structure, tower, or monopole shall be issued unless the location has been zoned commercial or industrial under the zoning laws of the city. 
(b)  No conditional use permit to construct a tower shall be issued unless the location has been zoned industrial under the zoning laws of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-9), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-485. - Location of antenna on an existing building, structure, or telecommunications facility. 
A conditional use permit may be issued to erect, repair, construct, relocate or maintain an antenna on an existing building, structure, tower or monopole within the city, provided that: 
(1)  The existing building, structure, tower or monopole is 50 feet in height or greater; 
(2)  If an antenna is installed on an existing building or structure other than a tower, such antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of the existing building or structure; 
(3)  No advertising is permitted on the antenna or telecommunications facility; 
(4)  If an antenna is installed on a structure or building other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure or building so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible; 
(5)  If an antenna is installed on an existing tower of any height, such antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower; 
(6)  The antenna is not artificially lighted unless required by the FAA, FCC, or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction for safety purposes. Where required, the building inspector shall review available lighting alternatives and approve the design which would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views; 
(7)  The antenna meets or exceeds current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC or such governing agency with the authority to regulate telecommunications towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owner of the antenna shall bring such antenna into compliance with any revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. Failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the city to require removal or re-permitting of the antenna at the owner's expense; 
(8)  The antenna complies with all current safety, design, structural, and wind loading standards of applicable building and technical codes adopted by the city, so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents; 
(9)  The antenna is equipped with an anti-climbing device to prevent unauthorized access; 
(10)  The antenna is set back from any adjoining residentially zoned property a distance of 200 feet, as measured from the side of the existing building or structure which is closest to or facing the adjacent residential property to the boundary of a residentially zoned lot; and 
(11)  The antenna is set back from all property lines a distance of 50 feet. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-10), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-486. - Telecommunications towers. 
A conditional use permit may be issued to erect, repair, construct, relocate or maintain a telecommunications tower within the city, provided that: 
(1)  The tower is not greater than 150 feet in height; provided, however, that the mayor and council may allow a greater height if the applicant demonstrates that the purposes and goals as expressed herein are further met. 
(2)  The tower maintains a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, is painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(3)  No advertising is permitted on the tower or telecommunications facility. 
(4)  The tower is not artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other authority for safety purposes. Where required, the building inspector shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(5)  The tower and telecommunications facility uses materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and base facility to the natural setting and built environment. 
(6)  The tower and telecommunications facility meets or exceeds current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC or such governing agency with the authority to regulate telecommunications towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owner of the tower or telecommunications facility shall bring such tower or facility into compliance with any revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. Failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the city to require removal or re-permitting of the antenna at the owner's expense. 
(7)  The applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing telecommunications facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(8)  The following setbacks and separation requirements are met: 
a.  All towers, including but not limited to lattice towers and guy towers, must be set back from any property line abutting a residential district, as measured from the base of the tower, a distance of 500 feet. For a guyed structure, such setback shall be adequate to provide a vegetative, topographic, or other buffer sufficient to obscure view to the anchor from such adjoining properties; 
b.  All towers and telecommunications facilities must have a front yard setback of 150 feet, and sufficient rear and side yard setbacks to fully contain the structure in the event of tower failure. 
(9)  The tower and telecommunications facility is equipped with an anti-climbing device to prevent unauthorized access. 
(10)  The tower complies with all current safety, design, structural, and wind loading standards of applicable building and technical codes adopted by the city, so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents. 
(11)  The tower and telecommunications facility are designed to structurally accommodate the maximum number of additional users technically practical. 
(12)  The following landscape buffer/screening requirements are met: 
a.  Any tower or telecommunications facility which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 50-foot landscaped, horizontal buffer that effectively screens the view of the tower and base facility from adjacent property. The buffer must include a solid opaque fence or solid vegetative buffer sufficient to screen the tower and base facility completely to a height of six feet from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 50-foot horizontal buffer should be an undisturbed buffer; provided, however, the buffer may be crossed by an access drive of not greater than 12 feet in width; 
b.  Any tower or telecommunications facility which abuts property zoned other than residential shall have a minimum 15-foot landscaped, horizontal buffer that effectively screens the view of the tower or base facility from adjacent property. The buffer must include a solid opaque fence or solid vegetative buffer sufficient to screen the tower and base facility completely to a height of six feet from adjacent properties and rights-of-way; 
c.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Where towers or facilities are sited on wooded lots in excess of five acres, natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer; 
d.  In locations where the visual impact of the tower or facility would be minimal, such as developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived. 
(13)  The equipment at the tower or telecommunications facility is automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. 
(14)  All access roads to the tower or telecommunications facility shall be constructed of dustless and durable Portland cement, concrete or asphaltic concrete complying with specifications established by the building inspector and maintained in a usable condition. 
(15)  Principal, accessory and joint uses are as follows: 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made. 
b.  Towers may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. As long as all of the other siting, setback, separation, and general requirements of this article are met, towers may occupy a leased parcel on a site meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. When joint use of a lot is permitted, the city shall require the execution of a unity of title if two or more lots are utilized for setback purposes or to prohibit the unlawful division of a lot containing a tower and another principal use. The minimum distance between a tower and other principal use located on the same lot shall be the lesser of 100 percent breakpoint of the tower or 150 feet. This separation is required to assure compatibility of land uses and to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of individuals and structures occupying the same site. 
c.  Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-11), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-487. - Monopole towers. 
A conditional use permit may be issued to erect, repair, construct, relocate or maintain a monopole tower within the city, provided that: 
(1)  The monopole tower is not greater than 60 feet in height; provided, however, that the mayor and council may allow a greater height if the applicant demonstrates that the purposes and goals as expressed herein are further met. 
(2)  The monopole tower is made of wood or, if made of steel, the monopole maintains a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, is painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(3)  No advertising is permitted on the monopole tower. 
(4)  The monopole tower is not artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other governmental authority for safety purposes. Where required, the building inspector shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(5)  The monopole tower meets or exceeds current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other governmental agency with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owner of the monopole shall bring such monopole into compliance with any revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. Failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the city to require removal or re-permitting of the antenna at the owner's expense. 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing telecommunications facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(7)  The following setbacks and separation requirements are met: 
a.  All monopole towers must be set back from any adjoining residentially zoned property a distance of 200 feet. 
b.  All monopole towers must have a front yard setback of 60 feet and sufficient rear and side yard setbacks to fully contain the structure in the event of monopole failure. 
c.  Monopole towers over 40 feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter mile from any existing telecommunications tower or monopole that is over 50 feet in height. 
(8)  The monopole tower is equipped with an anti-climbing device to prevent unauthorized access. 
(9)  The monopole tower complies with all current safety, design, structural, and wind loading standards of applicable building and technical codes adopted by the city, so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents. 
(10)  Accessory or principal uses are as follows: 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a monopole shall be allowed but not used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a monopole shall not be stored or parked on the site of the monopole, unless repairs to the monopole are being made. 
b.  Monopoles may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. As long as all of the other siting, setback, separation, and general requirements of this article are met, monopoles may occupy a leased parcel on a site meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. When joint use of a lot is permitted, the city shall require the execution of a unity of title if two or more lots are utilized for setback purposes or to prohibit the unlawful division of a lot containing a monopole and another principal use. The minimum distance between a monopole and other principal use located on the same lot shall be the greater of 60 feet or the 100 percent breakpoint of the monopole. This separation is required to assure compatibility of land uses and to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of individuals and structures occupying the same site. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-12), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-488. - Annual inspection; inspection fee; unsafe facilities; abandoned facilities. 
(a)  Tower, antenna or monopole owners shall provide written evidence that each telecommunications tower, antenna or monopole is in compliance with all federal requirements, including, but not limited to, the FCC frequency emissions standards. Evidence of such compliance shall be submitted annually by the tower or antenna owner. 
(b)  To ensure the structural integrity of towers, antennas, and monopoles, the owner shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building codes and the applicable standards for towers, antennas, and monopoles that are published by the Telecommunications Industry Association, as amended from time to time. Tower, antenna, and monopole owners shall conduct annual inspections to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a structural engineer licensed to practice in the state. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the building inspector no later than February 1 of each year. 
(c)  The building inspector shall have the right in the discharge of his official duties to enter upon and inspect any telecommunications facility located within the city. 
(d)  If, upon inspection or upon receipt of an engineer's report submitted pursuant to this section, the building inspector determines that a telecommunications facility fails to comply with the city's building and technical codes or with the requirements of this article, then, upon written notice being provided to the owner of such facility, the owner shall have 45 days to bring the facility into compliance with this article. If the owner fails to bring the telecommunications facility into compliance within said 45 days, the city may proceed with the removal of such facility pursuant to the provisions of the city's building code and place a lien upon the property for the costs of such removal. 
(e)  If, upon inspection or upon receipt of an engineer's report submitted pursuant to this section, the building inspector determines that a telecommunications tower, antenna or monopole has not been utilized for a continuous period of 12 months, such tower, antenna or monopole shall be considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. If the tower, antenna or monopole is not removed within said 90 days, the city may proceed with the removal of such facility pursuant to the provisions of the city's building code and place a lien upon the property for the costs of such removal. If there are two or more users of a single facility, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower or monopole for a period of 12 months. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-13), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-489. - Pre-existing antennas, towers, or telecommunications facilities. 
Any preexisting antenna, tower, or telecommunications facility which does not meet the requirements of this article for a conditional use permit shall be considered nonconforming and subject to the nonconforming use provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that the installation of a new antenna on a preexisting tower or monopole shall not constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use provided that the new antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of the preexisting tower or monopole. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-14), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-490. - Construction of new antenna, tower or monopole as expansion of nonconforming use. 
The construction of a new tower or monopole or the installation of a new antenna shall be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the installation of a new antenna on a preexisting tower or monopole. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-15), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-491. - Exemptions. 
(a)  A single antenna under 70 feet in height owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator shall be exempted from the provisions of this article. The owner or operator of such antenna, however, shall be required to comply with all applicable city, state and federal codes. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to the installation, maintenance, or use of: 
(1)  A satellite earth station antenna that is two meters or less in diameter and is located or proposed to be located in any area where commercial or industrial uses are generally permitted; or 
(2)  A satellite earth station antenna that is one meter or less in any area. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-16), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-492. - Penalties. 
Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 per day. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1(18-17), 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 42-493—42-522. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - SIGNS 

Sec. 42-523. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article are as follows: 
(1)  A comprehensive regulation is necessary because of the unique nature and history of the city in that a major commercial road runs through the center of the city and attracts signs that are inappropriately large, leading to poor aesthetics and dropping property values. 
(2)  To prevent the further deterioration of the city and to ensure that it remains an attractive residential area as well as a viable commercial area it is necessary to maintain a visually satisfying environment. A plethora of signs of a certain size and nature, no matter how tasteful, can have an undesirable effect upon traffic safety and the well-being of the entire community. The city is more likely to attract commercial enterprises and permanent residents if it improves and maintains the city's appearance. The residents will ultimately benefit from enhanced retail and commercial environments and improvements in the quality of life as a result of these regulations. City-wide regulations are necessary in view of the fact that very few areas are distinctly residential or distinctly commercial, and homes. It is a rational desire of the community, and most specifically of those who live therein from day to day, to plan their physical surroundings in such a way that unsightliness is minimized. 
(3)  Further, the city has an obligation and a right to protect the rights of adjoining landowners to adequate light and air, to promote desirable living conditions and sustain stability of neighborhoods, to protect property against blight and deprivation, and encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings and other structures throughout the city. 
(4)  Accordingly, in consideration of the city's rights and obligations to promote traffic safety, to preserve property values, to provide for the convenience and enjoyment of public travel, to eliminate annoyance to travelers, to attract tourists, residents and industry, to serve the public health, safety and morals, to advance the general prosperity of the community, and to serve the general welfare, the city hereby imposes the regulations contained in this article. 
(5)  The mayor and council find that signs provide an important medium through which individuals and entities may exercise their right to freedom of speech and expression and convey a variety of messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as well as a traffic hazard. Such signs may also constitute an aesthetic nuisance and be a detriment to property values and the city's public welfare. The mayor and council intend, by enacting the ordinance from which this article is derived, to: 
a.  Balance the rights of individuals and entities to convey their message through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
b.  Protect the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the city; 
c.  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
d.  Protect property values by minimizing the potentially adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
e.  Promote economic development; and 
f.  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(6)  The provisions in this article which regulate signs on the basis of such factors as size, height, shape, design, spacing, placement, and distance, but not on the content of any message conveyed, provide an appropriate balance between the protection of the right to freedom of speech and expression via the sign medium and furthering the substantial governmental purposes stated herein. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.1), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1(19A.1), 5-10-2004; Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-524. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the definitions contained in this chapter shall control. in addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aerial view sign means any sign which is designed primarily to be viewed from the sky from an airplane, helicopter, etc. The term "aerial view sign" includes, but is not limited to, any sign horizontally affixed to a roof or attached to a roof such that the sign is not readily viewable from the surrounding ground. 
Aggregate signable area means the sum total of the signable area of any and all signs, for a given lot. Street numbers assigned by the United States postal service shall not be considered in calculating the aggregate signable area. 
Animated sign. See flashing sign. 
Awning sign means any sign on a cloth, metal, plastic or other cover designed to shade a window or entrances and attached to any structure. 
Banner sign. See "temporary sign." 
Beacon. See "temporary sign." 
Bench sign. See "ground sign." 
Blade sign. See "projecting sign." 
Bracket sign. See "projecting sign." 
Building frontage means the linear feet of the exterior wall of a building that faces any road or street that provides a means of direct ingress and egress to the lot. 
Canopy sign. See "wall sign." 
Decal means a picture, design or label made to be transferred (as to glass, wood, metal or any other hard object) from specially prepared paper. 
Decision date means the date upon which the city clerk or his designated representative makes a final decision on the approval or denial of a sign permit. 
Detached sign. See "ground sign." 
Digital message sign means any sign, or a portion thereof, which is capable of displaying words, copy, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means. This definition includes an electronically changeable copy sign, a multiple message sign or a readerboard. This definition does not include a manually changeable copy sign. 
Door sign. See "wall sign" or "window sign." 
Eave means the projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
Electronically changeable copy sign. See "digital message sign." 
Entrance sign means any sign placed at the intersection of a public street and a public or private entryway into an apartment complex, condominium complex, office complex, industrial complex or other building or buildings with multifamily residential dwelling units or multiple commercial units. 
Erect means to build, paint, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, assemble or affix. 
Externally illuminated sign means any sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Fascia sign. See "wall sign." 
Flag means a sign consisting of fabric or similar material attached at one end to a pole or building and hanging freely such that it may flutter or move in the wind. 
Flashing sign means any sign with flashing, running, pulsing, scrolling or laser-generated lights; any sign upon which the illumination changes in intensity more often than once every 15 seconds; any sign that rotates or revolves; or any sign that has one or more elements that move by mechanical means as part of conveying a message. This definition includes an animated sign, a marquee sign, a moving sign, a revolving sign and a rotating sign. This definition does not include a digital message sign. 
Flat sign. See "wall sign." 
Ground sign means any sign supported by uprights or braces which are permanently placed into the ground and not supported by or suspended from any building. 
Hand-held sign means any sign larger than six inches by six inches carried by a human appendage or prosthesis, including but not limited to picket signs, shields or sandwich boards. 
Height means the vertical distance measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the highest point of the sign or sign structure. 
Internally illuminated sign means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes located within the interior parts of the sign. 
Lot means a single tax parcel as shown on a plat or deed filed in the real estate records of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
Mansard sign. See "roof sign" or "wall sign." 
Manually changeable copy sign means any sign, or a portion thereof, on which the displayed words, copy, symbols, figures or images are changed manually through placement or drawing of letters, symbols, figures or images on the signable area. 
Marquee sign. See "flashing sign." 
Mobile sign. See "temporary sign." 
Monument sign. See "ground sign." 
Moving sign. See "flashing sign." 
Multiple message sign. See "digital message sign." 
Noncombustible material means any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this article at the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Painted wall sign. See "wall sign." 
Parapet sign. See "wall sign." 
Pennant. See "temporary sign." 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, entity or organization of any kind. 
Pitched roof sign. See "roof sign." 
Pole sign. See "ground sign." 
Portable sign. "See temporary sign." 
Primary facade means the exterior wall of the building that faces the main parking area or street and includes the primary entrance into the building. If the building faces more than one parking area or street, the largest exterior wall of the building with a primary entrance which is most nearly parallel to the widest street or largest parking area to which the building faces is the primary facade. 
Projecting sign means any sign which is attached perpendicular to a building or other structure and extends more than 12 inches horizontally from the plane of the building wall. 
Pylon sign. See "ground sign." 
Readerboard. See "digital message sign." 
Reflectors means any device created for the purpose of reflecting light directed at the device so as to render the device especially visible. 
Residence means a home, abode, or place where an individual is actually living on a non-temporary basis. 
Revolving sign. See "flashing sign." 
Roof sign means a sign which is attached to a building or structure and is displayed above the lowest horizontal line of a building's roof. 
Rotating sign. See "flashing sign." 
Sandwich sign. See "temporary sign" or "hand-held sign." 
Searchlight. See "temporary sign." 
Secondary facade means any exterior wall of a building, other than the primary facade. 
Shingle sign. See "projecting sign." 
Sidewalk sign. See "temporary sign." 
Sign means every device, item, product, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, stroke, stripe, trademark, or reading matter, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information when the same is placed in view of the general public. For the purpose of determining number of signs, a single display surface or a single display device containing different elements that are organized, related, and composed to form a unit shall be considered to be one sign. Where different elements are displayed in a random manner without an organized relationship to each other, or where there is reasonable doubt as to the relationship of different elements to each other, each element shall be considered to be a single separate sign. 
Sign face. See "signable area." 
Signable area means the total area upon which a message is displayed on any sign. For double-face signs, the side with the largest signable area shall be used in computing signable area. If the two faces of a double-face sign are of unequal area, the signable area shall be the area of the larger face. For wall signs consisting entirely of products shaped in the form of letters or other figures attached directly to a wall or roof, the signable area shall consist of the net geometric area measured by the smallest possible single square or rectangle enclosing the display surface of the sign including the outer extremities of all letters, characters and delineations. 
Stake sign means any temporary sign supported by at least one upright placed into the ground, and not supported by or suspended from any building with signable area not greater than eight square feet. 
Streamer. See "temporary sign." 
Subdivision sign means any sign placed at the intersection of two public roads, where one of the roads is the main thoroughfare into and out of a single-family residential subdivision. 
Submission date means the date stamped on a sign application indicating the date the application was actually received by the city. 
Suspended sign. See projecting sign. 
Temporary sign means any sign or device which is not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, which is designed to be mobile or is designed to remain in place for a limited time. The term "temporary sign" includes, but is not limited to, signs which are designed to be transported regularly from one location to another, signs which are designed with wheels, regardless of whether the wheels remain attached to the sign, or signs tethered to an existing structure. These signs include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Sky lights; 
(2)  Balloons; 
(3)  Streamers; 
(4)  Flag strings; 
(5)  Inflatable displays; 
(6)  Banners; 
(7)  Beacons; 
(8)  Searchlights; 
(9)  Pennants; and 
(10)  Mechanical or animated figures. 
Wall sign means any sign which is attached parallel to or painted on an exterior building wall, which may include a door. 
Window sign means any sign displayed to an outside observer on or through a window or covering a window, which may include a door. 
Zoning district means the use classification of parcels of land as defined under this chapter generally. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.2), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-05, §§ 1—7, 6-12-2017) 
Sec. 42-525. - Permits. 
(a)  Application requirements. All applications for sign permits must be complete and contain all required information. If the city clerk or his designated representative shall determine that the application does not contain all required information as set forth in this article, or if such information is not sufficient to determine whether the permit should be issued or denied, or if such information is inaccurate or untrue, the application shall be denied. 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, relocate, or maintain any sign as defined in this article, except for those signs exempt from this article under section 42-534, without first obtaining a permit from the city in the manner set forth in this Code or otherwise complying with the terms herein. 
(c)  Permit application. Application for permits to erect signs shall be made upon forms provided by the city, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  Address of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected; 
(3)  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, property lines and other signs located on the lot showing compliance with all setback lines required by the city; 
(4)  Three sets of accurately scaled color drawings of the plans, contents, specifications, and method of construction and attachment to the building or the ground for the sign, as well as a scaled drawing of the site showing drives, structures, and any other limiting site features; 
(5)  Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the sign (i.e., contractor or builder); 
(6)  Written consent of the owner of the building or lot upon which the sign is to be erected; and 
(7)  A written list describing all other signs located on the lot indicating the sign type, size and placement. 
(d)  Approval of city clerk. Approval of the city clerk or his designated representative is required for all signs that require a permit. Such officer shall examine the plans and specifications to determine if the same complies with the building code of the city except if a building permit is not required, and shall then mark his approval or disapproval thereon. 
(e)  Submission of sign permit applications. 
(1)  Sign permit applications must be delivered to the city at city hall. 
(2)  All permit applications must be stamped by city personnel indicating the submission date. 
(f)  Permit fees. Each application for a sign permit must be accompanied by a payment for the permit fee. The fee for sign permits shall be as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(g)  Issuance and denial of permit. 
(1)  Provided that the application is complete, all permit fees have been paid, and the proposed sign and the lot upon which the sign is to be placed are within all the requirements of this article and all other ordinances and laws of the city, the city clerk or his designated representative shall then issue the permit. 
(2)  In the event the city clerk or his designated representative determines or learns at any time that the applicant has not properly completed the application for the proposed sign, he shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and shall automatically deny the application. 
(3)  In the event the city clerk or his designated representative determines that all requirements for approval have not been met, he shall then deny the permit. 
(4)  All permit applications shall either be issued or denied within 30 days of the submission date. If the application is denied because it does not contain the required information or the information is inaccurate or false, a new application must be submitted with all of the required information and such application shall be assigned a new submission date. Upon the expiration of the 30-day period without a decision being made on the application, the applicant shall be permitted to erect and maintain the sign under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the city clerk or his designated representative notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reason for the denial. No person erecting a sign under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued maintenance of such signs, and if the city clerk or his designated representative later denies the application, the sign must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(5)  Upon making his final decision, the city clerk or his designated representative must stamp each application with a decision date. 
(h)  Time period. If the work authorized under a permit has not been completed to the satisfaction of the city clerk or his designated representative using common industry standards within six months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(i)  Display of permit. Every sign constructed, erected, or maintained for which a permit is required by this article shall be plainly marked with the permit number, and expiration date for temporary signs, issued for the structure firmly affixed to the sign in such manner that the permit number, and expiration date if applicable, shall be readily accessible and durable. 
(j)  Altering permit. Displaying a permit that has been tampered with, altered, or mutilated, or displaying a sign without a permit, shall be a misdemeanor offense punishable in municipal court. The penalties for such a violation are provided in section 42-535. 
(k)  Appeals. An applicant who is dissatisfied by a decision on the application for a sign permit rendered under this section may appeal to the mayor and council under the following procedure: 
(1)  The city clerk or his designated representative shall notify the applicant of the decision on a sign permit application within three business days of the decision date. Notice shall be made in writing and sent to the applicant's address listed on the sign permit application. Upon the expiration of the three-day period without the city clerk or his designated representative notifying the applicant of the decision on a sign permit application, the applicant shall be permitted to erect and maintain the sign under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the city clerk or his designated representative notifies the applicant of a decision of the application and states the reason for that decision. No person erecting a sign under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued maintenance of such signs, and if the city clerk or his designated representative later denies the application, the sign must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(2)  Any appeal of the city clerk or his designated representative's decision relating to a sign permit application must be made within three business days of receipt of notice of the decision. In the event that no appeal is made within the three-day period, the decision of the city clerk or his designated representative shall become final. 
(3)  The mayor and council shall hold the hearing on any such appeal no more than 30 days after receipt of the appeal. Upon the expiration of the 30-day period without a hearing on the appeal occurring, the applicant shall be permitted to erect and maintain the sign under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the mayor and council hold a hearing on the appeal. No person erecting a sign under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued maintenance of such signs, and if the mayor and council later deny the appeal, the sign must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(4)  The mayor and council shall make its final determination on the appeal not more than 30 days after the date of the hearing. Upon the expiration of the 30-day period without a decision being made on the appeal, the applicant shall be permitted to erect and maintain the sign under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the mayor and council notify the applicant of a denial of the appeal and state the reason for the denial. No person erecting a sign under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued maintenance of such signs, and if the mayor and council later deny the appeal, the sign must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(5)  Any appeal of the decision of the mayor and council shall be taken to the superior court of the county by a petition for a writ of certiorari. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.3), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-526. - Construction standards; all signs. 
(a)  Building code compliance. All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of chapter 10. 
(b)  Materials required. All signs for which a permit is required by this article, except temporary signs, shall be constructed of noncombustible material. 
(c)  Reflectors. Reflectors and lights shall be permitted on ground signs, roof signs, and wall signs; provided, however, that the reflectors and lights shall be provided with proper glass lenses so that no light therefrom creates a hazardous or dangerous condition. 
(d)  Internal illumination. The illumination of internally illuminated signs shall not exceed 20 foot candles of incandescent light measured at a distance of ten feet from such structure. 
(e)  External illumination. Externally illuminated signs shall be lighted so that no lights are positioned in such a manner that light glares or shines into the eyes of motorists or pedestrians so as to create a hazardous or dangerous condition. 
(f)  Other code compliance. All building, construction, setback, zoning or other relevant codes, excluding permitting (other than that provided elsewhere herein), shall be applicable to the location, construction and siting of signs and shall be read in harmony with this article. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.4), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-527. - Special limitations. 
In addition to the limitations set forth in the other sections of this article, the following limitations shall apply to these specific types of signs: 
(1)  Wall signs. No wall sign shall cover, wholly or partially, any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. 
(2)  Roof signs. 
a.  Setback from roof edge. No roof sign shall be erected or maintained within five feet of the outside wall toward which the sign faces. 
b.  Prohibited obstructions. No roof sign shall be placed on the roof of any building or structure in such manner as to prevent free passage from one part of the roof to any other part thereof or interfere with openings in the roof. 
(3)  Projecting signs. 
a.  No projecting sign may be placed over streets, alleys, or ways available for vehicular traffic. 
b.  All projecting signs must be installed at a 90-degree angle to the building facade. 
(4)  Temporary signs. 
a.  A temporary sign shall be removed from the premises no later than 14 days after the date such sign is first placed on a lot. 
b.  A lot shall be allowed a maximum of one temporary signs per month. 
c.  All temporary signs shall be securely installed, and shall meet all applicable safety standards as prescribed by the building code, electrical code or as promulgated by the city with approval of the mayor and council. 
d.  If any temporary sign is erected or maintained in such a manner so as to be in violation of this article or any other ordinance or law of the city, the mayor and council may give written notice to the owner thereof and to the owner of the property and premises upon which the sign is located that the sign must be removed within three days. If the sign is not thereafter removed, the mayor and council may cause its removal and impose the cost of the removal as a lien upon the property upon which the sign sits. 
(5)  Awning signs. 
a.  Awning signs must be painted or installed directly on the valances of the awning. 
b.  Awning signs shall not have lettering or graphics exceeding ten inches in height. 
c.  No awning sign may be internally illuminated. 
d.  The signable area of any awning sign shall not exceed ten percent of the surface area of the awning. 
(6)  Entrance signs. All entrance signs shall be placed on private property and may not be placed in the right-of-way, except that the mayor and council may allow an entrance sign to be placed in the right-of-way in a center median if: 
a.  The sign has two faces; 
b.  The location has been approved in writing by the city clerk or his designee; and 
c.  The applicant agrees to be responsible for maintenance and repair of the entrance sign and ensures that the existence of the entrance sign is documented on the final plat for the development. 
(7)  Subdivision signs. All subdivision signs shall be placed on private property and may not be placed in the right-of-way, except that the mayor and council may allow a subdivision sign to be placed in the right-of-way in a center median if: 
a.  The sign has two faces; 
b.  The location has been approved in writing by the city clerk or his designee; and 
c.  The applicant agrees to be responsible for maintenance and repair of the subdivision sign and ensures that the existence of the subdivision sign is documented on the final plat for the development. 
(8)  Flags. 
a.  In-ground. A flag may be flown from a metal pole permanently placed in the ground. The pole shall not exceed 40 feet in height. The flag flying from such pole shall not exceed five feet in width and seven feet in length. 
b.  Projecting. A flag may be flown from a metal or wooden pole attached to a bracket projecting from the side of a building or door frame. The pole shall not exceed six feet in length. The flag flying from such pole shall not exceed three feet in width and five feet in length. Additionally, the flag displayed in such manner shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
c.  Hanging. A flag may be hung in either the primary facade or secondary facade of a property appropriately zoned under this article. The flag shall count against the percentage of window signage permitted for the zoned property as delineated in section 42-530. 
d.  Limit. Only three flags (either ground, projecting or hanging) shall be flown or displayed on each property. The flags shall count against the allocation of the ground, projecting or window signage permitted for each property in section 42-530. 
(9)  Hand-held signs. All hand-held signs shall meet the following regulations: 
a.  No hand-held signs shall be placed or carried which extend beyond the width of the carrier's body or that extend more than 24 inches above the carrier's head. 
b.  All persons carrying any such signs, shields or sandwich boards shall not stand or remain on any city, county, or state right-of-way. 
c.  All hand-held signs are exempt from the permitting requirements of section 42-525. 
(10)  Decals. Decals may be allowed, provided that they do not exceed four inches in width and 12 inches in length or 48 square inches in size. One decal may be placed on a window on a lot without counting against the maximum allowed window signage for that lot under this article. 
(11)  Digital message signs. All digital message signs shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  All digital message signs shall be placed on private property. 
b.  Digital message signs are allowed on real property classified under any of the following zoning classifications: OI (office/institutional); BN (neighborhood business); BG (general business); M (manufacturing); SCR (shopping center reuse); or G-1 (gateway village development). Digital message signs are prohibited on real property classified under any of the following classifications: RS-200 (single-family residence); RS-150 (single-family residence); RM (multiple-family residence) or RMH (mobile home or manufactured home park residence). 
c.  A digital message sign is allowed only in the form of an entrance sign, a ground sign, a monument sign or a wall sign and shall meet all the requirements of this chapter for the applicable form. 
d.  One digital message sign is authorized per each public street, road, or highway frontage of the lot upon which it is located. A maximum of two digital message signs are authorized per lot. 
e.  The total signable area of all digital message signs located upon a lot shall not exceed 30 percent of the aggregate signable area for such lot. 
f.  Each message displayed on a digital message sign shall remain static for at least ten seconds following the completion of its transition from the previous message. The transition between a complete static display of the previous message and a complete static display of the next message shall be accomplished in three seconds or less. The transition period shall be measured as that period between any movement of any part of the display of the previous message and the time that that display of the next message is fully static. As used in this subsection, "static" shall mean a display that is fixed in one position with no position of the display being in motion or changing in color or light intensity. 
g.  No display or other effect from any digital message sign shall cause a glare or other condition that impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or otherwise interferes with the safe operation of a motor vehicle. Any such display or effect shall be considered a traffic hazard under this chapter. 
h.  The minimum pixel pitch for any digital message sign is 19 millimeters. 
i.  All digital message signs shall have automatic dimming capability that adjusts the ambient light at all times of the day or night. 
j.  All digital message signs shall contain a default design which shall freeze the message of the sign in one position if a malfunction in the electronic or mechanical display occurs. 
k.  No permitted sign shall be converted to a digital message sign prior to the issuance of a sign permit under this chapter authorizing such digital message sign. The addition of any digital message sign to a nonconforming sign is prohibited. 
l.  The owner of a digital message sign shall coordinate with local law enforcement authorities to display, when appropriate, emergency information important to the travelling public including, but not limited to amber alerts or alerts concerning terrorist attacks or natural disasters. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.5), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 8, 6-12-2017) 
Sec. 42-528. - Special requirements; all signs. 
(a)  Public right-of way. No sign shall be placed in any public right-of-way. 
(b)  Placement. All signs must be placed upon a lot. No sign may be placed on any lot that does not meet the minimum requirements of this chapter and the city's subdivision regulations. 
(c)  Obstruction to doors, windows, or fire escapes. No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to, or egress from, any door, window, emergency exit, or fire escape; nor shall any sign be attached to any stand pipe or fire escape. 
(d)  Sign not to constitute traffic hazard. No sign shall be erected at the intersection of, or otherwise near, any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision from vehicles or pedestrians. 
(e)  Posting on trees, poles, etc. No sign shall be allowed to be tacked, painted, posted, marked, or otherwise affixed on trees, utility poles, or other similar structures, or on rocks, the ground itself, or other natural features. 
(f)  No posting on supports. No message may be displayed on any portion of the structural supports of any sign. 
(g)  Maintenance. All signs regulated by this article shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from all electrical and mechanical hazards, including, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose connections, and the premises surrounding the signs shall be maintained by the owner in a sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all weeds, rubbish, and debris. 
(h)  Special situations. Those developments which include at least one building of five stories or more may be permitted wall or roof signs in sizes not exceeding 100 square feet per primary and secondary facade. The sign allowance provided under this subsection shall be exempt from the aggregate signage allowed per lot. 
(i)  No simulation of public signal. No sign shall be erected where due to its proposed location, position, shape, color, size, height, and/or lighting would appear to be in imitation of, or likely would be confused by motorists or pedestrians, for an official traffic control device or signal. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.6), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-529. - Special requirements by zoning classification (see section 42-530 for additional requirements). 
(a)  No sign shall be illuminated, either internally or externally, in any district zoned RS-200, RS-150, and RMH, except that entrance signs and subdivision signs may be illuminated from dusk until dawn. 
(b)  All temporary signs are prohibited on lots zoned for residential use, except for stake signs as allowed in the charts contained in section 42-530. 
(c)  Variances. This subsection shall provide the exclusive procedures for granting variances to the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Upon application by the property owner of a lot zoned OI, BN, BG or M, covering more than ten contiguous acres, the mayor and council may grant a variance to allow the aggregate signable area to exceed 500 square feet where the applicant has shown that: 
a.  All signs and structures within the business development are in conformance with this article; 
b.  The variance, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to other property owners or tenants, or to the public good, nor would it impair the purpose and intent of this article; 
c.  The mayor and council shall consider at least one of the following factors: 
1.  The size of buildings constructed on the subject lot; 
2.  The potential to subdivide the lot; or 
3.  The number of different tenants occupying the buildings. 
d.  Financial loss to the appellant. However, such loss is not sufficient grounds, by itself, to justify a variance. 
(2)  Furthermore, peculiar conditions or circumstances which are the result of actions of the current or former owner of the property covered by the application cannot be considered as grounds to justify a variance. The authority to erect and maintain additional signs as may be permitted under any such variance shall terminate upon the subdivision of the lot upon which such variance was granted. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.7), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-530. - Charts. 
In addition to all other regulations in this article, all signs must conform with the requirements of the charts contained in this section. As used in these charts, the term "0" means that the use of that type of sign is prohibited. 
(1)  Lots zoned RS-200, RS-150, and RMH. 

 
In addition to those regulations set forth in the above chart, no person may maintain any sign on a lot zoned RS-200, RS-150, or RMH so that the aggregate signable area on the lot exceeds 20 square feet, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign. 
(2)  Lots zoned RM (where residences are located in an apartment complex, townhouse complex or condominium complex). 

 
In addition to those regulations set forth in the above chart, no person may maintain any sign on an individual unit in an apartment complex or condominium complex so that the aggregate signable area for that individual unit exceeds eight square feet, regardless of the construction, placement, number or type of sign. 
(3)  Lots zoned RM (where residences are not located in an apartment complex, townhouse complex or condominium complex). 

 
In addition to those regulations set forth in the above chart, no person may maintain any sign on a lot containing single family residences zoned RM so that the aggregate signable area exceeds 20 square feet, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign. 
(4)  Lots zoned BN and BG. 

 
In addition to those regulations set forth in the above chart, no person may maintain any sign on a lot zoned BN or BG so that the aggregate signable area exceeds 500 square feet, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign. 
(5)  Lots zoned M. 

 
In addition to those regulations set forth in the above chart, no person may maintain any sign on a lot zoned M so that the aggregate signable area exceeds 500 square feet, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign. 
(6)  Lots zoned O-I. The city may further reduce the amount of signage where necessary to avoid conflict with the architectural design or physical features of the building. 

 
*The total of all signs shall not exceed two signs of any allowed type for the primary facade and one sign of any allowed type for each secondary facade. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.8), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-531. - Unsafe and unlawful signs. 
(a)  If the city clerk or his designee shall find that any sign regulated herein is unsafe or unstable, or is a menace to the public health or safety, or is abandoned, or is maintained in a dilapidated condition, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this article, the city clerk or his designee shall notify the permittee, owner, or occupant of the property on which the sign is located by certified mail of such violation. Said notice shall include a brief and complete statement of the violations to be remedied. If the permittee, owner, or occupant of the property where the sign is located cannot be located, notice shall be effected by the city clerk or his designee affixing the notice to the sign or to the building on which the sign is erected. 
(b)  If the permittee or property owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten days after such notice, the permit for such sign shall be revoked and the permittee or property owner shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 42-535. 
(c)  In any case in which a sign is an immediate threat to the physical safety of persons or adjoining property, the city clerk or his designee may cause such structure to be removed summarily and without notice and cause the cost of same to be placed as a lien on the property upon which the sign sits. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.9), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-532. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  The following provisions shall apply to signs which, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, were approved and legally erected under previous sign restrictions and which became nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this article's restrictions: 
(1)  The owner of the sign shall secure a permit for the continuation of the sign subject to the restrictions of this section. Application for such permit must be filed within ten days of the notice of nonconformance. There shall be no charge for this permit. Failure to apply for such permit within ten days shall result in waiver of the protections afforded nonconforming signs by this section and the display of such sign shall be thereafter unlawful. 
(2)  No change shall be made in the size of any , nor shall any structural changes be made in such a sign, unless the sign is brought into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Any nonconforming sign declared to be unsafe by the city clerk or his designee shall be removed or rendered safe and brought into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  No nonconforming sign damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than 50 percent of its assessed value shall be repaired or rebuilt except in compliance with this article. Any such sign, if not repaired or rebuilt in compliance with this article, and all related debris shall be removed from the lot and disposed of appropriately. 
(5)  Any sign erected in violation of this section may be removed from any public property or right-of-way by duly authorized employees of the city, and the responsible party may be cited for such violation. 
(6)  No conforming sign or advertising device shall be permitted or erected on any lot which has located there upon an existing nonconforming sign until the nonconforming sign has been removed. 
(b)  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
(c)  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of a sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Nonconforming signs which met all requirements of this Code when erected may stay in place until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard; or 
(2)  The sign has been damaged to such an extent that structural repairs are required to restore the sign. A structural repair is any repair necessary to maintain the stability of the sign and shall not be merely aesthetic in nature. 
(e)  No structural repairs, change in shape, size or design shall be permitted on a nonconforming sign except to make the sign comply with all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.10), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-533. - Prohibited signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a flashing sign, an aerial view sign or a manually changeable copy sign in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.11), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 9, 6-12-2017) 
Sec. 42-534. - Exemptions. 
The following signs are exempt from all provisions of this article: 
(1)  Signs that are not visible from any public right-of-way or any adjacent property. 
(2)  Temporary signs required to be posted by federal law, state law or by this Code. 
(3)  Decals affixed to or signs painted on equipment, fuel pumps or other types of vending equipment used for dispensing retail products, provided that such decals or signs have a signable area not exceeding four square feet on any single piece of equipment. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.12), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-535. - Penalties. 
Any sign erected or maintained in violation of this article for more that 30 days after notice from the city thereof shall also be subject to removal by the city at the owner's or permittee's expense. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1(art. XIX-A, § 19A.13), 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002; Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-536. - Substitution. 
The owner or the permittee of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this article may substitute non-commercial speech in lieu of any other commercial or non-commercial speech. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial speech over any other non-commercial speech. This provision prevails over any more specific provision in this article to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-537. - Other ordinances regarding signage. 
It is the intention of this article to regulate signage. Where additional ordinances in the Code regulate signs, such other regulations shall be harmonized herewith. If such provisions are in conflict with this article, the provision of this article shall be deemed to prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-538. - Severability. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that all parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases, terms, or words of this article, were upon their enactment, believed by the mayor and council to be fully valid, enforceable, and constitutional. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term, or word of this article is severable from every other part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term or word of this article. It is further declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, no part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term, or word in this article is mutually dependent upon any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term, or word in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3, § 1(exh. A), 4-11-2016) 
Secs. 42-539—42-563. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 42-564. - Provisions declared to be minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, resolutions, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing higher standards shall govern. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-565. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  It is unlawful to violate the provisions of this chapter or to fail to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances, special exceptions or conditional uses. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 42-566. - Remedies. 
(a)  If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the mayor or city council, the building inspector, the zoning enforcement officer, the city engineer or any adjacent or other property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such building, structure or land use. 
(b)  In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city manager or his designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city manager or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city manager or his designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city manager or his designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city manager or his designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city manager or designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city manager or his designee shall deem appropriate (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city manager or designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city manager or his designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city manager or his designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in magistrate court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 110-1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 5-13-2002) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1994 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1994 Code, as updated through April 14, 2014, which are included herein. Sections of the 1994 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia State Law. 

 