Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code.     The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "The Code of the City of Valdosta, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Valdosta City Code." (Code 1976, § 1-1009)
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction.     In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of council or the context clearly requires otherwise.     Advice and consent. The term "advice and consent" of the city council means an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire council.     Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.     City. The term "city" means the City of Valdosta in the County of Lowndes and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided.     City council. The term "city council" or "council" means the city council of the City of Valdosta, Georgia.     Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Valdosta, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.     Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.     County. The term "county" means the County of Lowndes, State of Georgia.     Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours.     Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.     Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.     Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the mayor and council.     Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee.     Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.     Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Valdosta" were added to such name or title.     Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.     Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number.     Oath. The term "oath" means and includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed."     O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended.     Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.     Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.     Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city.     Person. The term "person" means and includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.     Personal property. The term "personal property" means and includes every species of property except real property.     Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.     Premises. The term "premises" means a place or places.     Property. The term "property" means and includes real and personal property.     Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or adjacent open space, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned.     Real property. The term "real property" means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.     Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence.     Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office, which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the city council.     Seal. The term "seal" means the city seal.     Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory and the term "may" is permissive.     Sheriff. The term "sheriff" means the Sheriff of Lowndes County, Georgia.     Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways.     Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" means and includes a mark when the person cannot write.     State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia.     Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct or bridge and their approaches within the city.     Tenant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.     Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.     Week. The term "week" means a calendar week of seven days.     Written or in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" mean and include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters.     Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. (Code 1976, § 1-1010)State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references.     The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. (Code 1976, § 1-1012)State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code.     It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since they would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Code 1976, § 1-1011)State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. (a)	The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained in the ordinance, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. (b)	When an ordinance that repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. (Code 1976, § 1-1005)
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code.     Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: (1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. (2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. (3)	Any contract or obligation assumed by the city.(4)	Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee.(5)	Any right or franchise granted by the city.(6)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. (7)	Any appropriation ordinance.(8)	Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term.(9)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor.(10)	Any zoning ordinance.(11)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or adopt any subdivision regulations. (12)	Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city.(13)	The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. (14)	Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code.(15)	Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city.No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. (Code 1976, § 1-1003)Cross reference— Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances.     The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments. (Code 1976, § 1-1004)
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. (a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part of such chapters, sections and subsections, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. (b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. (c)	If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of the City of Valdosta, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. (d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. (Code 1976, § 1-1008)
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. (a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. (b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. (c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: (1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. (3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. (4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). (5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code.     It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. (Code 1976, § 1-1006)State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty, continuing violations. (a)	Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city or county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (b)	The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to:(1)	Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; (2)	Sentence such person to community service work; or(3)	Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. (c)	The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. (Code 1976, § 1-1013)State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(13); civil emergencies, ch. 30; court, ch. 34; elections, ch. 38; administration of flood damage prevention regulations, § 50-71 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 66; personnel, ch. 78; taxation, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 98; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, app. A, § 10.State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Elections, ch. 38.State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d).
Sec. 2-31. - Mayor.     The mayor shall act as chairman of the council and is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the council. The mayor shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The mayor may not introduce motions or second a motion, except the mayor may introduce or second a motion to go into executive session as authorized by section 2-38. The mayor shall not vote except to break a tie. 
Sec. 2-32. - Mayor pro tem. (a)	The council shall select a mayor pro tem from the councilmembers at the beginning of the calendar year following the municipal election. (b)	The mayor pro tem shall fulfill the duties of the mayor if the mayor is not in attendance.(c)	If the mayor and the mayor pro tem are absent and a quorum is present, the remaining councilmembers shall select a councilmember to serve as temporary chairman of the meeting until either the mayor or mayor pro tem is present at the meeting. 
Sec. 2-33. - Committees.     The mayor, with the concurrence of the council, may create committees of members of the council to study any issue before the council. Any such committees may make recommendations to the city council, but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to councilmembers, committees may include other city officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any litigation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the mayor with the concurrence of the council. The mayor shall serve as an ex officio member of all committees. 
Sec. 2-34. - Open meetings.     All meetings of the city council shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
Sec. 2-35. - Regular meetings.     Regular meetings of the mayor and council shall be held twice each month. The first regular meeting shall be held on the first Thursday after the first Sunday of each month. The second regular meeting shall be held on the second Thursday thereafter. All regular meetings shall be held in the council chambers in the city hall. (Code 1976, § 2-1001; Ord. No. 80-10, 3-19-1980; Ord. No. 80-52, 12-10-1980; Ord. No. 90-13, 2-22-1990; Ord. No. 90-21, 3-22-1990; Ord. No. 91-38, 10-3-1991; Ord. No. 91-45, 12-17-1991) 
Sec. 2-36. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings.     A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the city by the mayor for any reason. Other special meetings may be called as provided in the Charter. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the city or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the city council. 
Sec. 2-37. - Emergency sessions.     When emergency circumstances occur, the council may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the city or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the city council as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
Sec. 2-38. - Executive sessions. (a)	Executive sessions of the city council may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the council is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the city council taken in a public meeting. (b)	The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the councilmembers present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the city clerk at the direction of the mayor. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the council may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
Sec. 2-39. - Quorum.     A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the council. A quorum is a majority of all of the members of the council then in office. It is the duty of the mayor to enforce this rule. Any councilmember may raise a point of order directed to the mayor if he believes that a quorum is not present. If during the course of a meeting a councilmember leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the mayor with the approval of the councilmembers present. 
Sec. 2-40. - Voting; majority.     Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in these procedures, a majority shall mean more than half of the councilmembers present excluding abstentions. Where a two-thirds majority is specified, a majority vote shall mean at least two-thirds of the councilmembers present, excluding abstentions. In the event of a tie vote, the mayor shall vote break the tie. 
Sec. 2-41. - Abstentions.     A councilmember shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest that would prevent him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the councilmember shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
Sec. 2-42. - Agenda. (a)	The clerk of council, with the advice of the mayor and the city manager, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. An agenda work session can be held in preparation for council meetings. The mayor and all councilmembers may participate in the work session. Whenever a quorum of the council is present for an agenda work session, the meeting shall be open to the public; and all notice and recordkeeping requirements applicable to an open meeting must be met. The agenda shall be made available to the councilmembers at least one business day before every council meeting. (b)	A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of any meeting. 
Sec. 2-43. - Consent agenda.     At the appropriate time of the meeting, the mayor shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a councilmember objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the mayor shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the mayor will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent. 
Sec. 2-44. - Minutes. (a)	The city clerk shall promptly record the minutes for each council meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the council meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the council but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the council. The minutes shall specify the names of councilmembers present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the councilmember who proposed each motion, the councilmember who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote, the name of each councilmember voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a councilmember has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the council. (b)	The council must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the council. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the councilmembers at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the council at the beginning of each meeting. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the mayor and attested to by the city clerk. 
Sec. 2-45. - Order of business.     All regular council meetings shall follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: (1)	Call to order.(2)	Minutes.(3)	Invited guests.(4)	Reports from committees and departments.(5)	Consent agenda.(6)	Old business.(7)	New business.(8)	Public comments.(9)	Adjournment.
Sec. 2-46. - Decorum. (a)	All councilmembers must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the mayor and not to individual councilmembers, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A councilmember is not allowed to speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the mayor. All comments made by a councilmember shall address the motion that is being discussed. (b)	The mayor shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a councilmember believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The mayor can rule on the question or he may allow the council to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
Sec. 2-47. - Public participation.     Public participation in meetings of the city council shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. (1)	Public comments. An agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members of the public who wish to address the council must submit their name and address and the topic of their comments to the city clerk at least three business days before the council meeting. These individuals will be allotted five minutes to make their comments, and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived at the discretion of the mayor. (2)	Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the council may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the council. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may only speak once. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the council. Anyone wishing to speak at any council meeting must be recognized by the mayor before addressing the council. (3)	Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a council meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for councilmembers. Individuals who violate any rules of the council may be ruled out of order by the mayor or on a point of order made by a councilmember. A majority vote of the council will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the mayor. (4)	Public hearings. The council may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the council. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the council or at such other places and times as the council may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. 
Sec. 2-48. - Amendments to rules.     Any amendments to the rules of order must be submitted by a councilmember in writing to the city manager three business days before a regular meeting of the council. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all councilmembers. All amendments require a two-thirds vote of the council to be adopted. 
Sec. 2-49. - Suspending the rules of order.     Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable, and requires a two-thirds vote of the council. Rules governing quorum, voting methods and requirements, the notification to councilmembers of meetings, and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
Sec. 2-50. - Visual and sound recordings.     Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings. 
Sec. 2-51. - Compensation.     The mayor and council shall, before the date that candidates for election to the mayor and council of the city may first qualify as such candidates in the next regular municipal election, set the compensation of the mayor and council to be elected at the next regular municipal election. Action to increase such compensation shall not be taken until notice of intent to do so has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least once a week for three consecutive weeks immediately preceding the week during which such action is taken. Any action to increase the compensation of the mayor and council shall be done in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. (Code 1976, § 2-1002; Ord. No. 76-18, § 1, 5-5-1976)
Secs. 2-52—2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3.
Sec. 2-71. - Rules of procedure.     Unless otherwise provided in this Code, procedures for meetings of the city council shall follow an edition of Robert's Rules of Order prescribed by the mayor. 
Sec. 2-72. - Parliamentarian.     The city attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for council meetings. 
Sec. 2-73. - Main motion.     In order for the council to take any official action on any subject, a councilmember must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the chair until another councilmember agrees to second the motion. A second does not require the councilmember seconding the motion to support the motion. A councilmember may withdraw a main motion that he has made at any time before the council has voted on that motion. 
Sec. 2-74. - Debate. (a)	After the main motion is recognized by the chair, the council shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the mayor in a manner that is fair to all members of the council. Councilmembers may participate in the debate only when they are recognized by the mayor. (b)	During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the council take a particular action on a motion. There are two classes of subsidiary motions: debatable subsidiary motions and undebatable subsidiary motions. Debatable subsidiary motions consist of motions to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee, and postpone to a time certain. Debatable subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. There are three undebatable subsidiary motions: limit debate, vote immediately, and lay on the table. They require a second and cannot be debated. (c)	Councilmembers may also introduce privileged motions. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on privileged motions. 
Sec. 2-75. - Voting; procedure.     Voting on debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions. (1)	Debatable motions. In the case of debatable motions, the vote can be proposed in one of two ways: a.	If debate has been completed and no other councilmember wishes to speak, the chair can call for the vote; if there are no objections then the chair can proceed with the vote; b.	If the mayor calls for the vote and there is an objection, a member of the council may move to vote immediately ("move the previous question"). If this motion is seconded and approved by a two-thirds vote, debate will stop. The mayor will then read the proposed motion to the council and ask for the votes of the councilmembers. (2)	Undebatable motions. In the case of undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is recognized by the chair. The mayor shall read the proposed motion to the council and then call for the vote. 
Sec. 2-76. - Ranking of motions. (a)	Each subsidiary and privileged motion is assigned a specific rank. A motion of higher precedence can interrupt a motion of lower precedence. The higher motion must be decided before the council returns to consider the motion of lower precedence. (b)	A main motion has the lowest rank and does not take precedence over any other motion. A motion to adjourn has the highest rank and will take precedence over all other subsidiary and privileged motions. The order of precedence of motions shall be in accordance with this section. Motions at the bottom of the following list take precedence over motions at the top of the list. (1)	Main motion (lowest rank).(2)	Subsidiary motions (debatable):a.	Postpone indefinitely.b.	Amend.c.	Refer to committee (commit).d.	Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely).(3)	Subsidiary motions (undebatable):a.	Limit debate or extend limits.b.	Vote immediately (previous question).c.	Lay on the table (postpone temporarily).(4)	Privileged motions (undebatable):a.	Question of privilege.b.	Recess.c.	Adjourn (highest rank).
Sec. 2-77. - Subsidiary motions.     During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce motions that propose that the council take a particular action on a main motion. These motions are called subsidiary motions and they allow a council to reach a conclusion on the main motion. Subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. Three subsidiary motions—amend, limit debate and vote immediately—also may apply to other subsidiary motions. (1)	Postpone indefinitely. If a councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered by the council, that councilmember may move to postpone the consideration of the main motions indefinitely. If the motion is successful, consideration of the main motion stops and the main motion is tabled. A motion to postpone indefinitely may be debated, but it cannot be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. (2)	Amend. If a councilmember believes that a main motion that is on the table should be changed in order to make it more acceptable, he can move to amend the motion. a.	Amendments must be closely related to the original motion and must not change the nature of the motion that they amend. b.	Motions to refer, amend, postpone to a time certain and the motion to recess can also be amended. c.	A motion cannot be amended more than two times.d.	Debate is allowed on a motion to amend only if the original motion is debatable.e.	A majority vote is required for the council to adopt an amendment.f.	If the amendment is adopted, the council shall consider the amended version of the motion. (3)	Refer to a committee (commit). If a councilmember believes that further information is needed before the council can act on a main motion, he may propose that the motion be referred to a specific committee or department for further study. If an appropriate committee does not already exist, then a committee may be formed as a part of the motion. A motion to refer should specify the date that the committee or department will report back to the council. This motion is debatable and amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. (4)	Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). A motion to postpone to a certain time may be proposed if a councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered until a future time. This motion shall set a particular time for the main motion to be considered again. It is debatable and can be amended. If this motion is passed, the mayor will bring the original motion back to the council for consideration at the specified time. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. (5)	Limit or extend limits of debate. A motion to limit debate places a time constraint on the length of debate. The details of such a motion are to be decided by the councilmember who makes the motion. This motion can also be used to extend the limits of debate if a limit on debate already exists. Debate is not allowed on this motion, and a two-thirds vote is required. (6)	Vote immediately (previous question). If a councilmember believes that the motion that is being considered should be voted on, the councilmember may move to vote immediately. The motion is undebatable, and a vote of two-thirds of the council is required for the motion to pass. (7)	Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). A motion to lay on the table proposes that the consideration of a main motion be postponed until a later time in the meeting. The motion can be brought up for consideration only if a motion to resume consideration is accepted by the council during the same meeting. The motion will die if it is not taken up during the meeting. Debate is not allowed on this motion, and the motion is not amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
Sec. 2-78. - Privileged motions.     Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting. They do not address or relate to a main motion and can be introduced whether or not there is a main motion under consideration. Privileged motions take precedence over all subsidiary motions. Debate is not allowed on these motions. (1)	Question of privilege. A formal question addressed to the chair concerning the rights of a councilmember or of the council as a whole is referred to as a question of privilege. It does not require a second and cannot be debated or amended. The chair is required to make a ruling on the question. (2)	Recess. A motion to recess proposes that the meeting be suspended for a particular amount of time. The motion must specify the length of the recess. The motion must also be seconded. Debate is not allowed on this motion, but the motion can be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. (3)	Adjourn. In order for a meeting to come to a close, a councilmember must make a motion to adjourn. The motion to adjourn has the highest rank of any motion, and as a result it can be introduced at any time. The motion requires a second, but is not debatable or amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
Sec. 2-79. - Incidental motions.     Incidental motions allow councilmembers to exert their rights as a member of the council. Incidental motions can be introduced at any time during a meeting. (1)	Appeal. If a councilmember disagrees with a decision that is made by the chair, that councilmember may appeal the decision. If the appeal is seconded, the appeal will be considered by the council. The chair has the opportunity to explain the ruling that has been challenged. The council may then debate the appeal. The council shall decide by majority vote if the chair's decision is to be upheld or overturned. An appeal is high in precedence and can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or by a motion to lay on the table. (2)	Parliamentary inquiry. If a councilmember has a question about the rules of order, he may ask the chair to give an opinion on that question. This question should take the form of a parliamentary inquiry and should relate to the current business of the council. This motion takes precedence over all motions except privileged motions. This motion does not require a second and is not debatable or amendable. (3)	Point of order (question of order). If a councilmember believes that a violation of the rules of parliamentary procedure has occurred, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chair can make a ruling on the question or can allow the council to debate and then rule on the question by majority vote. A point of order can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to lay on the table. (4)	Point of information (request for information). If a councilmember has a question about the facts of a particular issue that is being considered, he may ask a point of information. This motion is addressed first to the chair and then to the appropriate person. A second is not required and the motion is not debatable or amendable. 
Sec. 2-80. - Supplementary main motions.     Three motions allow the council to act on a main motion that has either been passed or tabled by the council. These motions are considered to be main motions but differ from usual main motions in the ways specified. (1)	Reconsider. The motion to reconsider allows the council to debate whether or not to overturn a decision made at the meeting that is in progress. It allows the council to consider new information that may affect the decision that has already been made. Any councilmember may make a motion to reconsider, and any councilmember may second the motion. The motion is debatable, but it cannot be amended. A majority vote of the council is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to reconsider is passed, the original decision will be voided and the council will return to debate and revote the original motion. (2)	Rescind. A motion to rescind proposes that the council overturn a motion passed at a previous meeting. A motion to rescind can be made by any councilmember. It is in order as long as the original motion has not been implemented. An announcement of the intention to rescind a motion may be made at the meeting where the decision was made, or the councilmember seeking to rescind may place the matter on the agenda for the next meeting pursuant to section 2-42. The motion to rescind will then be placed on the agenda for the next meeting. At the next meeting, the motion to rescind will formally be made. If it is seconded, the council shall debate and vote on rescission. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to rescind is passed, the original decision will be voided. (3)	Resume consideration. The motion to resume consideration allows the council to consider a motion that has been temporarily postponed. This motion requires a second and is not debatable or amendable. It is a main motion but ranks higher than any debatable motion. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
Secs. 2-81—2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LEGISLATION[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- State Law reference— Ordinances of a city council not to bind succeeding councils, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-3; authority to adopt municipal ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3.
Sec. 2-101. - Legislative authority generally.     The city council shall exercise the legislative functions of the city and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the government of the city; however, such ordinance or resolution must not be in conflict with the Charter of the city, the constitution or the laws of the state, or the constitution or the laws of the United States. 
Sec. 2-102. - Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements.     Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the manner provided in this division. 
Sec. 2-103. - Preparation of ordinances.     Whenever possible, all ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. 
Sec. 2-104. - Required elements of ordinances.     All ordinances passed by the council shall contain the following items, which shall be set forth in the ordinance in the following order: (1)	Ordinance number.(2)	Title and purpose.(3)	Enacting clause.(4)	Body of ordinance by sections.(5)	Severability clause.(6)	Penalty clause.(7)	Repealing clause.(8)	Adoption date.(9)	Effective date.(10)	Authentication of city clerk.
Sec. 2-105. - Introduction of ordinances, resolutions and other matters.     Ordinances, resolutions and other matters of subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council. 
Sec. 2-106. - Action restricted; emergencies.     No ordinance shall be put on its final passage on the same day on which it is introduced; except that where an emergency exists and public health and safety require it, an ordinance containing a full statement of the facts and reasons for the emergency may be made effective upon its adoption if approved by the council. 
Sec. 2-107. - Reading of ordinances.     Each ordinance shall be read at two consecutive meetings of the mayor and council. This subsection may be waived by two-thirds of those voting upon the question of waiver. 
Sec. 2-108. - Subject matter of ordinances.     No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; and no ordinance, or section of such ordinance, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed. When practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
Sec. 2-109. - Adoption of ordinances, resolutions, contracts.     An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives an affirmative vote of a majority of the whole council. 
Sec. 2-110. - Effective date of ordinances.     No ordinance shall take effect until ten days after its adoption unless deemed an emergency measure, in which case the ordinance shall take effect immediately. 
Secs. 2-111—2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-6(4); personnel, ch. 78.State Law reference— Personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2); municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-141. - Clerk of council.     There is created an office in and for the city to be known as the clerk of council. The clerk of council shall be selected by the city manager. The clerk of council shall attend all meetings of the city council and shall record the minutes of such meetings. (Code 1976, § 2-3011; Ord. No. 76-7, § 1, 3-10-1976)
Secs. 2-142—2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MARSHAL 
Sec. 2-161. - Appointment; duties generally.     The city manager shall appoint a city marshal, who shall perform the duties and responsibilities prescribed by the city manager or of the community development director consistent therewith. (Code 1976, § 2-3001)
Sec. 2-162. - Oath; bond.     The city marshal shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe an oath that he will faithfully perform such duties, and give bond with good security in such amount as may be required by the mayor and council, for the faithful performance of his duties. (Code 1976, § 2-3002)
Sec. 2-163. - Revenue collections. (a)	It shall be the duty of the city marshal to collect all executions issued for ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes or license fees, assessments, revenues, fees, costs and other charges. All sales under such executions shall be held by the city marshal as provided by law. (b)	The city marshal shall collect all delinquent ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, assessments, revenues, fees, costs and other charges. It shall also be the duty of the city marshal to levy and enforce such collection, as provided by law, and all executions placed in his hands for such purpose, and to do all the acts and things necessary in connection therewith to enforce the collection. (Code 1976, § 2-3003)
Sec. 2-164. - Duty to place purchaser at tax sale in possession. (a)	Upon the sale of any property, real or personal, under any execution issued by authority of the Charter of the city and ordinances passed pursuant to the Charter, and after the time fixed by law to redeem the same, it shall be the duty of the city marshal, or other levying officer of the city, conducting the sale, or his successor in office with the assistance, if necessary of any policeman, or policeman of the city, on request of such purchaser at the sale, or his attorney at law or agent, to put the purchaser, his attorney or agent, in possession of the property, provided that the officer shall not turn out any person other than the defendant or anyone claiming under him. (b)	It shall be unlawful for any defendant in such execution, or anyone claiming under him, to resist the marshal or levying officer in the execution of his duty as defined in subsection (a) of this section. (Code 1976, § 2-3004)
Secs. 2-165—2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRAVEL EXPENSES AND ADVANCES 
Sec. 2-191. - Governing body and appointed officials.     All members of the mayor and council and appointed officials of the city will be advanced or reimbursed travel expenses for travel in connection with city business on the following basis: (1)	Advances. a.	All requests for advances against expenses must be signed by the person requesting the advance and approved by the mayor or the mayor pro tem in his absence. No advances against expenses, including prepayment of lodging, registration or travel expenses, shall be made until approved by the mayor in writing. b.	All advance request forms shall be completed in full detail by each person making an advance request on the form provided by the city manager. (2)	Expense form. a.	Upon return from any trip, an expense form shall be completed in full by the person making the trip. This form shall be returned no later than 14 days following the trip to be reimbursed. b.	The expense form shall be signed by the person filing the request, the mayor or mayor pro tem, and by the city manager attesting to its compliance with the established procedure and approved by the city manager. c.	Moneys reimbursed to the city must be shown on an attached receipt to any expense request. d.	Documentation must accompany all expense forms in the form of motel-hotel bills, plane tickets, and beginning and ending mileage for mileage reimbursement. e.	The city manager's expense form shall be reviewed and approved by the mayor or the mayor pro tem. f.	The mayor or mayor pro tem's expense form will be reviewed and signed by either (but not their own approval) and a member of the governing body and the city manager. (3)	Travel policy. a.	It is the policy of mayor and council that all travel and business expenses incurred by mayor and council must meet the following criteria in order to be reimbursable: 1.	The purpose for which the expense was incurred must be of benefit to the city.2.	The amount of the expenses must be reasonable under the circumstances and in relation to the event or activity involved and the benefit to which it relates. On behalf of the mayor and council members, staff must seek the lowest possible prices or government rates at hosting facilities or nearby facilities. 3.	The city will pay all reasonable travel expenses for members of the governing body for attending all Georgia Municipal Association meetings, including those committees and subcommittees to which members belong and the board of directors where they are members, National League of Cities Annual Conference, the annual Lowndes County Bird Supper, the annual Washington, D.C. trip, the annual Legislative Black Caucus, the Community Planning Institute sponsored by the Georgia Planning Association, GMA's Newly Elected Officials Training, and the U.S. Conference of Mayors annual meeting without being specifically authorized by a majority of mayor and council for expense reimbursement. Any member of the governing authority may travel to any approved event provided such travel is within the approved budgeted amount provided however such travel is not in conflict with subsection (3)a.2. Travel expenses to attend other meetings will be paid only for those meetings and members specifically authorized by a majority vote of mayor and council to attend. 4.	Except as otherwise provided herein, in every case where the payment of travel expenses is authorized, the city will pay registration fees, the actual reasonable costs of transportation and lodging, and a maximum food allowance of $50.00 per day, not including gratuities, unless the food expenses occurred in a metropolitan statistical area as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau with a population of over 400,000, the maximum reimbursement of $75.00 per day, not including gratuities. Costs for less than a whole day shall be prorated. No expenditures in excess of the maximum here stated will be reimbursable except when deemed by a majority of mayor and council to have been warranted under the circumstances. In order to be considered for reimbursement, such expenses must be fully documented. Reimbursement will not be granted when the cost of any meal is free or included in the registration fee of the event. 5.	City credit cards will be issued to members of council for out-of-town travel. Council shall have the discretion to store these city cards in the city manager's office or may retain physical possession of the card. Non-city business charges are not allowed. 6.	Transportation costs will be paid by the city only for the most reasonable and economical means. The use of city-owned vehicles for travel is permissible provided prior approval by the city manager or mayor is obtained, which approval shall be withheld only in the event a vehicle is not available. Where travel by a personal vehicle is authorized, the city will reimburse to and from the destination based upon the prevailing travel rate established by the internal revenue service (IRS). For elected officials who receive a car allowance, half of this travel rate will be eligible for reimbursement. The costs associated with any changes or deviations from the approved method of travel will be the responsibility of the traveler. Mileage to destination shall be determined by MapQuest or other recognized map site and shall be used as a base mileage for the trip including return. No more than a five percent deviation from that mileage shall be paid unless explanation is provided and approved by mayor and city manager. The rate will be determined each year in accordance with the rate allowed by the internal revenue service and will remain in effect for the full calendar year. 7.	The clerk or assistant clerk of council may provide travel assistance to members of mayor and council as may be needed or requested. This includes the arrangement of itinerary, registration, reservations for travel and lodging, transportation tickets, advances, and other assistance that may be applicable. 8.	The actual cost of meals, not to exceed $50.00 per day, will be paid for spouses of council members attending official functions of the Georgia Municipal Association. Spouses may travel to official functions of GMA. However, no lodging, transportation, or other travel expenses of spouses will be paid, other than meals as outlined above. In no event will the city pay travel expenses for children or other persons who may accompany members of mayor and council. 9.	Alcoholic beverages shall not be considered for reimbursement to individual members of the governing authority; however alcoholic beverages are eligible when it is an official dinner or function hosted by the city. The number of guests and names city officials must be attached to the reimbursement form(s). 10.	Any unused portion of any advances, overpayments, and any amounts due the city which are not reimbursed at the time of filing of the travel expense report, or within 14 calendar days as required hereunder, shall be deducted from the compensation of the member or appointed official. 11.	City council members travel expense forms shall be filed with the finance director giving complete details, including a travel expense report with supporting itemized receipts and documentation, and certified by the member to be true and correct. The member's expense form shall be reviewed and signed by the mayor and the city manager provided it meets the requirements of this policy. 12.	Any decision made by the mayor disallowing travel expenses must be based upon a specific violation of this policy and may be appealed to the mayor and council to be heard at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 13.	The mayor and council shall have an individual travel budget for out of town travel as follows: The mayor shall have a fiscal year budget of $12,000.00 and each member of council shall have a fiscal year budget of $6,000.00. In addition, the city will budget a specific amount for the event costs of the Bird Supper, the Washington D.C. trip and for any other such budgeted trip that might be necessary in the future, for expenses unique to those trips. Each member's expenses for those trips shall be included on the individual members travel expense statement. In addition, the city will budget an amount for miscellaneous trips that can be used by any of the member's upon the vote and approval of the governing authority when determined necessary and in the best interest of the city. 14.	The mayor shall have authority to make any trip or travel which, in his judgment, he deems necessary and in the city's best interest for economic development or any other purpose related to city business and deemed by the mayor to be in the best interest of the city's welfare. The mayor shall be allowed to take with him such person or persons as he considers essential to the success of the trip and the expenses of said trip shall be paid by the city with the approval of the mayor pro tem and the councilman at large. The mayor's travel expense form shall be filed with the finance director giving complete details, including a travel expense statement with supporting itemized receipt(s) and documentation, and certified by the mayor to be true and correct. The mayor's expense form shall be reviewed and signed by the mayor, the mayor pro tem, and the city manager within ten days of receipt provided it meets the requirements of this policy and may be posted to the city's website in accordance with subsection a.19 of this section. The finance department will provide reimbursement to the mayor no later than ten business days after stamped received by the senior accounting clerk responsible for travel. Travel expenses shall not exceed the annual budgeted amount. 15.	Council members travel expenses shall not exceed the annual budgeted amount. Council members' travel expense forms shall be filed with the finance director giving complete details, including a travel expense report with supporting itemized receipt(s) and documentation, and certified by the council member to be true and correct. Council members' expense forms shall be reviewed and signed by the mayor and the city manager within ten days of receipt provided it meets the requirements of this policy and may be posted to the city's website in accordance with subsection a.19 of this section. The finance department will provide reimbursement to council members no later than ten business days after stamped received by the senior accounting clerk responsible for travel. In order for an expense form to be stamped received, it must have the city manager's and mayor's approval signature affixed. 16.	At next available mayor/council meeting upon return from a trip, mayor/council may report any travel and the purpose of the travel during council comments. In the event there were numerous members of mayor/council traveling, one member can report for all. 17.	When a member of mayor/council, or their representative, serves on a board or organization related to their position with the city and that board/organization provides travel, meals, and/or lodging reimbursement or per diem for such, said member will file all travel costs associated with that organization and not the City of Valdosta. If, during this travel, said member performs any separate functions directly related to their role with the City of Valdosta, travel expenses above and beyond those covered by the board/organization will be eligible for reimbursement as allowed within the city travel policy. In such cases, copies of all reimbursement forms submitted to the board/organization must be included in the city travel reimbursement form for verification purposes. 18.	The reimbursement for tips at meals will be included when the tip is automatically added into the bill, or when added to the bill by mayor/council up to 18 percent of the total bill. All tips must be paid on the city's charge card. No cash tips for meals will be reimbursed. Additional tip included by mayor/council will not be reimbursed. 19.	Within ten days of filing a travel expense statement, members of mayor and council may have posted on the city's website the following: (a) a copy of the individual member's travel statement including: (1) number of officials/guests, (2) event name, (3) location, (4) purpose, (5) benefit to the city, and (6) reimbursement forms with receipts. (Code 1976, § 2-3012(a); Ord. No. 92-30, 8-6-1992; Ord. No. 94-16, 7-7-1994; Ord. No. 97-11, 4-10-1997; Ord. No. 2001-8, §§ 1—4, 3-8-2001; Ord. No. 2008-8, 2-7-2008; Ord. No. 2010-14, 4-8-2010; Ord. No. 2011-9, § 1, 3-24-2011; Ord. No. 2011-25, 7-7-2011) 
Sec. 2-192. - City employees. (a)	Advances. (1)	All requests for advance travel expenses must be signed by the person requesting the advance, by the respective department head and approved by the city manager. All requests must be submitted on the form authorized by the city manager. (2)	All advance request forms shall be completed in full detail by each employee making an advance request. (b)	Credit cards. All credit cards of the city shall be kept and maintained by the city manager or his designee and shall be disbursed to any city employee only upon the request of the respective department head. Any and all credit cards shall be returned immediately upon return from any travel. (c)	Expense forms. (1)	Upon return from any work-related trip, an expense form shall be completed in full by the employee making the trip. This form shall be returned and submitted to the city manager no later than 30 days following a trip. (2)	The expense form shall be signed by the employee filing the request, by his department head, and by the accounting department attesting to its compliance with the established procedure and approved by the city manager. (3)	Moneys reimbursed to the city must be shown on an attached receipt to the expense request. (4)	Documentation must accompany all expense requests in the form of motel/hotel bills, plane tickets, and beginning and ending mileage for mileage reimbursement. (d)	Travel policy. All city employees will be advanced travel funds or reimbursed travel funds for employment-connected travel upon the following criteria and schedule: (1)	Meals will be reimbursed to the employee up to $35.00 per diem basis, not including gratuities; except if the expenses occurred in a metropolitan area with a population of over 400,000, the maximum cost per day shall be $50.00, not including gratuities. Reimbursement will begin with the first meal following departure from the city. (2)	Meals and hotel charges will be reimbursed at the single rate.(3)	Charges for telephone calls regarding city business will be reimbursed.(4)	Charges for alcoholic beverages will not be reimbursed.(5)	Travel reimbursement costs will be the lesser of day coach fare destination or the current reimbursement mileage rate for a personal vehicle as designated by the Internal Revenue Service. (6)	Travel reimbursement for use of a personal vehicle will be at the current rate designated by the Internal Revenue Service. (7)	Spouse registration, lodging, travel and event participation will be at the expense of the employee. (8)	Pre-registration of conference or meetings that include costs for meals will not be limited to $35.00 per day meal cost, but shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. (Code 1976, § 2-3012(b); Ord. No. 77-1, §§ 1—4, 1-27-1977; Ord. No. 77-2, §§ 1—4, 1-27-1977; Ord. No. 79-5, 2-7-1979; Ord. No. 79-39, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 79-40, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 81-33, 7-23-1981; Ord. No. 86-19, 3-20-1986; Ord. No. 92-30, 8-6-1992; Ord. No. 94-16, 7-7-1994; Ord. No. 97-11, 4-10-1997) 
Secs. 2-193—2-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- Cross reference— Fire department, § 46-41 et seq.; police department, § 66-31 et seq.
Sec. 2-231. - Departments and directors enumerated.     The following departments and their directors are created or continued in the executive branch of the city: (1)	Finance department, director of finance;(2)	Police department, chief of police;(3)	Fire department, fire chief;(4)	Public works department, director of public works;(5)	Water and sewer department, director of utilities;(6)	Recreation and parks department, director of recreation;(7)	Inspection department, director of inspections;(8)	Engineering department, city engineer;(9)	Community development, director of community development; and(10)	Human resources, director of human resources.(Code 1976, § 2-4001)
Sec. 2-232. - Duties and responsibilities.     The duties and responsibilities of the departments and directors listed in section 2-231 shall be prescribed by ordinance and by administrative regulations of the city manager consistent with such ordinance. (Code 1976, § 2-4001)
Secs. 2-233—2-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES[8] Footnotes: --- (8) --- Cross reference— Construction board of adjustment and appeals, § 18-191 et seq.; housing board of adjustments and appeals, § 18-221 et seq.; historic preservation commission, § 58-61 et seq.; board of ethics, § 78-49; zoning board of appeals, app. A, § 11; board of adjustment for airport zoning, app. C, § IX.State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 2-271—2-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY[9] Footnotes: --- (9) --- State Law reference— Hospital authority created, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72.State Law reference— Hospital Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq.
Sec. 2-291. - Need for authority; creation.     There is a need for a hospital authority to function in the city, and there is created such an authority. (Code 1976, § 2-8001)
Sec. 2-292. - Name of authority.     The hospital authority created in this division is to function in the city and the county jointly and shall be known as "The Hospital Authority of Valdosta and Lowndes County, Georgia." (Code 1976, § 2-8002)
Sec. 2-293. - Appointment of members; vacancies. (a)	The hospital authority shall consist of eight members, four of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and council, and four of whom shall be appointed by the governing body of the county. (b)	Members shall be allowed to serve an unrestricted number of consecutive five-year terms. (c)	When a vacancy occurs as result of resignation, death or disability, at its next regular meeting following the vacancy occurring, the hospital authority shall notify the appropriate governing authority of the vacancy, and simultaneously therewith submit three names from which the governing authority, at its next regular meeting, will select one to fill the vacancy and duly notify the appointee and the hospital authority. (d)	When a vacancy is about to occur as result of the expiration of a member's term, at its regular meeting at least 30 days prior to the occurrence of the vacancy, the hospital authority shall notify the appropriate governing body of the vacancy, and simultaneously therewith submit three names from which the governing authority at its next regular meeting shall select one of the three to fill the vacancy and duly notify the appointee and the hospital authority. (e)	A licensed physician of the medical staff of any hospital operated by the authority may be appointed as a member thereof. (Code 1976, § 2-8003; Res. No. 82-23, 12-9-1982)
Sec. 2-294. - Division of authority.     The mayor and council and the governing body of the county shall have equal voting power with respect to matters pertaining to the hospital authority. (Code 1976, § 2-8004)
Secs. 2-295—2-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VALDOSTA-LOWNDES COUNTY PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD[10] Footnotes: --- (10) --- Editor's note—This division is derived from the "Memorandum of Agreement By and Between Lowndes County, Georgia, City of Valdosta, Georgia, City of Hahira, Georgia, City of Remerton, Georgia, City of Lake Park, Georgia, and City of Dasher, Georgia," as adopted by the mayor and council in August of 1999.
Sec. 2-311. - Established.     There is established by the city and county a board to be known and designated as the Valdosta-Lowndes County Parks and Recreation Board ("the board"). 
Sec. 2-312. - Compensation; appointment; terms of office; ex-officio members. (a)	The parks and recreation board shall consist of nine members. One member shall be appointed by the county, who shall be a member of the board of commissioners; one member shall be appointed by the city, who shall be a member of the mayor and council; one member at-large shall be appointed each by the county and city; one member shall be appointed each by the City of Hahira, City of Lake Park, City of Remerton and City of Dasher; one member shall be appointed by the boards of education of the county and city, on a rotating basis, with the initial appointment being made by the county board of education. (b)	The initial appointment for one of the county appointees shall be for a term of two years, and the initial appointment of the other shall be for a term of three years. The initial appointment for one of the city appointees shall be for a term of two years, and the initial appointment of the other shall be for a term of three years. The initial appointment for the appointee of the City of Hahira shall be for a term of three years. The initial appointment for the appointee of the City of Lake Park shall be for a term of three years. The initial appointment for the appointee of the City of Remerton shall be for a term of two years. The initial appointment for the appointee of the City of Dasher shall be for a term of two years. The initial appointment for the appointee from the county board of education shall be for a term of two years. Thereafter all appointments shall be for a term of three years. (c)	The city manager and the county manager shall be ex-officio members of the parks and recreation board. 
Sec. 2-313. - Organization; operation.     The parks and recreation board shall appoint one of its members as chairman, and one of its members as secretary. The parks and recreation board shall meet a minimum of once a month, and the secretary shall keep official minutes of the meetings and all votes of the board. All meetings of the board must be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, and a majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
Sec. 2-314. - Duties.     The parks and recreation board shall serve in an advisory capacity regarding the operation and management of the parks and recreation program with the county and city. As one of its primary functions, the board shall have the responsibility to make recommendations on operational issues to the county manager, city manager and director, and the city and council will consider and respond to such recommendations. Each fiscal year an annual budget shall be prepared, and shall be submitted to and approved by the county and city. In addition, the board shall send a minimum of monthly reports to the city and the county. The director shall report to the board on all activities. The staff retained for the operation of the parks and recreation program shall report directly to the director. 
Sec. 2-315. - Funding of programs. (a)	The county has agreed to fund sufficient funds from its county-wide digest to provide for a parks and recreation program composed of the following activities: (1)	Parks and recreational administration.(2)	Mathis Auditorium.(3)	Jaycee Park.(4)	Parks.(5)	Therapeutics.(6)	Aquatics.(7)	Instructional programming.(8)	Athletics manager.(9)	Pinevale.(10)	Youth sports.(11)	Adult athletics.(12)	Hosted tournaments.(13)	Senior citizens.(14)	Special events.(15)	After school program.(16)	Summer camp program.(b)	In the day-to-day operation of the parks and recreation program, the expenses necessarily incurred thereby will be paid by the City of Valdosta and City of Hahira, and such cities will be reimbursed monthly for actual expenses incurred by such cities; however, such reimbursement shall not exceed the annual budget appropriation for the parks and recreation program without prior approval. Detailed expense reports will be required as set forth by the county finance director. Expense reports shall be furnished to the county finance director no later than the 15th day of each month and payment shall be made by the county no later than the first day of the following month. 
Sec. 2-316. - Activities.     The following activities shall be funded and operated under the parks and recreation program: (1)	Parks and recreation administration. The parks and recreation administration division shall oversee the daily operations of the parks, recreation and community affairs department and administer and evaluate departmental policies and procedures, and provide quality recreational programming, facilities and special events for the entire community. (2)	Mathis Auditorium. The Mathis Auditorium division shall provide and maintain meeting facilities, including a multipurpose room of 5,000 square feet provided in the community for banquets and meetings, and a 1,200-seat auditorium facility with stage support for community groups, shows and concerts promoted by outside organizations. (3)	Jaycee Park. The Jaycee Park division shall provide a facility for meetings, rentals for private functions, instructional classes and camps for the entire community. (4)	Parks. The parks division shall maintain parks and facilities in a safe, attractive and accessible condition, and develop new parks for public use and provide a variety of recreational opportunities. (5)	Therapeutics. The therapeutics division shall provide: a.	Therapeutic programs designed to meet social, recreational and educational needs of the mentally and physically disabled community in the city and county; b.	A quality social, recreational and educational program to the mentally and physically disabled adults and children; and c.	Quality summer programs for the special needs population.(6)	Aquatics. The aquatics division shall provide quality aquatic programming that will benefit the citizens of the city and county, and provide a quality aquatic facility that is operated in compliance with the state standards. A pool is operated at the Fry Street location, which meets state pool operating and safety standards with hired, professionally trained aquatic managers and certified lifeguards. Such location provides a variety of aquatics, including swimming lessons, free swimming, specialty classes and summer events. (7)	Instructional programming. The instructional programming division will provide quality programming for the residents of the city and county, to include a variety of instructional, educational and informative programs. (8)	Athletic manager/coordinator. The athletic manager/coordinator oversees the daily athletic operations that are used in adult programs, weekend tournaments and special athletic events, as well as coordinating the training and supervision of all athletic personnel. (9)	Pinevale. The Pinevale division's responsibilities shall be to meet the athletic, recreational and social needs of the Pinevale Youth Center participants, by providing a variety of youth-oriented programs through the Pinevale Youth Center. (10)	Youth sports division. The youth sports division provides a quality, economical and community-oriented recreational youth sports program for the city and county citizens, by providing seasonal leagues for boys and girls four to 18 years of age, including baseball, football, basketball and soccer for boys, and softball, soccer, basketball and cheerleading for girls. (11)	Adult athletics. The adult athletics division offers a variety of programs and events to both adult men and women, which events consist of softball, basketball, soccer, football and tennis. (12)	Hosted tournaments. The hosted tournaments division provides quality tournaments for the citizens of the city and county. Such division currently provides 12 quality softball invitational tournaments per year; four state parks and recreation association hosted tournaments per year; and four American Softball Association tournaments per year. (13)	Senior citizens. The senior citizens division shall establish quality programs for all senior citizens 55 years of age and older. Such division also provides facilities and programs for senior activities and instructional programming. A senior center is currently under construction, and the construction is funded jointly by the city and county. (14)	Special events. The special events division provides special events for the recreation of the county and city. (15)	After school program. The after school program division provides afternoon activities for elementary school age children in the community. (16)	Summer camp program. The summer camp program division provides an eight-week summer day camp for school age children in the city and county. Such division provides a quality eight-week camp program for an average of 30 children per site, per week. 
Sec. 2-317. - Capital improvements.     Unless otherwise agreed by separate written agreement, the county and cities agree and understand that the funding contemplated by the agreement as set forth in section 2-315 shall be for the annual operating budget of the county-wide recreational program. Any capital improvement or acquisitions of parks or other facilities for recreational purposes shall be at the expense of the individual government or by separate contract between the parties, or any combination thereof. 
Sec. 2-318. - Parks and recreation department.     The current and future employees of the city parks and recreation department and the current director shall continue to be considered employees of the city and subject to all of the benefits granted city employees and the personnel rules, regulations and procedures of the city, including its grievance procedure. Upon a vacancy in the office of director, the city and county will jointly conduct a solicitation phase for the hiring of a director. The city manager and county manager will jointly hire any new director. 
Sec. 2-319. - Director's duties.     The director shall be responsible for the general organization and staffing for the parks and recreation program, including, but not limited to, the following: (1)	Report to and be responsible to the city manager.(2)	Develop a plan for the parks and recreation program.(3)	Prepare an annual budget for the parks and recreation program. In the preparation of the budget, the director will work closely with the county manager, city manager and the parks and recreation board. The budget will be submitted on the format approved by the county finance department. (4)	Maintain complete and accurate records, under the supervision of the city's private sector certified public accountant, of all activities of the parks and recreation program and all receipts and disbursements of funds. A copy of such audit is to be furnished to the county each year. (5)	Oversee the execution of the parks and recreation program plan.(6)	Attend the monthly meeting of the advisory board and respond to their suggestions and inquiries. (7)	Make monthly reports to the advisory board, city manager and county manager, as they may require. (8)	Such other duties as may be prescribed by the city manager.
Secs. 2-320—2-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TREE COMMISSION 
Sec. 2-331. - Creation and purpose.     There is created a commission to be known and designated as the city tree commission for the purpose of regulating the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs in public places, providing for the pruning and removal of trees on private property which endanger public safety, and to generally improve the general welfare and health of the people of the city and the county. (Code 1976, § 2-8061; Ord. No. 84-25, § 1, 8-9-1984)
Sec. 2-332. - Members; terms; vacancies.     The tree commission shall consist of nine members as follows: Seven members shall be appointed by the mayor and council; the director of public works shall be an ex officio member, and the director of the department of leisure services shall be an ex officio member; an appointed member of the mayor and council shall serve as an ex officio member also. The seven members appointed by the mayor and council shall be citizens of the city, and the respective terms of the members shall begin as follows: (1)	One member for one year;(2)	Two members for three years; and(3)	Four members for four-year terms;and thereafter upon the expiration of such terms, successors shall be appointed for a term of four years by the mayor and council. Vacancies caused by death, resignation or otherwise shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and council. (Code 1976, § 2-8062; Ord. No. 84-25, § 2, 8-9-1984; Ord. No. 86-22, 4-10-1986)
Sec. 2-333. - Powers and authority.     The tree commission shall have the power and authority to: (1)	Study and determine the problems and needs of the city for the planting of trees and shrubberies in public places. (2)	Recommend to the proper authorities and officials of the city the types and kinds of trees or shrubs to be planted upon the right-of-way of municipal streets, public parks and public facilities. (3)	Assist the city and parks and recreation department in a program to protect and maintain existing trees, shrubs and green areas on all city-owned property and public properties. (4)	Recommend to the mayor and council removal of any trees or shrubbery deemed to be hazardous to the public safety or public health. (5)	a.	Assist the proper officials and make available to the general public news and information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of trees, shrubbery and other greenery within the corporate limits of the city; b.	Recommend from time to time as necessary ordinances and other programs that will be beneficial to protect and maintain existing trees, shrubs and green areas; and c.	Encourage the development of private property owners of landscaped areas with trees and shrubs. (Code 1976, § 2-8063; Ord. No. 84-25, § 3, 8-9-1984)
Sec. 2-334. - Officers and meetings.     Upon appointment of the initial tree commission by the mayor and council, the commission shall meet and elect one of its members as chairman and one of its members as secretary. The commission shall then provide for the rules and procedures for the holding of regular and special meetings of the commission as deemed advisable and necessary. (Code 1976, § 2-8064; Ord. No. 84-25, § 4, 8-9-1984)
Secs. 2-335—2-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sec. 2-361. - Creation of the Greater Lowndes Planning Commission.     There is established a Greater Lowndes Planning Commission to succeed to the general powers, duties and responsibilities of the former Greater Lowndes County Planning Commission, and as more fully set forth in this division. All acts, decisions, determinations and findings heretofore made by the abolished Greater Lowndes County Planning Commission are ratified and confirmed and shall remain in force and effect until changed. Any unfinished business of the abolished Greater Lowndes County Planning Commission, including any scheduled hearings or hearings in progress, shall be assumed, continued and carried out by the new commission. All 13 membership appointments of the abolished Greater Lowndes County Planning Commission shall continue uninterruptedly until the expiration date of their term as original members of the new commission. Future membership appointments and reappointments, including the addition of a 14th member representing the City of Dasher, shall continue as prescribed in section 2-362. (Ord. No. 96-56, § 2, 12-5-1996)
Sec. 2-362. - Membership.     The planning commission shall consist of 14 appointed members: five members appointed from the county commission, five from the mayor and council, two appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Hahira, one appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Lake Park, and one appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Dasher. All members shall be appointed for five-year terms and until their successors are appointed. (Ord. No. 96-56, § 3, 12-5-1996)
Sec. 2-363. - Compensation.     All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. (Ord. No. 96-56, § 4, 12-5-1996)
Sec. 2-364. - Organization, rules, staff and officers.     The planning commission shall elect from its members a chairman and a vice-chairman, each to serve for a term of one calendar year and until a successor is elected. The commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the chairman or majority of commission members shall determine. The commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its meetings and the transaction of its business, and shall keep records of its resolutions, motions, transactions, findings, determinations and recommendations. These records shall be public records. The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it deems necessary for its work, within the budget provided for its operation by the respective member governments, or other funds lawfully available to it. (Ord. No. 96-56, § 5, 12-5-1996)
Sec. 2-365. - Finances.     In the performance of its duties, the planning commission may cooperate with, contract with, and accept funds from federal, state, local, public or semi-public agencies, or private individuals or corporations, and may expend such funds and carry out cooperative undertakings and contracts with any of them within its lawful powers. The commission is authorized to make expenditures for the purchase of required equipment and supplies, all, with exception of gifts to the commission or contract receipts, to be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the member governments of the commission. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division to the contrary, all checks or other orders of the commission for the withdrawal of money from banking institutions shall be signed in accordance with the commission's operating procedures as authorized by the member governments. (Ord. No. 96-56, § 6, 12-5-1996)
Sec. 2-366. - Powers, duties and responsibilities. (a)	It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission, subject to the direction and control of the respective member governments, to make surveys and studies of existing conditions and future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, general welfare, efficiency and economy in the development of the member governments. In particular, the commission shall have the power and duty, subject to the direction and control of the member governments, to: (1)	Prepare and maintain a local comprehensive plan for each of the member governments in accordance with state guidelines and regulations, and make recommendations on any amendments to such plan. (2)	Prepare and recommend to the member governments the adoption of amendments or revisions to local development regulations, including zoning ordinances and maps, subdivision regulations, special ordinances, and the like. (3)	Prepare and recommend to the member governments for the adoption of subdivision plats, or official maps, and amendments, showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened, narrowed or closed streets, public open spaces, or public building sites. (b)	The commission shall have such additional duties and responsibilities and shall perform such additional functions and services as may be called for by the member governments. (Ord. No. 96-56, § 7, 12-5-1996)
Secs. 2-367—2-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
Sec. 2-391. - Creation and purpose.     There is created a commission to be known as the Valdosta Historic District Preservation Commission, which shall be part of the planning function of the city. (Code 1976, § 2-8070)
Sec. 2-392. - Members; terms; vacancies.     The historic preservation commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and council, who shall be residents of the city and who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. The term of office for each commission member shall be three years. On appointment of the first commission, two members shall be appointed for a term of three years, two members for a term of two years, and two members for a term of one year. All appointments thereafter shall be for a term of three years. In the event of a vacancy, the appointment shall be for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation, although they may be reimbursed for expenses incurred. (Code 1976, § 2-8071; Ord. No. 85-5, 2-13-1985)
Sec. 2-393. - Powers.     The commission created in this division shall be authorized to: (1)	Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property. (2)	Recommend to the mayor and council specific places, districts, buildings, structures, objects or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts. (3)	Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny such applications in accordance with the provisions of this division. (4)	Recommend to the mayor and council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, objects or works of art as an historic property or as an historic district or as part of an historic district be revoked or removed. (5)	Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the Facade and Conservation Easement Act of 1976 (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.). (6)	Conduct educational programs on historical properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities. (7)	Make such investigations and studies on matters relating to historic preservation, including the consultation with historic preservation experts as the mayor and council or the commission itself may deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources. (8)	Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the mayor and council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired. (9)	Submit to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated and review and make comments to this agency concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places. (10)	Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation programs. (11)	Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the mayor and council enter into agreements to do so. (Code 1976, § 2-8072)
Sec. 2-394. - Adoption of rules and standards.     The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws, removal of membership, provisions, and designated guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the authority to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this division. (Code 1976, § 2-8073)
Sec. 2-395. - Officers and meetings; public records.     The historic preservation commission shall also provide for the time and place of its regular meetings and a method for calling of special meetings. The commission shall elect such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum of the commission shall consist of a majority of the members. All meetings of the commission shall be public meetings, and a public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. (Code 1976, § 2-8074)
Sec. 2-396. - Conflict of interest.     At any time the historic preservation commission reviews a project or application in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, or that member is employed by a financial institution that may be considering financing of the project or application, that particular member shall be prohibited from voting on the particular project or application. (Code 1976, § 2-8075)
Sec. 2-397. - Designation of historic districts and properties; criteria for selection of historic districts; preliminary research by commission.     The historic preservation commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. The commission shall present to the mayor and council recommendations for historic districts and properties. Prior to the commission's recommendations of an historic district or historic property to the mayor and council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report consisting of: (1)	A physical description of the property or district.(2)	A statement of historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance of the property or district. (3)	A map showing district boundaries and classifications of individual properties in the districts, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties. (4)	A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries.(5)	Representative photographs of the district or properties.(Code 1976, § 2-8076)
Sec. 2-398. - Boundaries of an historic district.     Boundaries of an historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. (Code 1976, § 2-8077)
Secs. 2-399—2-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - KEEP LOWNDES-VALDOSTA BEAUTIFUL 
Sec. 2-421. - Created.     A Keep Lowndes-Valdosta Beautiful (KLVB) Commission is created for the purpose of assisting the city and the county in establishing community-wide policies for the purpose of decreasing the amount of loose refuse in the city and county and for the purpose of promoting and establishing beautification programs for the city and county. (Ord. No. 97-12, § I, 4-10-1997)
Sec. 2-422. - Duties. (a)	The duties of the KLVB commission shall be to:(1)	Promote public interest in the general improvement of the environment of the city and the county; (2)	Initiate, plan, direct and coordinate education programs for litter control for the community on a sustainable basis; (3)	Implement and maintain the Keep America Beautiful System;(4)	Study, investigate and develop plans for improving the health, sanitation, safety and cleanliness of the city and the county by beautifying the streets, highways, alleys, river and stream banks, lots, yards and other similar places in the city and county; (5)	Aid in the prevention of fires, diseases and other casualties by the removal and elimination of trash and other debris from the streets, highways, alleys, lots, yards, plots and other similar places; (6)	Encourage the placing, planting and/or preservation of trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects or ornamentation in the city and county; and (7)	Advise and recommend plans and cooperate with other agencies for the beautification of the city and county. (b)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge or change the powers and duties of other commissions, departments, boards and like agencies of the city or county, or the effect of other ordinances or resolutions regarding these matters adopted prior to April 10, 1997. (Ord. No. 97-12, § II, 4-10-1997)
Sec. 2-423. - Authority.     In order to perform its duties, the KLVB commission shall have the following authority: (1)	To adopt bylaws to facilitate the attainment of its purposes and functions.(2)	To initiate, plan, direct and coordinate community-wide efforts to achieve its goal.(3)	To solicit and accept donations and appropriations of money, services, products, property and facilities for expenditure and use by the commission for the fulfillment of commission purposes. (4)	To make recommendations to city and county governing bodies as well as to the private sector regarding measures which it deems necessary to accomplish its objectives. (Ord. No. 97-12, § III, 4-10-1997)
Sec. 2-424. - Membership.     The KLVB commission shall consist of not more than 12 voting members who shall be residents of the city and the county and who shall serve without remuneration. Four of the members shall be appointed by the city council, and four members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of the county. Four members shall be appointed by the sitting KLVB commission. In addition to the appointed members of the commission, the solid waste manager for the county and the director of public works for the city shall serve as nonvoting ex officio members of the commission. (Ord. No. 97-12, § IV, 4-10-1997)
Sec. 2-425. - Terms of office of members.     The terms of office of the members of the KLVB commission shall generally be for three-year staggered terms, with approximately one-third of the membership being appointed every year. The terms of four of the 12 voting initial members selected will expire on June 30, 1998; terms of four of the initial members will expire on June 30, 1999; terms of the remaining four of the initial members will expire on June 30, 2000. Members may serve a maximum of two consecutive terms or six years. Members shall hold office until their successors have been appointed and qualified. The appropriate governing authority shall fill each vacancy from a list of names submitted by the commission. (Ord. No. 97-12, § V, 4-10-1997)
Sec. 2-426. - Officers.     The KLVB commission shall elect from its membership a chairman and such other officers as may be desired. Officers shall be elected on a fiscal year (July 1—June 30) basis for a term of one year but may be reelected for succeeding terms. (Ord. No. 97-12, § VI, 4-10-1997)
Sec. 2-427. - Disbursal of funds; records. (a)	The KLVB commission shall have the power to receive and disburse funds within the limitations of appropriations, gifts and grants which have been previously approved jointly by the city and the county, and in connection with projects or undertakings. Within the same limitation, the commission shall be empowered to contract with any private or public agency with the approval of the city and/or the county to the extent required for its proper operation and to create and contract with not-for-profit corporations. (b)	The commission shall keep such records as will enable it to make such reports and accountings as are requested by the city and/or the county, which shall be subject to verification and examination by auditors of the city and/or the county. (c)	Any project or undertaking begun by the commission shall be terminated at any time upon the decision of either the board of commissioners of the county or the city council that its continuance is not in the public interest. (Ord. No. 97-12, § VII, 4-10-1997)
Secs. 2-428—2-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - AIRPORT AUTHORITY 
Sec. 2-451. - Created.     The Valdosta-Lowndes County Airport Authority is created and established effective May 1, 1987. (Ord. No. 87-8, § 1, 5-20-1987)
Sec. 2-452. - Assumption of airport control.     The airport authority shall assume the management and control of the Valdosta Municipal Airport effective May 1, 1987. (Ord. No. 87-8, § 2, 5-20-1987)
Secs. 2-453—2-470. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - METROPOLOTIAN PLANNING ORGANIZATION 
Sec. 2-471. - Policy committee established.     The City of Valdosta and Lowndes County do hereby establish a Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) Policy Committee to ensure a continuing, cooperative, and comprehensive transportation planning process for the Valdosta/Lowndes MPO and that said policy committee be empowered to establish a technical coordinating committee, a citizens advisory committee and other ad hoc or advisory committees as required or deemed necessary. The MPO policy committee will: (1)	Be the forum for cooperative decision-making and shall consist of principal elected officials of the participating local general governments within the Valdosta/Lowndes County MPO area and appointed officials of designated agencies, which oversee or operate major transportation modes within the area. The MPO policy committee: a.	Reviews and approves all transportation study programs;b.	Ensures that the transportation program is current and responsive to laws, rules, regulations; c.	Designates and prioritizes transportation improvement projects recommended in the planning process; d.	Serves as liaison between the planning process and the governmental units and designates membership and operations of the technical coordinating committee, the citizens advisory committee and other ad hoc study committees. (2)	Consist of the following members:a.	Chairman, Lowndes County Board of Commissioners (or representative);b.	Mayor, City of Valdosta (or representative);c.	Annually rotating small city mayor (mayor or representative of Hahira, Lake Park, Remerton or Dasher); d.	Lowndes County Manager;e.	Valdosta Manager;f.	SGRDC executive director;g.	Georgia DOT Commissioner (or representative);h.	Nonvoting members:1.	Division administrator—Federal Highway Administration;2.	Regional administrator—Federal Transit Administration.(Res. No. 2003-16, 11-20-2003)
Secs. 2-472—2-475. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - PUBLIC ART ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Sec. 2-476. - Purpose of program.     It is the intent and purpose to create in the City of Valdosta a program to further the purchase and foster the appreciation of works of public art. Also to promote the creation of works of art and the purchase of same for the citizens and the City of Valdosta in order to promote the aesthetic value to the entire community and encourage the preservation and protection of works of public art and to encourage economic development. (Ord. No. 2010-9, § 1, 2-25-2010)
Sec. 2-477. - Public art advisory committee. (a)	There is hereby created a public art advisory committee to be appointed by Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta to administer the public art program. (b)	The public art advisory committee shall consist of nine members. Five members appointed from the membership of the Lowndes-Valdosta Art Commission, including at least two professional artists and at least two members from the Board of Directors of the Lowndes-Valdosta Art Commission. One member from the general membership of the Lowndes-Valdosta Art Commission. Four members of the public art advisory committee shall be members of the community at large. (1)	The initial board shall be appointed by mayor and council as follows: One professional artist who is a member of the Lowndes-Valdosta Art Commission, one board member of Lowndes-Valdosta Art Commission and one member from the community at large for a term of three years; one professional artist who is a member of the Lowndes-Valdosta Art Commission, one member of the Board of Lowndes-Valdosta Art Commission and one member from the community at large for a term of two years; one member at large from the Lowndes-Valdosta Art Commission for a term of one year; two members from the community of the City of Valdosta for a term of one year. Thereafter members shall be appointed to three-year terms. (2)	Ex-officio members shall include a representative of the following departments to be determined by the city manager and the department head: Finance, planning and zoning, and public works. Ex-officio members shall also include the city manager and the mayor or the mayor's representative as appointed by the mayor. (3)	Five members shall reside, own property or work within the corporate limits of the City of Valdosta. The remaining four members shall be from the community at large. (Ord. No. 2010-9, § 1, 2-25-2010)
Sec. 2-478. - Powers and duties.     The public art advisory committee shall have the following powers and duties: (1)	The committee shall act as an advisory body to the mayor and the city council and as an advocate for public arts and aesthetics in all aspects of city life. It shall encourage, develop and support a variety of programs which reflect the cultural art needs and experience of all citizens and shall encourage participation by all citizens in the cultural art activities carried on in the city; (2)	Develop, maintain and update a public art master plan identifying locations for public artwork; (3)	Develop public art program guidelines and amendments thereto as deemed appropriate;(4)	Approve the location and installation of artwork based on public art program guidelines; and (5)	Request annual funding from various public, private, foundation and other potential sources to support the capital and operational needs of the public art program. (Ord. No. 2010-9, § 1, 2-25-2010)
Sec. 2-479. - Election of officers, quorum, bylaws, procedures of meetings.     Each year, the membership of the public art advisory committee shall meet as soon as practical after the effective date of this division and shall elect from among themselves a chairperson and vice-chairperson, each of whom shall continue as voting members. The chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the committee and the vice-chairperson shall preside in his or her absence. Such officer shall have such other powers, duties and responsibilities as are set out elsewhere herein. The committee shall also choose a secretary who may or may not be a member of the committee to keep minutes and records of the committee. Five members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. A majority of a quorum may exercise any and all powers of the committee. The committee may adopt its own bylaws, rules and procedures to govern internal workings in the conduct of its business. The committee shall meet at least quarterly and at such other times as it may deem necessary. (Ord. No. 2010-9, § 1, 2-25-2010)
Sec. 2-480. - Compensation of members.     The members shall receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed from the funds of the committee for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in pursuing the business of the committee. (Ord. No. 2010-9, § 1, 2-25-2010)
Sec. 2-481. - Funding. (a)	There shall be created a public art fund administered by the public art advisory committee which shall consist of all contributions received from cash grants and donations to the program for public art projects from governmental or private resources, and all other funds allocated by the City of Valdosta through the budgetary process for the purchase and fostering of public art. (b)	The public art fund shall be used solely for expenses associated with the selection, commissioning, acquisition, transportation, maintenance, education promotion, administrative duties, removal and insurance of works of art. (Ord. No. 2010-9, § 1, 2-25-2010)
Sec. 2-482. - Ownership of artwork.     Unless otherwise expressly agreed in writing ownership and title of all art acquired through spending of funds in the public art fund shall be vested in the City of Valdosta. (Ord. No. 2010-9, § 1, 2-25-2010)
Sec. 2-483. - Program guidelines and master plan.     The public art advisory committee may adopt specific criteria for review of proposed permanent public art projects and guidelines therefore. (1)	The initial guidelines and criteria for review of proposed permanent public art projects shall be as follows: a.	Relevance of the work to the City of Valdosta, its values, culture and people;b.	Technical suitability of the work for outdoor display, including its maintenance and conservation requirements; and c.	Relationship of the work to the site, especially how it serves to activate or enhance the public space. (2)	In general, a proposed work of public art will not be accepted if it is not original sculpture or painting. If accepted artwork is a multiple, it will only be accepted if it is a limited edition. Generally reproductions; unlimited editions; decorative, ornamental and functional elements of architecture; directional elements, such as super graphics, signage and color-coding usually are not considered artwork unless done by an artist. a.	Acceptable media include:1.	Sculpture: in the round, bas-relief, mobile, fountain, kinetic, electronic;2.	Mosaic: ceramic, glass, metal, wood, mixed media;3.	Fountains or water elements;4.	Crafts: Clay fiber, textiles, wood, metal, plastics, stained glass;5.	Mixed media;6.	Earthworks and environmental artworks;7.	Decorative, ornamental or functional elements designed by an artist; and8.	Murals and paintings.b.	Unacceptable criteria: The artwork does not meet professional standards for public art due to one or more of the following: 1.	Faults of design or workmanship which will either pose a public safety hazard or diminish the value of the work. 2.	The possibility that the artwork is fraudulent or not authentic.3.	The artwork appears to be of inferior quality relative to the quality of other works in the city's collection. c.	The public art advisory committee will consider the following questions and criteria when conducting its review: 1.	Aesthetic quality and artistic merit;2.	Placement and sitting;3.	Fabrication, handling and installation;4.	Maintenance requirements;5.	Conservation and preservation;6.	Liability and safety; and7.	Community.(Ord. No. 2010-9, § 1, 2-25-2010)
Sec. 2-484. - Definitions.     As used in this division the following terms shall mean as follows:     Artists or professional artist. Practitioner in the visual arts, generally recognized by critics and peers as a professional of serious intent and ability. Indications of a person's status as a professional artist include, but are not limited to, income realized through the commission of artwork, frequent or consistent art exhibitions, placement of artwork in public institutions or museums, receipt of honors and awards, and training in the arts.     Art, artwork or works of art. Tangible creations by artists exhibiting the highest quality of skill and aesthetic principles and includes all forms of the visual arts conceived in any medium, material or combination thereof, including, but not limited to, paintings, sculptures, engravings, carvings, frescos, stained glass, mosaics, mobiles, tapestries, murals, photographs, video projections, digital images, bas-relief, high relief, fountains, kinetics, collages, drawings, monuments erected to commemorate a person or an event, functional furnishings, such as artist designed searing and pavers, architectural elements designed by an artist, and artist designed landforms or landscape elements. (1)	The following shall not be considered artwork or works of art for purposes of the program: a.	Reproductions or unlimited copies of original artwork.(Ord. No. 2010-9, § 1, 2-25-2010)
Secs. 2-485—2-490. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[11] Footnotes: --- (11) --- Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-6(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(3); any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-6(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(14); Sunset Hill Trust Fund, § 26-91 et seq.; taxation, ch. 90.State Law reference— Discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; grants of state funds to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-491. - Depository; withdrawal of funds.     All funds of the city shall be deposited with the depository designated by the mayor and council and shall be withdrawn from such depository only upon checks signed as authorized from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. (Code 1976, § 2-5005; Ord. No. 97-21, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. 2009-29, 5-7-2009)
Sec. 2-492. - Bonds for public contractors.     No contract with the City of Valdosta for the doing of any public work in excess of $20,000 shall be valid for any purpose unless the contractor shall give: (1)	A performance bond with good and sufficient surety or sureties payable to, in favor of, and for the protection of the City of Valdosta. The performance bond shall be in an amount at least the total amount payable by the terms of the contract. (2)	A payment bond with good and sufficient surety or sureties payable to the City of Valdosta and for the use and protection of all subcontractors and for all persons supplying labor, materials, machinery and equipment in the prosecution of the work provided for in the contract. The payment bond shall be in the amount of at least a total amount payable by the terms of the contract. (Code 1976, § 2-5006; Ord. No. 88-35, 7-26-1988; Ord. No. 97-21, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. 2009-29, 5-7-2009) 
Secs. 2-493—2-510. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING PROCEDURE[12] Footnotes: --- (12) --- Editor's note—Ord. No. 2009-29, adopted May 7, 2009, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 2-511—2-514, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1976, §§ 2-5001—2-5004; Ord. No. 82-18, adopted Apr. 8, 1982; and Ord. No. 97-21, adopted Apr. 24, 1997.
Sec. 2-511. - Purchase orders required.     Purchases made by the city shall be made either by purchase order or procurement card. All purchase orders shall be signed by the city manager, deputy city manager of administration or other person designated by the city manager to act in the capacity when not utilizing the city procurement card. Other procurement information may be obtained by reading the City of Valdosta Purchasing Policy and Procedure Manual. The city will not be obligated to recognize claims for payment of materials, supplies and equipment issued without the authority of such purchase order or procurement card receipt. (Ord. No. 2009-29, 5-7-2009)
Sec. 2-512. - Purchases of $25,000.00 or more, specific pricing of construction projects for city departments, and information technology hardware and software. (a)	Except as provided for in subsection (b), purchase orders or procurement card transactions for amounts of $25,000.00 or more will be issued after approval of the mayor and council and after the receipt of sealed, competitive bids opened at a prior specified time by the city manager, deputy city manager of administration or another city employee designated by the city manager or mayor and council to act in this capacity in the presence of representatives of competing bidders, or in the event no bidders or representatives are present, at least two witnesses shall be present; provided, however, that competitive bids shall not be required if only one source of supply exist, an existing city annual contract, or an approved state or other governmental contract is in place for the desired product or service in which the contract pricing will be used. At least seven calendar days prior to the receipt of bids, except in the case of utmost urgency, a notice of the city's intent to receive bids shall be printed one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. (b)	Specific pricing of construction projects under $50,000.00. Purchase orders for amounts up to $50,000.00 will be issued only after approval of the city manager, deputy city manager of administration or any other city employee designated by the city manager or mayor and council and after the receipts of competitive pricing, by the requesting department from consultants and/or contractors for expedition including procurement of professional services and the award of construction contracts. Competitive prices will be independently verified by at least two individuals including the contract manager, purchasing agent or any other city employee designated by the city manager or mayor and council. (c)	The South Georgia RDC or Information Technology Manager with approval from the city manager or deputy city manager of administration will be responsible for procuring all information technology hardware and software utilizing the best source of supply available with regards to price, service and standardization. Purchase order amounts or procurement card transactions may exceed $25,000.00 and be exempt from mayor and council approval; however, orders will be issued only after approval of the city manager, deputy city manager of administration or any other city employee designated by the mayor and council. (Ord. No. 2009-29, 5-7-2009)
Sec. 2-513. - Purchases between $10,000.00 and $25,000.00.     Purchase orders or procurement card transactions for amounts in excess of $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 shall be issued only after the receipt of competitive prices in writing by mail, e-mail, facsimile or internet; provided, however, that competitive prices shall not be required if only one source of supply exist, an existing city annual contract, or an approved state or other governmental contract is in place for the desired product or service in which the contract pricing will be used. (Ord. No. 2009-29, 5-7-2009)
Sec. 2-514. - Purchases between $1,000.00 and $10,000.00.     Purchase orders or procurement card transactions for amounts in excess of $1,000.00 but less than $10,000.00 or less shall be issued to the vendor who quotes the best price or has provided similar products or service with an acceptable level of performance over the past year to the using department with prior approval from the city manager, deputy city manager of administration or another city employee designated by the city manager or mayor and council to act in this capacity. (Ord. No. 2009-29, 5-7-2009)
Sec. 2-515. - Purchases less than $1,000.00.     Purchase orders or procurement card transactions less than $1,000.00 may be made by any department that has funds available using their own discretion whereas quotes are not necessary but recommended. (Ord. No. 2009-29, 5-7-2009)
Secs. 2-516—2-540. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUDGETS[13] Footnotes: --- (13) --- State Law reference— Appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6.
Sec. 2-541. - Completion of annual operating budget requests. (a)	Generally. The individual budget requests for the annual operating budget shall be completed in three separate steps or phases: (1)	A proposed work program for the ensuing budget year shall be determined;(2)	A basic budget consisting of the personal services, materials and supplies, capital outlay and other operating expenses necessary to complete the planned work program at the current level of operations shall be prepared; and (3)	Program change requests shall be prepared for all proposed new work programs or the expansion of current work programs. (b)	Work program. All departments and divisions shall plan their work program and estimate their work load for the ensuing budget year. An explanation of the work program and a tabulation of the work load data shall be submitted. The preparation of the work program shall include three elements of information: (1)	Enumeration of functions and objectives. The work program presentation shall begin with a brief paragraph defining and explaining the purposes, objectives and functions of the department or division. (2)	Service estimates and service standards. The work program shall contain a concise analysis of the level of services which can be provided with the funds included in the budget requests. Any inadequacies of service which are not provided for shall be pointed out, and any changes proposed in the level of services or activity shall be explained. (3)	Work load data. a.	The work program shall contain a tabular listing of the work load planned for the ensuing budget year. Department and division heads shall analyze each activity under their supervision and determine the significant work units in each. The work units shall be reflected in existing records or be easily countable. They shall reflect work effort and shall be stated in familiar terminology. b.	If program changes are requested for the ensuing budget year, the effect of the program change on work load output shall be estimated. (Code 1976, § 2-5031)
Sec. 2-542. - Budget requests. (a)	Persons making budget request shall:(1)	Read all budget instructions carefully;(2)	Meet all deadline dates;(3)	Check all figures for mathematical accuracy and totals; and(4)	Round off all figures to the nearest dollar, and omit all zeros in the cents columns.(b)	The budget requests shall be prepared in duplicate, the original and one copy; the original copy shall be returned to the finance department, and a copy shall be retained by the requesting department. (Code 1976, § 2-5032)
Sec. 2-543. - Preparation of schedules. (a)	Organization chart. (1)	Each department head shall summarize the department organization on the first sheet of the organization chart showing the major functional areas (to coincide with the currently established divisions of the department) and indicating the name of the function or division and the total full-time numbers of positions by each function or division. (2)	Additional sheets (one for each functional area or division) shall be included showing a detailed breakdown of each function or division, to include the total numbers of full-time positions for each classification or position title and the major functional areas under each division. (b)	Pricing schedule. (1)	The pricing schedule shall be provided prior to the start of the ensuing budget year. This schedule shall include costs (for budget purposes) for common items of equipment. (2)	Departmental officials shall contact the purchasing agent only for pricing estimates. The vendors shall not be contacted unless requested to do so by the city manager. (c)	Chart of accounts. The chart of accounts schedule shall be provided prior to the start of the ensuing budget year. This schedule shall name and describe all existing account classifications with the city. (Code 1976, § 2-5033)
Sec. 2-544. - Capital improvement program; definition. (a)	Capital improvements shall mean projects of generally large size, fixed nature and long life, value determined annually by the city's schedule for fees and capital projects on file in the office of the city clerk, which provide new or improved public facilities or services. Included in the first year of the program are all ongoing projects (those which have been funded), and those projects which are proposed to be funded for the ensuing fiscal year. All other proposed projects are scheduled over the remaining four years, in order of priority. (b)	Capital improvements shall include, without limitation, street improvements, bridges, water mains and treatment facilities, sewers (storm and sanitary), public buildings, parks, playgrounds, libraries, recreation facilities, the acquisition of land or right-of-way related to these projects, and major replacements and reconstruction. (c)	Also included as capital improvements are certain types of new major equipment. Generally, major equipment shall mean equipment with a life expectancy of at least 15 years. Heavy equipment shall include, without limitation, fire apparatus (these equipment items shall be included for new fire stations), bulldozers and draglines. (d)	Other items to be considered as capital improvements are preconstruction architectural and engineering costs and consultative services, such as site location studies, related to the planning and design of projects. (Code 1976, § 2-5034)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-545. - General procedure for capital improvement programming. (a)	A determination shall be made for a five-year period of what capital improvements are needed or desirable, arranged in order of priority. Both uncompleted projects currently underway and newly proposed projects shall be included. (b)	The financial resources such as general obligation bonds and revenue bonds shall be analyzed to determine the funds which should be available or can be provided within safe limits for construction or completion of capital improvements during a five-year period. (c)	The first year of the five-year schedule, called the capital budget, is considered the capital budget for the current fiscal year and shall include only funded projects. (d)	Those new projects which are tentatively selected for construction as well as ongoing projects to be completed shall be scheduled over the remaining four-year period in accordance with their need and desirability and in direct relation to the funds available. (e)	At the end of each year the capital improvement program shall be reviewed. Any projects that are no longer justified or needed shall be eliminated; others may be shifted in position in the program in accordance with changing needs. An additional year shall be added to replace the year just completed. Projects included in the budget for the current year shall again appear in the first year of the five-year program; and new and additional projects shall fall somewhere within the remaining four years based upon consideration or priority, feasibility, and availability of funds. (f)	The criteria to be used in analyzing proposed projects and their relative importance and priority shall include, without limitation, the following: (1)	Protection of life;(2)	Maintenance of public health;(3)	Protection of property;(4)	Maintenance of physical property;(5)	Provision of public services;(6)	Replacement of obsolete facilities;(7)	Reduction of operating costs;(8)	Public convenience and comfort; and(9)	Enhancement of community appearance.(Code 1976, § 2-5035)
Sec. 2-546. - Completion of five-year capital improvement program estimates. (a)	Project proposal sheets shall be completed in duplicate. The original shall be provided to the budget division, forwarded to the city manager, and a copy shall be retained by the requesting department. (b)	All participating departmental officials shall receive copies of their respective five-year programs for the previous year that are to be used as department work copies. These copies shall be submitted to departmental officials along with the blank project proposal sheets which shall be used to complete the new five-year program. (c)	The work copies (previous year's program) shall be reviewed in detail to determine accuracy, completeness, etc.; and any revisions or corrections, shall be made. Projects which are no longer needed, or which are considered to be nonfeasible, etc., shall be eliminated. (d)	Project proposals shall be prepared for all new or additional projects. Information given for each project shall be developed as accurately and comprehensively as possible, including all applicable data elements as described in this section. (e)	Projects shall be arranged in priority sequence by year only; i.e., all projects scheduled to begin in the ensuing budget year shall be grouped together, followed by all projects scheduled in the subsequent budget year, etc. There is no need to rank projects within each year on the basis of priority. (f)	Cost information for prior expenditures shall be obtained from the finance department. This information shall be given for all projects where there have been expenditures. (g)	The financial portion of the project proposal sheet shall be completed, using the most accurate cost figures available. Previous expenditures shall be used in estimated costs. These figures shall be updated for current market conditions and prices. (Code 1976, § 2-5036)
Sec. 2-547. - Submittal of budget.     The annual operating budget for the city shall be submitted to the mayor and council for their final approval or disapproval no later than the regular midmonth meeting in June of each fiscal year. The final proposed budget shall be submitted to the members of the mayor and council for their review at least 30 days prior to that meeting. (Ord. No. 92-28, 7-23-1992)
Secs. 2-548—2-570. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INVESTMENT POLICY 
Sec. 2-571. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Agencies means federal agency securities.     Asked means the price at which securities are offered.     Bankers' acceptance (BA) means a draft or exchange accepted by a bank or trust company. The accepting institution guarantees payment of the bill, as well as the issuer.     BID means the price offered by a buyer of securities. (When you are selling securities, you ask for a bid.) See definition of "Offer."     Broker means a person who brings buyers and sellers together for a commission.     Certificate of deposit (CD) means a time deposit with a specific maturity evidenced by a certificate. Large denomination CDs are typically negotiable.     Collateral means securities, evidence of deposit or other property which the borrower pledges to secure repayment of a loan. The term "collateral" also refers to securities pledged by a bank to secure deposits of public monies.     Comprehensive financial report (CAFR) means the official annual report for the city. The term "comprehensive financial report" includes five combined statements for each individual fund and account group prepared in conformity with GAAP. The term "comprehensive financial report" also includes supporting schedules necessary to demonstrate compliance with finance-related legal and contractual provisions, extensive introductory material and a detailed statistical section.     Coupon means: (1)	The annual rate of interest that a bond's issuer promises to pay the bondholder on the bond's face value. (2)	A certificate attached to a bond evidencing interest due on a payment date.    Dealer, as opposed to a broker, means a person who acts as a principal in all transactions, buying and selling for his own account.     Debenture means a bond secured only by the general credit of the issuer.     Delivery versus payment means two methods of delivery of securities: delivery versus payment and delivery versus receipt. The term "delivery versus payment" means delivery of securities with an exchange of money for the securities. The term "delivery versus receipt" means the delivery of securities with an exchange of a signed receipt for the securities.     Discount means the difference between the cost price of a security and its maturity when quoted at lower than face value. A security selling below the original offering price shortly after sale also is considered to be at a discount.     Discount securities means noninterest bearing money market instruments that are issued a discount and redeemed at maturity for full value, e.g., U.S. Treasury bills.     Diversification means dividing investment funds among a variety of securities offering independent returns.     Federal credit agencies means agencies of the federal government set up to supply credit to various classes of institutions, e.g., savings and loans, small business firms, students, farmers, farm cooperatives and exporters.     Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) means a federal agency that insures bank deposits up to $100,000.00 per deposit.     Federal home loan banks (FHLB) means the institutions that regulate and lend to savings and loan associations. The federal home loan banks play a role analogous to that played by the federal reserve banks vis-a-vis member commercial banks.     Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA or Fannie Mae). Like GNMA, the FNMA was chartered under the Federal National Association Act of 1938. The term "FNMA" means a federal corporation working under the auspices of the department of housing and urban development (HUD), and is the largest single provider of residential mortgage funds in the United States. Fannie Mae is a private stockholder-owned corporation. The corporation's purchases include a variety of adjustable mortgages and second loans, in addition to fixed rate mortgages. FNMA's securities are also highly liquid and are widely accepted. FNMA assumes and guarantees that all security holders will receive timely payment of principal and interest.     Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) consists of seven members of the federal reserve board and five of the 12 federal reserve presidents. The president of the New York Reserve Bank is a permanent member of the FOMC, while the other presidents serve on a rotating basis. The committee periodically meets to set federal reserve guidelines regarding purchases and sales of government securities in the open market as a means of influencing the volume of bank credit and money.     Federal reserve system means the central bank of the United States created by Congress and consisting of a seven-member board of governors in Washington, D.C., 12 regional banks and about 5,700 commercial banks that are members of the system.     Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA or Ginnie Mae) means securities influencing the volume of bank credit guaranteed by GNMA and issued by mortgage bankers, commercial banks, savings and loan associations and other institutions. The security holder is protected by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. Ginnie Mae securities are backed by the FHA, VA or FMHM mortgages. The term "passthroughs" is often used to describe Ginnie Maes.     Liquidity means a liquid asset, which is an asset that can be converted easily and rapidly into cash without substantial loss of value. In the money market, a security is liquid if the spread between bid and asked prices narrow and reasonable size can be done at those quotes.     Local Government Investment Pool (LGIP) means the aggregate of all funds from political subdivisions that are placed in the custody of the state treasurer for investment and reinvestment.     Market value means the price at which a security is trading and could presumably be purchased or sold.     Master repurchase agreement means a written contract covering all future transactions between the parties to repurchase; reverse repurchase agreements that establishes each party's rights in the transactions. A master agreement will often specify, among other things, the buyer's right of the buyer-lender to liquidate the underlying securities in the event of default by the seller-borrower.     Maturity means the date upon which the principal or stated value of an investment becomes due and payable.     Money market means the market in which shortterm debt instruments (bills, commercial paper, bankers acceptances, etc.) are issued and traded.     Offer means the price asked by the seller of securities. (When you are buying securities, you ask for an offer.) (See the definitions of "Ask" and "Bid.")     Open market operations means purchases and sales of government and certain other securities in the open market by the New York Federal Reserve Bank as directed by the FOMC in order to influence the volume of money and credit in the economy. Purchases inject reserves into the bank system and stimulate growth of money and credit; sales have the opposite effect. Open market operations are the most flexible monetary policy tool.     Portfolio means a collection of securities held by an investor.     Primary dealer means a group of government security dealers who submit daily reports of market activity and positions and monthly financial statements to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and are subject to its informal oversight. Primary dealers include the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), registered securities broker-dealers, banks and a few unregulated firms.     Prudent person rule means an investment standard. In some states the law requires that a fiduciary, such as a trustee, may invest money only in a list of securities selected by the custody state, the so called "legal list." In other states the trustee may invest in a security if such security is one which would be bought by a prudent person of discretion and intelligence who is seeking a reasonable income and preservation of capital.     Qualified public depositories means a financial institution which does not claim exemption from the payment of any sales or compensating use or ad valorem taxes under the laws of the state, which has segregated for the benefit of the commission eligible collateral having a value of not less than its maximum liability and which has been approved to hold public deposits by the public deposit protection commission.     Rate of return means the yield obtained on a security based on its purchase price.     Repurchase agreement (RP or REPO) means when a holder of securities sells such securities to an investor with an agreement to repurchase such securities at a fixed price on a fixed date. The security buyer in effect lends the seller money for the period of the agreement, and the terms of the agreement are structured to compensate him for such loan. Dealers use RP extensively to finance their positions, except when the FED is said to be doing RP, it is lending money, which is, increasing bank reserves.     Safekeeping means a service to customers rendered by banks for a fee whereby securities and valuables of all types and descriptions are held in the bank's vaults for protection.     Secondary market means a market made for the purchase and sale of outstanding issues following the initial distribution.     SEC Rule 15C3-1. See the definition of "Uniform net capital rule."     Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) means an agency created by Congress to protect investors in securities transactions by administering securities legislation.     Treasury bill means a noninterest bearing discount security issued by the U.S. Treasury to finance the national debt. Most bills are issued to mature in three months, six months or one year.     Treasury bond means longterm U.S. Treasury securities having initial maturities of more than ten years.     Treasury note means a noninterest bearing discount security issued by the U.S. Treasury to finance the national debt. Most notes are issued to mature in three months, six months or one year.     Uniform net capital rule means a Securities and Exchange Commission requirement that member firms, as well as nonmember broker-dealers in securities, maintain a maximum ratio of indebtedness to liquid capital of 15:1; also called "net capital ratio." Indebtedness covers all money owed to a firm, including margin loans and commitments to purchase securities, one reason new public issues are spread among members of underwriting syndicates. Liquid capital includes cash and assets easily converted to cash.     Yield means the rate of annual income return on an investment, expressed as a percentage. (1)	Income yield is obtained by dividing the current dollar income by the current market price for the security. (2)	Net yield or yield to maturity means the current income yield minus any premium above par or plus any discount from par in the purchase price, with the adjustment spread over the period from the date of purchase to the date of maturity of the bond. (Ord. No. 2000-63, 9-7-2000)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-572. - Policy.     It is the policy of the City of Valdosta (hereinafter referred to as the "city") to invest public funds in a manner which will provide the highest investment return with the maximum security while meeting the daily cash flow demands of the entity and in compliance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-83-4 and this Code governing the investment of public funds. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 1.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-573. - Investment policy.     The city's investment policy shall be adopted by resolution of the city's mayor and council. The policy shall be reviewed annually by the finance director, external auditor and assistant finance director, and any modifications made to such policy must be approved by the city manager and the mayor and council. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 18.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-574. - Scope of policy.     The city's investment policy applies to all financial assets of the city, except for the tree commission agency fund. Such funds are accounted for in the city's comprehensive annual financial report, and include: (1)	Funds: a.	General fund.b.	Special revenue funds.c.	Capital project funds.d.	Enterprise funds.e.	Internal service funds.f.	Trust and agency funds.g.	Other funds that may be created from time to time.(2)	Pooling of funds. Except for cash in certain restricted and special funds, the city will consolidate cash balances from all funds to maximize investments earnings. Investment income will be allocated to the various funds based on their respective participation and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 2.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-575. - Prudence. (a)	Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their capital as well as the probable income derived. (b)	The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be the prudent person standard, and shall be applied in the context of managing an overall portfolio. Investment officers acting in accordance with the written procedures and the investment policy and exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's credit risk or market price changes, provided, deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 3.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-576. - Objectives.     The city's primary objectives, in the order of priority, for the investment activities shall be: (1)	Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the investment program. Investments of the city shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. The objective will be to mitigate credit and interest rate risks. (2)	Credit risk. The city will minimize credit risk, the risk of loss due to the failure of the security issuer or baker, by: a.	Limiting investments to the safest types of securities.b.	Prequalifying the financial institutions, broker/dealers, intermediaries and advisers with which the city will do business. c.	Diversifying the investment portfolio so that potential losses on individual securities will be minimized. (3)	Interest rate risk. The city will minimize the risk that the market value of securities in the portfolio will fall due to changes in general interest rates, by: a.	Structuring the investment portfolio so that securities mature to meet cash requirements for ongoing operations, thereby avoiding the need to sell securities on the open market prior to maturity. b.	Investing operating funds primarily in shorter-term securities, money market mutual funds or similar investment pools. (4)	Liquidity. The city's investment portfolio must be structured in a manner so as to provide sufficient liquidity to meet all operating requirements which might be reasonably anticipated. (5)	Return on investments. The city's investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of attaining a rate of return throughout budgetary and economic cycles, commensurate with the city's cash flow characteristics of the portfolio. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 4.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-577. - Delegation of authority. (a)	Authority to manage the city's investment program is derived from article I, section 1.1, Incorporation; name, corporate powers, of the city's Charter. (b)	The city and its inhabitants shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Valdosta (hereinafter referred to as the "city"). The city shall be the legal continuation and successor to the city as heretofore incorporated, and shall continue to be vested with all property and rights of property which now belong to the city; shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell or dispose of any such property; may have a common seal and alter and renew such seal at will; may exercise, in conformity with the Charter, all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. (c)	Management responsibility for the investment program is delegated to the finance director, who shall establish written procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with this investment policy. Procedures should include reference to safekeeping, PSA repurchase agreements, banking service contracts and collateral/depository agreements. Such procedures shall include explicit delegation of authority to persons responsible for investment transactions. No person may engage in an investment transaction, except as provided under the terms of the policy set forth in this division and the procedures established by the finance director. The finance director shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken and shall establish a system of controls to regulate the activities of subordinate officials. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 5.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-578. - Ethic and conflict of interest.     Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution of the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions. Employees and investment officials shall disclose to the city manager any material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business within this jurisdiction, and they shall further disclose any large personal financial/investment positions that could be related to performance of the city, particularly with regard to the time of purchase and sales. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 6.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-579. - Authorized financial dealers and institutions. (a)	A list will be maintained of financial institutions authorized to provide investment services. In addition, a list also will be maintained of approved security broker/dealers selected by creditworthiness (e.g., a minimum capital requirement of $10,000,000.00 and at least five years of operation). Such lists may include primary dealers or regional dealers that qualify under the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Rule 15c3-1 (uniform capital rule). (b)	All financial institutions and broker/dealers who desire to become qualified for investment transactions must supply the following, as appropriate: (1)	Audited financial statements;(2)	Proof of National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) certification;(3)	Proof of state registration;(4)	Completed broker/dealer questionnaire; and(5)	Certificate of having read and understood and agreeing to comply with the city's investment policy. An annual review of the financial condition and registration of qualified financial institutions and broker/dealers will be conducted by the finance director. (c)	Before accepting funds or engaging in investment transactions with the city, the supervising officer at each financial institution and recognized security broker/dealer shall submit a certification. Such document will certify that the officer has reviewed the investment policies and objectives, and agrees to disclose potential conflicts or risks to public funds that might arise out of business transactions between the firm/depository and the city. All financial institutions shall agree to undertake reasonable efforts to preclude imprudent transactions involving the city's funds. (d)	The supervising officer shall agree to exercise due diligence on monitoring the activities of the other officer and subordinate staff members engaged in transactions with the city. Employees of any firm or financial institution offering securities or investments to the city shall be trained in the precautions appropriate to public-sector investments and shall be required to familiarize themselves with the city's investment objectives, policies and constraints. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 7.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-580. - Authorized and suitable investments.     The city is empowered by O.C.G.A. § 36-83-4 to invest in the following types of securities: (1)	Obligations of this state or other states.(2)	Obligations issued by the United States government:a.	U.S. Treasury bills.b.	U.S. Treasury notes.c.	U.S. Treasury bonds.(3)	Obligations fully insured or guaranteed by the United States government or a United States government agency: a.	Export-import bank.b.	Farmers' Home Administration.c.	General services administration.d.	Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA).e.	Penn Central Transportation Certificates.f.	Ship financing bonds, title 13.g.	Small Business Administration.h.	Washington Metropolitan Transit Authority bonds.(4)	Obligations of the following U.S. government agencies:a.	Federal Farm Credit Banks (FFCB).b.	Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC) participation certificates or debentures.c.	Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) or its banks.d.	Government National Mortgage Association (FNMA).e.	Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA) participation certificates or debentures which are guaranteed by GNMA. f.	Student Loan Marketing Association.(5)	Repurchase agreements backed by subsections (2), (3) and (4) of this section.(6)	Prime bankers' acceptance (bankers' acceptances that are eligible for purchase by the Federal Reserve Bank and have a letter of credit rating of A+ or better). (7)	The local government investment pool.(8)	Obligations of other political subdivisions of the state.(9)	Time deposits and saving deposits of banks organized under the laws of the state or the U.S. government and operating in the state: a.	Savings accounts.b.	Money market accounts.c.	Certificates of deposit (nonnegotiable type).(Ord. No. 2000-63, § 8.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-581. - Collateralization. (a)	Collateralization will be required on two types of investments:(1)	Certificate of deposit; and(2)	Repurchase and reverse agreements.(b)	In order to anticipate market changes and provide a level of security for all funds, the collateralization level will be 100 percent of the market value of principal and accrued interest. The city chooses to limit collateral to: (1)	Obligations issued by the United States government.(2)	Obligations fully insured or guaranteed by the United States government or a United States government agency. (3)	Obligations of the following U.S. government agencies:a.	Federal farm credit banks (FFCB).b.	Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC).c.	Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) or its banks.d.	Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA).e.	Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA) participation certificates or debentures which are guaranteed by GNMA. f.	Student Loan Marketing Association.(4)	Collateral will always be held by an independent third party with whom the city has a current custodian agreement. (5)	A clearly marked evidence of ownership (safekeeping receipt) must be supplied to the city and retained. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 9.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-582. - Safekeeping and custody.     All securities transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements, entered into by the city shall be conducted on a delivery-versus-payment (DVP) basis. Securities will be held by a third party custodian designated by the finance director and evidenced by safekeeping receipts. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 10.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-583. - Diversification. (a)	The city will diversify its investments by security type and institution. With the exception of U.S. Treasury securities, no more than 50 percent of the city's total investment portfolio will be invested with a single financial institution. (b)	The following guidelines represent maximum limits established for diversification by instrument: U.S. Treasury obligations100 percentU.S. government agency securities and securities issued by instrumentalities of government-sponsored corporations  75 percentRepurchase agreements 25 percentPrime bankers acceptance 10 percentLocal government investment pool 40 percentCertificates of deposit 25 percentObligations of other political subdivisions of the state 25 percent (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 11.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-584. - Maximum maturities. (a)	To the extent possible, the city shall attempt to match its investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless such investments are matched to a specific cash flow, the city will not directly invest in securities maturing more than five years from the date of purchase. The city shall adopt a weighted average maturity limitation (which often range from 90 days to three years), consistent with the city's investment objectives. (b)	Reserve or other funds with longer term investment horizons may be invested in securities exceeding five years if the maturities of such investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable with the expected use of funds. The intent to invest in securities with longer maturities shall be disclosed in writing to the mayor and council. (c)	Because inherent difficulties in accurately forecasting cash flow requirements, a portion of the portfolio should be continuously invested in readily available funds to assure that appropriate liquidity is maintained in order to meet ongoing obligations. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 12.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-585. - Internal controls.     The quarterly and annual investment reports submitted to the mayor and council shall contain sufficient information to permit an independent organization to evaluate the performance of the investment program. Every year, the city shall retain an independent firm to evaluate investment performance and conduct an operational audit. The purchase of such examinations shall be to obtain suggestions for improved future performance, and to verify that investment officials have acted in accordance with the investment policy and written investment procedures. The compensation structure for investment officials shall be designed to provide adequate compensation in the event of successful performance without encouraging a bias toward risk. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 13.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-586. - Performance standards. (a)	Investment portfolio. The investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the parameters specified within the policy set forth in this division. The portfolio should obtain a market average rate of return during a market/economic environment of stable interest rates. A series of appropriate benchmarks shall be established against which portfolio performance shall be compared on a regular basis. (b)	Market value of portfolio. The market value of the portfolio shall be calculated at least quarterly and a statement of the market value of the portfolio shall be issued at least quarterly. This will ensure that review of the investment portfolio, in terms and value and price volatility, has been performed consistent with the Governmental Finance Officers Association's (GFOA) recommended practice on mark to market practices for state and local government investment portfolios and investment pools. (c)	Yield. The investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of attaining a market rate of return throughout budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account the investment risk constraints and liquidity needs. Return on investment is of secondary importance compared to the safety and liquidity objectives described in section 2-576. The core of investments are limited to relative low risk securities in anticipation of earning a fair return relative to the risk being assumed. Securities shall not be sold prior to maturity with the following exceptions: (1)	A security with declining credit may be sold to minimize loss of principal.(2)	A security swap would improve the quality, yield or target duration in the portfolio.(3)	Liquidity needs of the portfolio require that a security be sold.(Ord. No. 2000-63, § 14.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-587. - Reporting.     The investment officer shall prepare an investment report at least quarterly, including a management summary that provides for an analysis of the status of the current investment portfolio and transactions made over the last quarter. Such management summary will be prepared in a manner which will allow the city to ascertain whether investment activities during the reporting period have conformed to the investment policy. The report should be provided to the city manager, finance director, legislative body and any pool participant. The report will include the following: (1)	Listing of individual securities held at the end of the reporting period.(2)	Realized and unrealized gains or losses resulting from appreciation or depreciation by listing the cost and market value of the securities over one year in duration that are not intended to be held until maturity (in accordance with Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) requirements). (3)	Average weighted yield to maturity of portfolio on investments as compared to applicable benchmarks. (4)	Listing of investments by maturity date.(5)	Percentage of the total portfolio which each type of investment represents.(Ord. No. 2000-63, § 15.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-588. - Policy considerations. (a)	Exemption. Any investment currently held that does not meet the guidelines of the policy set forth in this division shall be exempted from the requirements of such policy. At maturity or liquidation, such monies shall be reinvested only as provided by this division. (b)	Amendments. The policy set forth in this division shall be reviewed on an annual basis. Any changes must be approved by the investment officer and any other appropriate authority, as well as individuals charged with maintaining internal controls. (Ord. No. 2000-63, § 16.0, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-589. - List of documents.     The following documents, as applicable, are on file in the office of the city clerk: (1)	Listing of authorized personnel;(2)	Relevant investment statutes and ordinances;(3)	Repurchase agreements and tri-party agreements;(4)	Listing of authorized broker/dealers and financial institutions;(5)	Safekeeping agreements;(6)	Sample investment reports; and(7)	Methodology for calculating rate of return.(Ord. No. 2000-63, § 17.0, 9-7-2000)Editor's note— The documents listed in this section are on file in the office of the city clerk, and are incorporated into this section as if fully set out. 
Secs. 2-590—2-610. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DEBT MANAGEMENT POLICY 
Sec. 2-611. - Purpose.     The city recognizes the foundation of any well managed debt program is a comprehensive debt policy. A debt policy sets forth the parameters for issuing debt and managing outstanding debt, and provides guidance to decision makers regarding the timing and purposes for which debt may be issued, types and amounts of permissible debt, method of sale that may be used and structural features that may be incorporated. The debt policy should recognize a binding commitment to full and timely repayment of all debt as an intrinsic requirement for entry into the capital markets. Adherence to a debt policy helps to ensure that a government maintains a sound debt position and that credit quality is protected. Advantages of a debt policy are that it: (1)	Enhances the quality of decisions by imposing order and discipline, and promoting consistency and continuity in decision making; (2)	Rationalizes the decision making process;(3)	Identifies objectives for staff to implement;(4)	Demonstrates a commitment to longterm financial planning objectives; and(5)	Is regarded positively by the rating agencies in reviewing credit quality.(Ord. No. 2000-64, § I, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-612. - Adoption.     The city's debt policy shall be adopted by resolution of the city's mayor and council. The policy shall be reviewed annually by the finance director, external auditor and the assistant finance director, and any modifications made to the policy must be approved by the city manager, mayor and council. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § XIV, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-613. - Responsibility for developing financing recommendations. (a)	The primary responsibility for developing financing recommendations rests with the finance director. In developing such recommendations, the finance director shall be assisted by the assistant finance director, budget director and accounting manager, the four of whom shall comprise a debt management committee. The responsibilities of the debt management committee shall be to: (1)	Meet no less than quarterly to consider the need for financing and assess progress on the capital improvement program; (2)	Meet, as necessary, in preparation for a financing, review changes in state and federal legislation; (3)	Annually review the provisions of ordinances authorizing issuance of obligations; and (4)	Annually review services provided by the financial advisor, bond counsel, paying agent and other service providers to evaluate the extent and effectiveness of services being provided. (b)	Prior to the quarterly meeting, the assistant finance director and budget director shall jointly prepare a written report on the status of capital improvement program financing. The report shall be based in part on information collected from the primary capital improvement project managers in the city, and shall include a projection of near term financing needs compared to available resources, an analysis of the impact of contemplated financings on the property tax rate and user charges, and a financing recommendation. (c)	In developing financing recommendations, the debt management committee shall consider:(1)	The time proceeds of obligation are expected to remain on hand and the related carrying cost; (2)	The options for interim financing, including shortterm and interfund borrowing, taking into consideration federal and state reimbursement regulations; (3)	The effect of proposed action on the tax rate and user charges;(4)	Trends in interest rates;(5)	Other factors, as appropriate.(Ord. No. 2000-64, § II, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-614. - Bond counsel involvement.     The bond counsel will issue an opinion as to the legality and tax exempt status of any obligations. The city will also seek the advice of bond counsel on all other types of financings, and on any other questions involving federal tax or arbitrage law. The bond counsel is also responsible for the preparation of the ordinance authorizing issuance of obligations and all of the closing documents to complete their sale and will perform other services as defined by contract approved by the city council. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § II, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-615. - Financial advisor involvement.     When necessary, the city will seek the advice of the financial advisor. The financial advisor will advise the city on the structuring of obligations to be issued, inform the city of various options, advise the city as to how choices will impact the marketability of city obligations and provide other services as defined by contract approved by the city council. To ensure independence, the financial advisor will not bid on nor underwrite any city debt issues. The financial advisor will inform the city manager of significant issues. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § II, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-616. - Limitations on indebtedness. (a)	Established. The city will keep outstanding debt within the limits prescribed by state statute and at levels consistent with its creditworthiness objectives. The city will annually identify intermediate-range to long-range capital spending and debt conditions that would impact city residents' property taxes, and fit proposed spending to the city's debt management goals. The city will exchange information and expertise with each jurisdiction of the county during each jurisdiction's capital improvement budgeting process so that the jurisdictions can eliminate duplication, share facilities, where appropriate, and provide the taxpayers with the greatest return for the jurisdictions' capital improvement. (b)	Target limitations on nonself-supporting tax general obligation indebtedness; full faith and credit lease-purchase obligations. (1)	As a matter of policy, the city shall conduct its finances so that the amount of direct, nonself-supporting tax general obligation debt and full faith and credit lease-purchase obligations outstanding at any time does not exceed one percent of the city's taxable assessed valuation. Furthermore, the city shall strive to limit annual debt service requirements on such obligations to an amount that is not greater than ten percent of annual general fund revenues. (2)	Such limitations shall apply to debt obligations secured by a pledge of the city's full faith and credit obligations which are not self-supporting, or which are paid from the general fund revenues. (c)	Target limitations on lease-purchase financing of equipment and furnishings. The city may enter into shortterm lease-purchase obligations to finance the acquisition capital equipment and furnishings with estimated lives of less than ten years. Outstanding lease-purchase obligations issued to finance capital equipment and furnishings shall not exceed 0.125 percent of the city's taxable assessed valuation. Repayment of such lease-purchase obligations shall occur over a period not to exceed the useful life of the underlying asset or in any case no longer than five years from the date of such obligations. The debt management committee shall be responsible for developing procedures for use by city departments interested in participating in the lease-purchase program, and for setting repayment terms and amortization schedules, in consultation with participating departments. (d)	Limitations on general fund loan guarantees and credit support. (1)	As part of the city's financing activities, general fund resources may be used to provide credit support or loan guarantees for public and private developments that meet high priority city needs. Before such general fund commitments are made, specific policy goals and objectives that determine the nature and type of projects qualifying for support, and specific limitations to be placed on the maximum amount of general fund resources pledged to such projects shall be developed. The department of finance shall be responsible for coordinating the development of such policies and goals, which shall not take effect until approved by the city council. General fund loan guarantees shall be subject to the overall debt limitations set forth in subsection (b) of this section. (2)	Recognizing the limited capacity of the city's general fund to support both ongoing operating programs and secure longterm debt obligations, use of the general fund to secure such obligations must first be approved by the debt management committee. Key factors that will be considered in determining whether or not the general fund should be used to secure a particular debt obligation will include the following: a.	Demonstration of underlying self-support, thus limiting potential general fund financial exposure. b.	Use of general fund support as a transition to a fully stand alone credit structure, where interim use of general fund credit support reduces borrowing costs and provides a credit history for new or hard to establish credits. c.	General fund support is determined by the city council to be in the city's overall best interest. (e)	Target limitations on the issuance of revenue-secured debt obligations. The city shall seek to finance the capital needs of its revenue producing enterprise activities through the issuance of revenue-secured debt obligations. Prior to issuing revenue-secured debt obligations, city departments, in consultation with the finance director, will develop financial plans and projections showing the feasibility of the planned financing, required rates and charges needed to support the planned financing, and the impact of the planned financing on ratepayers, property owners, city departments and other affected parties. The amount of revenue-secured debt obligations issued by a city department will be limited by the feasibility of the overall financing plan as determined by the debt management committee. Revenue-secured debt obligations must first be reviewed and approved by the debt management committee before being issued. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § III, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-617. - Structure and term of indebtedness. (a)	Rapidity of debt repayment. Generally, borrowing of the city should be of a duration that does not exceed the economic life of the improvement that such borrowing finances and, where feasible, should be shorter than the projected economic life. Moreover, to the extent possible, the city should design the repayment of debt so as to rapidly recapture its credit capacity for future use. The city shall strive to repay the principal amount of its longterm general obligation debt by at least 20 percent in five years and 40 percent in ten years. The city may choose to structure debt repayment so as to wraparound existing obligations or achieve other financing planning goals. Such alternative structures shall be subject to the approval of the debt policy committee, in consultation with the involved city departments, before being recommended to the city manager and city council. (b)	Use of variable rate securities. When appropriate, the city may choose to issue securities that pay a rate of interest that varies according to a predetermined formula or results from a periodic remarketing of the securities. The decision to issue such securities must be reviewed and approved by the debt management committee and city manager before the council is requested to approve the issuance of such securities. (c)	Pledge of restricted funds to secure debt. The city has the power to make an irrevocable pledge of a security interest in an account created exclusively for the security holders of the city obligations. Before such funds are used to secure a prospective financing, policies regarding the use of such restricted funds shall be developed by the debt management committee to ensure that each use of such funds to secure bonds does not violate restrictions on such funds and that the underlying program commitments can be maintained in addition to meeting debt service obligations on debt secured by the restricted funds. Such policies shall be presented as recommendations to the city manager, then to the council prior to or at the time issuance of the secured debt is to be authorized. (d)	Use of subordinate lien obligations. Creation of a subordinate lien financing structure, if appropriate, shall be based on the overall financing needs of a particular department, expected credit ratings, relative cost of subordinate lien structure and impacts on the city as determined by the debt management committee, in consultation with the involved department. The results of such review shall be presented in the form of recommendations to the city manager, then to the mayor and council for consideration prior to or at the time such bonds are being authorized. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § IV, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-618. - Creditworthiness objectives.     Considering other components of the guidelines set forth in this division, the city's primary objective is to minimize debt service costs. To measure and compare the cost of alternatives, the city will use net present value and internal rate-of-return analysis. Such objective will be achieved through the following: (1)	Credit ratings. The city seeks to maintain the highest possible credit ratings for all categories of shortterm and longterm general obligation and revenue debt that can be achieved without compromising delivery of basic city services and achievement of adopted city policy objectives. The city recognizes that external economic, natural or other events may from time to time affect the creditworthiness of the city's debt. Nevertheless, the executive and legislative departments are committed to ensuring that actions within their control are prudent. (2)	Rating agency relationships. The debt management committee shall be responsible for maintaining relationships with the rating agencies that currently assign ratings to the city's various debt obligations. Such effort shall include providing periodic updates on the city's general financial condition along with coordinating meetings and presentations in conjunction with a new debt issuance. (3)	Use of rating agencies. The debt management committee shall be responsible for determining whether or not a rating shall be requested on a particular financing, and which of the major rating agencies shall be asked to provide such rating. (4)	Minimum longterm rating requirements. The city's minimum rating requirement for its direct, longterm debt obligations is a rating of "A" or higher. If such a longterm debt obligation cannot meet such requirement based on its underlying credit strength, then credit enhancement shall be sought to ensure that the minimum rating is achieved. If credit enhancement is unavailable, or is determined by the debt management committee to be uneconomic, then the obligations may be issued without a rating. A lower rating standard may be accepted for indirect or conduit obligations, subject to the approval of the debt management committee. (5)	Financial disclosure. a.	The city is committed to full and complete financial disclosure, and to fully cooperating with rating agencies, institutional and individual investors, city departments and agencies, other levels of government and the general public to share clear, comprehensible and accurate financial information. The city is committed to meeting secondary disclosure requirements on a timely and comprehensive basis. b.	Official statements accompanying debt issues, comprehensive annual financial reports and continuous disclosure statements will meet, at a minimum, the standards articulated by the Municipal Standards Rulemaking Board (MSBR), the Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB), the National Federation of Municipal Analysts, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The department of finance shall be responsible for ongoing disclosures to establish national information repositories and for maintaining compliance with disclosure standards promulgated by state and national regulatory bodies. (6)	Credit enhancements. Credit enhancements (letters of credit, bond insurance, etc.), may be used, but only when net debt service on the bonds is reduced by more than the costs of the enhancements. Selection of credit enhancement providers shall be subject to a competitive bid process developed by the debt management committee. (7)	Capital planning. To enhance creditworthiness and prudent financial management, the city is committed to systematic capital planning, intergovernmental cooperation and coordination, and longterm financial planning. Evidence of such commitment to systematic capital planning will be demonstrated through adoption of the annual capital improvement plans (CIP). (Ord. No. 2000-64, § V, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-619. - Method of sale. (a)	Determination of best sale method. In connection with the issuance of each debt obligation, the city shall determine the best sale method, giving consideration to: (1)	Financial market conditions;(2)	Issue-specific conditions, such as the type and life of the financed projects and issue size; (3)	The costs and risks associated with alternative debt structures; and(4)	City-related conditions, including its credit rating, general financial condition and staff capability to administer the financing. In all instances, the city shall promote competition in issuing debt. Such promotion will be implemented in the selection of professionals and other service providers, giving consideration to the experience and quality of service, as well as cost. In determining whether to sell the debt on a negotiated or competitive basis, the factors outlined in the Government Finance Officers Association's recommended practice on selecting and managing the method of sale will be followed. (b)	Competitive sale. As a matter of policy, the city shall seek to issue its debt obligations in a competitive sale unless it is determined by the debt management committee that such a sale method will not produce the best results for the city. In such instances where the city, in a competitive bidding for its debt securities (whether general obligation or nongeneral obligation debt), deems the bids received as unsatisfactory or does not receive bids, it may enter into negotiation for the sale of securities. (c)	Negotiated sale. When determined appropriate and approved by the debt management committee, the city may elect to sell its debt obligations through a negotiated sale. Such determination may be made on an issue-by-issue basis for a series of issues or for part or all of a specific financing program. Selection of the underwriting team shall be made pursuant to selection procedures set forth in this division, consistent with this Code. (d)	Private placement. When determined and approved by the debt management committee, the city may select to sell its debt obligations through a private placement or limited public offering. Selection of a placement agent shall be made pursuant to selection procedures developed by the debt management committee, consistent with this Code. (e)	Official bid form. The city shall design an official bid form to be made a part of each official notice of sale published in conjunction with the sale of debt securities in a competitive sale by the city. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § VI, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-620. - Shortterm debt and interim financing. (a)	Lines of credit. Where their use is judged by the debt management committee to be prudent and advantageous to the city, the city has the power to enter into agreements with commercial banks or other financial entities for the purpose of acquiring lines or letters of credit that shall provide the city with access to credit under the terms and conditions as specified in such agreements. Before entering into any such agreements, takeout financing for such letters of credit must be planned for and determined to be feasible by the debt management committee. Any agreements with financial institutions for the acquisition of lines or letters of credit shall be approved by the mayor and council. Lines and letters of credit entered into by the city shall be in the support of projects contained in the approved capital improvement plan. (b)	Bond anticipation notes. Where their use is judged by the debt management committee to be prudent and advantageous to the city, the city may choose to issue bond anticipation notes as a source of interim construction financing. Before issuing such notes, takeout financing for such notes must be planned for and determined to be feasible by the debt management committee. Bond anticipation notes may be sold in either a competitive or negotiated sale, subject to authorization and approval of the mayor and council. (c)	Tax and revenue anticipation notes. Where their use is judged by the debt management committee to be prudent and advantageous to the city, the city may choose to issue tax and revenue anticipation notes to fund internal working capital cashflow needs. Before issuing such notes, cashflow projections will be prepared by the appropriate city departments and reviewed by the debt management committee. Tax and revenue anticipation notes may be sold in either a competitive or negotiated sale, subject to authorization and approval by the city council. (d)	Tax exempt commercial paper. The city may choose to issue tax exempt commercial paper as a source of interim construction financing for projects contained in the city's approved capital improvement plan only after the debt management committee determines that such a financing represents the least cost interim financing option for the city. Furthermore, tax exempt commercial paper shall not be issued for city capital programs unless it is of sufficient economic size as determined by the debt management committee. A report recommending the issuance of tax exempt commercial paper must first be approved by the debt management committee before recommendations are made to the city council authorizing the establishment of such a program. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § VII, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-621. - Refunding of indebtedness. (a)	Debt service savings—Advance refundings. The city may issue advance refunding bonds (as defined for federal tax law purposes) when advantageous, legally permissible, prudent and net present value savings, expressed as a percentage of the par amount of the refunding bonds, equal or exceed five percent. Exceptions to such requirement shall be made only upon the approval of the debt management committee. (b)	Same—Current refundings. The city may issue current refunding bonds (as defined for federal tax law purposes) when advantageous, legally permissible, prudent and net present value savings equal or exceed $100,000.00. (c)	Restructuring of debt. The city may choose to refund outstanding indebtedness when existing bond covenants or other financial structures impinge on prudent and sound financial management. Savings requirements for current or advance refundings undertaken to restructure debt may be waived by the debt management committee upon a finding that such a restructuring is in the city's overall best financial interests. (d)	Open market purchase of city securities. The city may choose to defease its outstanding indebtedness through purchases of its securities on the open market when market conditions make such an option financially feasible. The debt management committee shall be responsible for developing procedures for executing open market purchases and the savings objectives to be achieved by undertaking such actions. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § VIII, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-622. - Rebate reporting and covenant compliance.     The debt management committee shall establish a system of recordkeeping and reporting to meet the arbitrage rebate compliance requirements of the federal tax code. Such effort shall include tracking investment earnings on bond proceeds, calculating rebate payments in compliance with tax law and remitting any rebatable earnings to the federal government in a timely manner in order to preserve the tax-exempt status of the city's outstanding debt issues. Additionally, general financial reporting and certification requirements embodied in bond covenants shall be monitored to ensure that all covenants are complied with. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § IX, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-623. - Conduit financings.     The city may sponsor conduit financings for those activities (i.e., economic development, housing, health facilities, etc.) that have a general public purpose and are consistent with the city's overall service and policy objectives as determined by the mayor and council. All conduit financings must completely insulate the city from any credit risk or exposure, and must first be approved by the debt management committee before being submitted to the city manager, then to the city council for authorization and implementation. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § X, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-624. - Financing proposals.     Any capital financing proposal made to a city department, agency or commission involving a pledge or other extension of the city's credit through the sale of securities, execution of loans or leases, or making of guarantees or otherwise directly or indirectly involving the lending or pledging of the city's credit shall be referred to the debt management committee, who, in a timely manner, shall be responsible for analyzing the proposal, responding to the proposal and recommending to the city manager the required action to be taken. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § XI, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-625. - Derivative products.     The city may, in the future, choose to enter into contracts and financing agreements involving interest rate swaps, floating/fixed rate auction or reset securities, or other forms of debt bearing synthetically determined interest rates as authorized under state statutes. Before entering into such contracts or agreements, a review team made up of the debt management committee and appropriate department staff and outside consultants shall be formed to review the risks and benefits of such financing techniques and expected impacts on the city's longterm financial operations and credit ratings. When completed, the report shall be presented to the city manager, then to the city council for authorization and implementation. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § XII, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-626. - Selection of finance consultants and service providers.     The city's finance director shall be responsible for establishing a solicitation and selection process for securing professional services that are required to develop and implement the city's debt program. Goals of the solicitation and selection process shall include encouraging participation from both local and national qualified service providers, and securing services at competitive prices. (1)	Bond counsel. As part of its responsibility to oversee and coordinate the marketing of all city indebtedness, the city attorney, with the advice of the debt management committee and a committee representing city departments, agencies and commissions with capital financing needs, shall make recommendations to the city manager, then to the city council regarding the selection of bond counsel to be employed and the duration of the employment for individual financing or a series of financings. The solicitation and selection process for such services will comply with requirements of this Code for professional, technical and expert services. The council shall make such selection, taking into consideration such recommendations. (2)	Underwriters. The finance director shall solicit proposals for underwriting services for all debt issued in a negotiated or private placement sale mode. The solicitation process used for such services shall fully comply with requirements of this Code for professional, technical and expert services, and the debt management committee shall evaluate written proposals and, if deemed necessary, conduct oral interviews. In addition, the proposal solicitation and selection process for negotiated sales as developed by the debt management committee, and amended from time to time, shall also be followed. The selection of underwriters may be for an individual financing, a series of financings or a specified period of time. The council shall make such selections, taking into consideration the recommendations of the review committee. (3)	Financial advisor. The finance director, with the advice of the debt management committee and the city department, agencies and commissions with capital financing needs, shall make recommendations to the city manager, then to the city council regarding the selection of financial advisors to be employed and the duration of such employment. The solicitation and selection process for such services will comply with the requirements of this Code for professional, technical and expert services. The time period for employment may relate to an individual financing, a series of financings or a specified period of time. (4)	Paying agent. The finance director shall periodically solicit for paying agent services from qualified commercial and trustee banks. The cost of providing such services shall be used by the debt management committee, along with other qualitative measurements, in developing a paying agent recommendation to the city council, along with the term of such agreement. (5)	Other service providers. The finance director shall periodically solicit for other service providers (escrow agents, verification agents, trustees, etc.). The cost of providing such services shall be used by the debt management committee in developing a recommendation to the city manager, then to the city council, along with the term of such agreement. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § XIII, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-627. - Annual audit.     The annual audit of the city shall describe in detail all funds and fund balances established as part of any direct debt financing of the city. The audit may also contain a report detailing any material or rate covenants contained in any direct offering of the city and whether or not such covenants have been satisfied. (Ord. No. 2000-64, § XIV, 9-7-2000)
Secs. 2-628—2-650. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CASH HANDLING POLICY 
Sec. 2-651. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Cash means currency, coins, checks, money orders, traveler's checks, ACH payments and credit card payments.     Casual collection point means a location where cash is collected which is not designated as a cash collection point by the finance department, including, but not limited to, road race registration sites, auction sites and after school program sites. (Ord. No. 2000-65, 9-7-2000)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-652. - Adoption.     The city's cash handling policy shall be adopted by resolution of the mayor and council. The policy shall be reviewed annually by the finance director, external auditor and the assistant finance director and any modifications made to such policy must be approved by the city manager, mayor and council. (Ord. No. 2000-65, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-653. - Policy statement.     Strong internal controls for cash collection are necessary to prevent mishandling of city funds and are designed to safeguard and protect employees from inappropriate charges of mishandling funds by defining their responsibilities in the cash handling process. The city cash handling policy requires that areas receiving cash be approved by the finance director and be designated as cash collection points. The term "cash collection point" means a department or other entity that handles cash on a regular basis. Although departments and other entities with casual cash collections are not recognized as cash collection points, they must follow the same cash handling policies and procedures that apply to the cash collection points. Required policies for cash collection points include the following: (1)	Accounting for cash as such cash is received.(2)	Adequate separation of duties.(3)	Proper prenumbered receipts for any cash received.(4)	Approval of any voided cash receipts with the initials of the approving supervisor.(5)	Adequate safeguards for handling and storing cash.(6)	Daily depositing monies received in the form and amounts received.(Ord. No. 2000-65, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-654. - Knowledge of policy.     Any department head or supervisor with responsibilities for managing city cash receipts and employees who are entrusted with the receipt, deposit and reconciliation of cash for city-related activities should know the cash handling policy set forth in this division. (Ord. No. 2000-65, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-655. - Responsibilities. (a)	Cash collection point supervisor. The responsibilities of the cash collection point supervisor shall be to: (1)	Design an adequate separation of duties in cash handling.(2)	Develop a method of accounting for cash as it is received.(3)	Provide adequate safeguards for cash.(4)	Inform the accounting office of any changes in cash handling procedures or personnel involved with the cash collection point. (5)	Balance collections at the end of each business day.(b)	Cash collection point cashiers. The responsibilities of the cash collection point cashier shall be to: (1)	Conduct cash transactions with customers.(2)	Upon receipt, immediately mark checks with the customer's account number or general ledger account number. (3)	Count the cash and turn it over to the deposit preparer at the end of the shift.(4)	Turn over any supporting documentation to the cash collection point supervisor.(c)	Deposit preparer. The responsibilities of the deposit preparer shall be to: (1)	Count the cash receipts and verify check totals, prepare the deposit and deliver or have the deposit delivered to the bank. (2)	Store the cash in a safe or other secure place until such cash is deposited.(Ord. No. 2000-65, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-656. - Establishing new cash collection points.     The finance director must authorize all new cash collection points before collection begins. Departments or other entities wishing to become cash collection points must submit a request to the finance director. Such request must include the following: (1)	Reasons why a cash collection point is needed.(2)	A list of persons involved with the cash collection point and a description of such persons' duties. (3)	Whether there is a need for a change advance.(4)	A description of the reconciliation process, including the frequency of reconciliation.(5)	A description of the security for safeguarding cash until such cash is deposited.The request will be reviewed and, if appropriate, approved by the finance director. (Ord. No. 2000-65, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-657. - Operating procedures for cash collection points.     The following procedures shall be required for the operation of cash collection points: (1)	All cash received must be recorded through a cash register or computer terminal, when available, and/or the customer should be given a prenumbered receipt form with a duplicate record being retained from the receiving department. Receipts should be put in numerical order at the end of each shift. (2)	All numbered receipts must be accounted for, including voided receipts. Approved prenumbered receipts are available at customer service. Rediform receipts are not acceptable. (3)	The cash collection point must maintain a clear separation of duties. An individual should not have the responsibility for more than one of the cash handling components (collecting, reconciling or depositing). (4)	The cash received must be reconciled to the cash register tape, computer terminal edit or prenumbered receipts at the end of the day or at the end of each shift. (5)	All checks, cash and credit card receipts must be stored in a safe or other secure place until deposited. (6)	Checks must be made payable to the city and then restrictively endorsed for deposit to the city. (7)	Cash collection points must not cash checks unless the finance director has granted prior approval. (8)	All funds must be deposited intact, and not intermingled or substituted with other funds. However, checks issued incorrectly may be returned to the payer. (9)	Refunds must be made by city check.(10)	Payments must not be made from funds collected. All collected funds and request checks for payments shall be deposited. Other than official petty cash funds, there should be no exception to the policy set forth in this subsection. (11)	If a petty cash fund is maintained, it shall be an official fund and funds that have been held back for such purpose. (12)	If a cash collection point experiences a loss or theft, the finance director should be notified at once. The finance director will notify the police of such loss or theft. (13)	Cash which is property of the city must be kept separate from private or unofficial monies and must never be used for private or unofficial purposes. City safes should not be used to hold personal items or unofficial monies. (14)	Every employee involved in the handling of cash is responsible for its correctness and safe custody. Until the employee hands over the money in an authorized manner, he will be held responsible for any loss or deficiency or failure to account for such cash. (Ord. No. 2000-65, 9-7-2000)
Sec. 2-658. - Receipt, deposit and reconciliation of cash collected. (a)	Cash received in person. (1)	A receipt or validated water bill stub must be issued for each payment received. At a minimum, manual prenumbered receipts must include the date, mode of payment (cash, check or credit card) and the identification of the department and the person issuing the receipt. Machine generated receipts must contain similar information. (2)	All voided transactions are to be approved and initialed by the cash collection point supervisor. (3)	Only one cashier should be allowed to access a cash drawer during a single shift.(4)	Cash must be stored in a safe place until such cash is deposited.(b)	Cash received through the mail or drop box. (1)	An authorized employee must open the mail. Drop box receipts, which sometimes contain currency as well as cash, must be opened by two authorized employees. (2)	The checks should be entered into an approved accounts receivable system, if available, or if such system is not available, then a listing of the checks should be prepared or the checks should be photocopied and the copies retained as supporting documentation. The total of the checks should be utilized for reconciliation purposes. (3)	Cash must be stored in a safe place until such cash is deposited.(c)	Balancing of cash receipts. (1)	All cash received must be balanced daily by comparing the total of the cash, checks, credit card receipts, etc., to the cash register totals, the prenumbered receipt totals and the total of the money received by mail. (2)	Over/short amounts must be recorded separately, and investigated and resolved to the extent possible. (d)	Preparation of deposits. (1)	The preparation of deposits shall include counting the cash collection, verifying the check total and preparation of the deposit. (2)	The deposit must be prepared by a person not involved with collecting the cash or opening the mail. Under extraordinary circumstances, the finance director may authorize the revenue administrator to open payments received in the mail as well as complete the deposit. Such extraordinary circumstances include, but are not limited to, unusually high mail volume or inadequate staff to process the mail receipts due to vacation, illness or position vacancy. (3)	The cash receipts must be deposited by fund or location number using the appropriate deposit slip. (4)	The deposit must be taken directly to the bank by an authorized employee or handed over to an authorized guard in a bank-provided armored car. The armored car guard is to be given the deposit in a sealed bank bag and a grand total of the deposit. (e)	Reconciliation of cash collected. (1)	The reconciliation of cash collected must be performed by an employee who has no cash handling responsibilities. (2)	Monthly validated deposit slips must be reconciled to the receipts on the bank statements.(Ord. No. 2000-65, 9-7-2000)
Secs. 2-659—2-680. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PURCHASING CARD POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
Subdivision I. - Procuring Goods and/or Services Using a Purchasing Card 
Sec. 2-681. - Purpose. (a)	To establish policies and procedures for procuring goods and/or services using a purchasing card. Purchasing cards are referred to throughout this policy as the "P-Card." The purchasing card program is designed to streamline the purchasing and accounts payable process by reducing the paperwork generated by small dollar, high volume transactions, eliminating the need for purchase orders and facilitating quick payment to vendors. (b)	This policy includes procedures for the following:·	Establishing purchasing limits;·	Establishing allowable/prohibited purchases;·	Security;·	Charge transaction declines;·	Merchandise returns;·	Report processing;·	Reconciliation;·	Payment processing;·	Records management.(Ord. No. 2015-21, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-682. - Scope.     This policy applies to all City of Valdosta employees and elected officials. All purchasing cards shall be governed by this policy and used in a manner that complies with state law and city policy. (Ord. No. 2015-21, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-683. - Policy.     Employees who use the purchasing card to perform official city business will use the purchasing card as provided in this policy. (Ord. No. 2015-21, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-684. - Definitions.     [Terms are defined as follows:] (1)	Purchasing card - (also referred to herein as "P-Card"). The P-Card is a commercial credit card for small dollar purchases of goods and/or services necessary for official city business. The P-Card may be permanently issued to a named individual employee or elected official, a department or division, or temporarily issued to an employee traveling on city business. (2)	Purchasing card program administrator. The designee who will serve as a single point of contact between the city and the P-Card provider for general oversight of the purchasing card program. (3)	Departmental purchasing card coordinator. An individual or backup designated by the department head who is responsible for administration and control of the departmental implementation of the purchasing card policies and procedures. (4)	Purchasing cardholders. Full-time, permanent employees that have been designated by the department head to be issued a P-Card in their name for use under these policies and procedures. (5)	P-Card provider. The financial institution selected by the city to provide the P-Card program. (6)	Cut-off date. The monthly cut-off date is the last day of the P-Card provider's billing cycle. (Ord. No. 2015-21, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-685. - Responsibilities. (a)	It shall be the responsibility of the finance department to:(1)	Develop policy and procedures for the use of P-Cards that comply with state law.(2)	Administer the P-Card program, to include the following responsibilities:a.	Serve as primary contact with the P-Card provider for P-Cards.b.	Serve as primary contact with the departmental P-Card coordinators.c.	Approve/process applications for the issuance of P-Cards for users in compliance with the requirements as stated in the policy. d.	Establish guidelines and criteria for transactions and cumulative dollar limits for P-Cards. Cardholder limits will include monthly spending limits, individual transaction limits, and merchant category restrictions. These limits will be based on the cardholder's purchasing requirements and will not exceed the limits established by P-Card program administrator. e.	Approve/process changes to cardholder limits and restrictions as authorized by the city manager and department heads. f.	Maintain a current list of cardholders, card numbers and card limits.g.	Coordinate training on P-Card usage and small purchase policies and procedures.h.	Review departmental compliance/submission of approved expense reports with receipt reconciliations. i.	Cancel and suspend cards as requested by the city manager, department heads or departmental P-Card coordinators. j.	Conduct monthly reviews of all purchasing card transactions. The review is designed to ensure compliance, identify noncompliance issues and misuse, and through corrective measures assist the city with improving compliance. The monthly review and audit should happen within 15 days of the start of a new P-Card cycle. After completing the audit the administrator shall notify cardholders of any violations or questions the administrator has that occurred within the previous P-Card cycle. Depending on the severity of the violation, the administrator may suspend or revoke the use of the purchasing card. k.	Coordinate any system updates needed to interface with the city's accounting system. Review transactions for verification of small dollar purchases and price agreement opportunities. l.	Process general ledger interface for monthly county P-Card purchases.(3)	Provide direction for vendor enrollment.(4)	Establish general ledger hierarchy for P-Card purchases in conjunction with information technology department. (5)	Review expense reports and monthly billing statement from the P-Card provider and ensure timely payments of indebtedness. (6)	Review or perform necessary accounting transactions to process all departmental charges and ensure reconciliation account zeros out monthly. (7)	Conduct random audits of P-Card transactions to act as a check on departments carrying out their responsibility for audit and compliance with state law and city policies 5.3. It shall be the responsibility of all department heads to: (8)	Designate which employees will receive a P-Card.(9)	Recommend suspension or cancellation of a card to P-Card program administrator.(b)	Notify P-Card program administrator to cancel card privileges, if employee is terminated or changes positions; collection of card from employees. (1)	Designate departmental P-Card coordinator (and alternate) for each department who will be responsible for the following: a.	Verify that information on requests for purchasing cards is correct and that P-Cards are issued within the guidelines established by P-Card program administrator. b.	Monitor purchases made by cardholders.c.	Enforce timely compliance of submission requirements; review receipt sand expense report reconciliation for submission to the P-Card program administrator. Maintain all necessary documentation to support all purchases made by P-Card. d.	Code general ledger account numbers to online card transactions before the deadline established by the P-Card administrator. e.	Review P-Card applications or changes to card controls prior to submission.f.	Designate a system to maintain receipts and reconcile to expense report for each cardholder reporting to him/her. (2)	Designated cardholders will be responsible for the following:a.	Read and sign a purchasing card cardholder agreement prior to being issued a P-Card.b.	Assume responsibility for all purchases made with the P-Card, adhering to this policy insuring that no unauthorized purchases are made. Unauthorized purchases could be considered misappropriation of city funds. c.	Inform merchant of tax exempt status.d.	Provide receipts to the departmental P-Card coordinator on a daily basis.e.	Immediately report lost or stolen cards to the P-Card provider toll-free number and the P-Card program administrator by phone and then notify the department P-Card coordinator. f.	Make every reasonable effort to resolve disputed purchases with the vendor.g.	Immediately report all unresolved disputed purchases to the departmental P-Card coordinator.(Ord. No. 2015-21, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-686. - Procedures. (a)	Purchasing limits. The finance department will establish monthly and transaction limits for individual P-Cards. (b)	Purchases allowed with the purchasing card. Purchasing cards may not be used to purchase any item and/or service for immediate use not prohibited by law, this policy, or other policies approved by the mayor and council. The total purchase with the P-Card will not exceed the limits established for that card. All other purchasing policies remain in effect and P-Cards should not be used to circumvent them. (c)	Purchases prohibited with the purchasing card: (1)	Personal expenditures.(2)	Cash advances or refunds.(3)	The purchase of alcoholic beverages.(4)	Separate, sequential, and component purchases or transactions made with the intent to circumvent state law or city policy. (5)	Purchases that are split to stay within card transaction limits.(6)	Transaction amounts greater than cardholder's transaction limit.(7)	Other purchases specifically excluded in other city policies or by law.(d)	Security. The cardholder is responsible for the security of the card. This card should be treated with the same level of care as the cardholder would use with his/her own personal charge cards. (e)	Supporting documentation for card purchases. All transactions must be supported by receipts or credit slips. In instances where the receipt is lost, cardholder must obtain a copy at their own expense from the vendor or P-Card provider. For purchases made over the phone or on the internet, a logging system with unique transaction identifies should be maintained and a faxed copy or e-mail confirmation of the order retained as the receipt. (f)	Declined transactions. (1)	If a vendor receives a "decline" response from the P-Card provider after attempting to put through a P-Card transaction, cardholders should contact the P-Card program administrator with the following information for resolution: a.	Account number;b.	Business where decline occurred;c.	Total transaction amount of the decline;d.	Date the decline occurred.(2)	After determining the reason for the "decline" it may be necessary for the P-Card program administrator to contact the P-Card program coordinator for temporary or permanent changes to the cardholder's control limits to process the transaction. (g)	Using the card. In making a purchase, the cardholder must abide by the following rules: (1)	The cardholder must ensure that the item or service purchased is not restricted under subsection (c) of this section. (2)	In purchasing an item or service the cardholder must ensure that sales tax is not included in the purchase price before issuing payment with the P-Card. (3)	The cardholder must retain the purchase receipt and submit it to the P-Card program administrator. (h)	Purchasing return. The cardholder is responsible for obtaining a credit memo from the vendor when merchandise purchased with the card is later returned to the vendor for any reason. The credit memo will be attached to the expense report along with the sales receipt. (i)	Reconciliation of card purchases. (1)	The departmental P-Card coordinator is responsible for ensuring that all purchase receipts are collected and reconciled to transactions charged to their department. (2)	All transactions must be coded in the P-Card provider's system by the deadline set by the P-Card administrator. (j)	Records management. The departmental P-Card program coordinators must maintain all original receipts in a secure location in accordance with the city's record retention policy. (k)	Lost or stolen purchasing cards. When it is determined that P-Card has been lost or stolen, it is imperative to first cancel the card with the P-Card provider by calling the P-Card provider's toll-free number. In addition, the cardholder must also notify the P-Card program administrator of the loss by phone. Once a P-Card is discovered lost or stolen, it is imperative to cancel the card immediately. (l)	Changes to existing accounts. To make changes to an existing P-Card account, a department head should email the requested change to the finance director and the P-Card program administrator. (m)	Unauthorized use of the purchasing card. (1)	Any purchases that the P-Card program administrator deems prohibited as defined in subsection (c), will be sent back to the cardholder for justification and/or explanation. If any prohibited charges appear in the cardholder's transactions, the following may occur: a.	The P-Card program administrator will investigate all circumstances surrounding alleged misuse of the P-Card and in cases where there is evidence of a procedure or policy violation; refer that information to the appropriate authority for investigations and/or disciplinary action. b.	Termination of employment and forfeiture of the P-Card are potential disciplinary actions for improper use of the card. c.	In those cases where there is evidence of negligent use of the P-Card, but no fraudulent acts have been committed, the cardholder will be required to surrender the P-Card with all further privileges revoked. (2)	Any employee having knowledge of violations to this procedure or any other procedure or policy governing the use of the P-Card must immediately report such activity to the P-Card program administrator. (3)	The P-Card may be suspended or terminated if a purchasing cardholder is suspected of fraud, theft or illegal drug use. Should the suspicion prove founded, appropriate action shall be taken in accordance with existing city policies and procedures. (n)	Disputed items. Disputes, if possible, should be resolved promptly between the cardholder and the vendor. Cardholders should raise disputes immediately. As failure to do so will result in an authorized purchase that the department is responsible for paying even though the charge is incorrect. If the dispute cannot be resolved, the cardholder should notify the P-Card program administrator. A charge should not be disputed in the current P-Card cycle if it was returned for credit after the cut-off date. The credit should be coded to the original charge's account. (o)	Termination clause. (1)	The P-Card is issued to an employee for the city's convenience and may be suspended or terminated at any time by the city for noncompliance with city policies and procedures. Transfer, resignation or terminations of employment are grounds for cancellation of the P-Card. The department head or P-Card program coordinator should notify the P-Card program administrator. (2)	It is important to cancel a card immediately upon an employee's separation from employment.(Ord. No. 2015-21, 9-24-2015)
Secs. 2-687—2-700. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Purchasing Card (P-Card) Policy for Elected Officials[14] Footnotes: --- (14) --- Editor's note—Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 2-52. For purposes of classification and clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 2-701—2-710.
Sec. 2-701. - Overview.     The Georgia General Assembly established guidelines and penalties into the Official Code of Georgia, Annotated ("O.C.G.A.") which provides that no municipal corporation shall issue governmental purchasing cards or government credit cards to elected officials on or after January 1, 2016, until the governing authority of the municipal corporation, by public vote, has authorized the issuance and has promulgated specific policies regarding the use of such government purchasing cards or government credit cards for elected officials of such municipal corporation. (Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-702. - Purpose.     The purpose of this policy is to set requirements and standards for the City of Valdosta Purchasing Card Program. The policy is not intended to replace current State of Georgia Statutes, but is intended to comply with such state laws and establish more efficient guidelines for elected officials using such purchasing cards. At no time should a city-issued purchasing card be used for personal purchases regardless of circumstances. Utilizing the purchasing card or credit card for personal use or for any item or service not directly related to such official's public duty may result in disciplinary action including, but not limited to, felony criminal prosecution. All purchases utilizing a City of Valdosta purchasing card must be in accordance with these guidelines and with state law. (Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-703. - Scope.     This purchasing card policy, as required by state law under O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c), applies to the use of City of Valdosta purchasing cards by elected officials authorized to be issued such purchasing cards. The Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta have been authorized by the governing authority of the city to use purchasing cards and must abide by all of the applicable state laws and this purchasing card policy. (Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-704. - Public inspection.     In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(b), any documents related to purchases using government purchasing cards or government credit cards incurred by elected officials shall be available for public inspection. (Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-705. - Transaction limits.     Transaction limits are hereby established to insure compliance with state purchasing laws, maintain proper budgetary controls, and to minimize excessive use of any individual credit line. Individual monthly card limits cannot exceed those established by the mayor and council. The established single transaction limit for each card issued to an elected official must be no more than $6,000.00 in the case of the mayor or $3,000.00 in all other cases. The established monthly card limit is based upon the city's budgetary constraints and is no more than $12,000.00 per month for a card issued to the mayor and $6,000.00 for cards issued to other elected officials. Any exceptions to the standardized limits must have express written approval by the mayor and council and must be added to this policy by amendment or addendum. (Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-706. - Purchasing restrictions. (a)	Elected officials may not use a government purchasing card or government credit card for the following: (1)	Any purchases of items for personal use.(2)	Cash refunds or advances.(3)	Any transaction amount greater than the transaction limits set forth by this policy.(4)	Items specifically restricted by this policy, unless a special exemption is granted by the municipal governing authority. (5)	Alcohol or liquor of any kind. Such purchases should not be made with the purchasing card and may not be reimbursed by the city. (6)	Purchases or transactions made with the intent to circumvent the city purchasing policy, transaction limits or state law. (b)	Elected officials may use government purchasing cards or government credit cards to purchase goods and/or services not prohibited by this policy or state law. Such purchases include, but are not limited to: (1)	Purchases of items for official city use which fall within the transactional restrictions of this policy. (2)	Purchasing of lodging, fuel, food, non-alcoholic beverages, or education and training materials while on city business. (3)	Emergency purchases necessary to protect city property.(Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-707. - Administrator.     The city designates the office of finance director, as the program administrator of government purchasing cards or government credit cards. Such administrator shall: (1)	Serve as a liaison between the city's cardholders and the issuers of such cards.(2)	Maintain the cardholder agreement for all cardholders.(3)	Provide instruction, training and assistance to cardholders.(4)	Maintain account information and secure all cardholder information.(5)	Keep cardholders up-to-date on new or changing information.(6)	Upon receipt of information indicating fraudulent use or lost/stolen cards, immediately report it to appropriate parties, including the issuer. (7)	Ensure all card accounts are being utilized properly as set forth by state law and this policy. (8)	Define the city's policy and procedures for proper documentation and storage of receipts, logs and approvals required under this policy. (9)	Identify any changes to named persons authorized to use a government purchasing card or government credit card. (10)	Any other duties assigned by the municipal governing authority.(Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-708. - Accounting and auditing.     The administrator, in an effort to ensure compliance with city policy and state law, will conduct periodic reviews in accordance with city's general P-Card policy. If a violation of policy is discovered, the administrator may suspend or revoke the use of the P-Card after notification to the cardholder and to the mayor and council, but only after consultation with the city attorney. Any unresolved violations should be reported to the mayor and council and the city attorney in writing within five business days. (Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-709. - Violations.     The use of a government purchasing card or government credit card may be suspended or revoked when the administrator, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that the cardholder has violated the approved policies or state law regarding the use of a government purchasing card or government credit card. The government purchasing card or government credit card shall be revoked whenever a cardholder is removed from office with the city and shall be suspended if such elected official has been suspended from the office. (Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, 9-24-2015)
Sec. 2-710. - Agreement.     Before being issued a government purchasing card or government credit card under this policy and state law, all authorized users of government purchasing cards or government credit cards shall sign and accept below indicating that such user will use such cards only in accordance with the policies of the city and with the requirements of state law. (Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, 9-24-2015)
Secs. 2-711—2-730. - Reserved. 
Chapter 4 - ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; business regulations, ch. 22; zoning, app. A.State Law reference— State licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 4-1. - Purpose.     The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. Other communities and cities, including Marietta, Georgia, Fulton County, Georgia and Savannah, Georgia, have recognized that regulation of adult entertainment establishments helps to end or curtail many types of criminal activity. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition; otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this chapter represents a balancing of competing interests: Reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 1, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult business means either: (1)	Any business other than those expressly specified in this chapter, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or (2)	Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas.     Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated, or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled, still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Church means a temple or building consecrated to the honor of God or other supreme being and religion; or an assembly of persons united by the profession of the same religious faith, meeting together routinely for religious worship.     Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas.     Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names or persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters.     Good moral character means a person is of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five years.     Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years.     Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following: (1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (2)	Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.     Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: (1)	Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; (2)	Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;(3)	Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation;(4)	Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast;(5)	Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain;(6)	Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or (7)	Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.(Ord. No. 2006-57, § 2, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-3. - Regulations. (a)	No person shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in section 4-2, without a valid adult entertainment occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to this chapter. (b)	No later than March 1 of each year, an adult entertainment establishment applicant shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the applicant's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. (c)	An adult entertainment establishment applicant shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers. (d)	No adult entertainment establishment applicant shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. (e)	No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment.(f)	An adult entertainment establishment, as defined in section 4-2, shall be closed between 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays and 2:55 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. (g)	No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. (h)	If any portion, or subsection, of this section, or its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 3, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-4. - Certain activities prohibited.     No person shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion or a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 4, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-5. - Operation of unregulated premises unlawful.     It is unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid occupation tax certificate or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this chapter, which occupation tax certificate shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 6, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-6. - Admission of minors unlawful.     It is unlawful for an applicant to admit or permit the admission of minors within a regulated premises. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 7, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-7. - Sales to minors unlawful.     It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 8, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-8. - Location. (a)	No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located:(1)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily, single-family, or residential-professional uses or purposes. (2)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, college or university, library, civic center, conference center, convention center, cultural center, public park, recreation facility or neighborhood playground is located. (3)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. (4)	Within the central downtown business district as defined by the central downtown development authority district. (5)	Within any zoning category other than light manufacturing (M-1), heavy manufacturing (M-2), or by special exception in highway-commercial (C-H) per the official zoning map. (6)	Within the city historic district as defined by the chapter 58, article II. (b)	For the purposes of this section, distance shall be from property line to property line using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 9, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-9. - Penalty for violation.     Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the occupation tax certificate issued hereunder. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 27, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-10. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance.     Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal, or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of the occupation tax certificate granted hereunder. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 28, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-11. - Alcoholic beverages; prohibitions, exceptions. (a)	No person, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. Any licensee whose license was granted prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall not be subject to this provision until December 31, 2007, at which time all licensees within the city shall be subject to this provision, including those licensees licensed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. (b)	This section shall not apply to nor prohibit the live performance of legitimate plays, operas, ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums, or educational institutions holding a license, which derive less than 20 percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. (c)	The word "premises" is hereby defined as the building for which or upon which a license is issued hereunder; and the terms "premises" and "building" are further defined as a structure or edifice enclosing a space within its exterior walls, and covered with a roof or outside top covering of a building or connected or attached or joined with or by a wall, roof, walkway or breezeway. Any structures of any nature that share a wall, roof, walkway, or breezeway shall be considered a single premises and building for the purposes of this chapter. No building may be subdivided for the purpose of creating more than one premises for the purposes of this chapter. In addition, the word "premises" shall include the land and real estate as well as its appurtenances, including the entire parcel together with the boundaries thereof, upon which the licensed premises sits as well as the area of land surrounding said premises. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 32, 9-21-2006)
Secs. 4-12—4-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX CERTIFICATE 
Sec. 4-41. - Required.     It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments, defined in section 4-2, without an occupation tax certificate so to do. No occupation tax certificate so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 5, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-42. - Application. (a)	Any person desiring to obtain an occupation tax certificate to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city manager, or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable processing fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the business license manager to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The business license manager shall issue a receipt showing that such processing fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the city manager at the time such application is submitted. (b)	The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. (c)	The premises for which the application is sought shall be posted with a sign in accordance with all applicable ordinances. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 11, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-43. - Application contents.     Each application for an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate shall contain the following information: (1)	The applicant's full true name.(2)	The present address and telephone number of the applicant.(3)	Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age.(4)	Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors, and officers of a corporation. (5)	The business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or occupation tax certificate for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. (6)	If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address, and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. (7)	If the applicant, any partners or any corporate officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, have been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. (8)	If applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. (9)	At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the occupation tax certificate is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral character. The business license manager shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. (10)	Address of the premises to be regulated.(11)	Whether the premises are owned or rented.(12)	A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing that the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 4-8 which provide that no adult business or use restricted shall be located within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily, single-family, or residential-professional uses or purposes; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, conference center, cultural center, convention center, public park, recreation facility or neighborhood playground is located; within 1,000 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; within the downtown business district of the city; or within any zoning category other than M-1, M-2 or C-H by special exception. (13)	Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: a.	If the applicant is an individual, the individual;b.	If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner;c.	If a corporation, by the president of the corporation;d.	If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official.(Ord. No. 2006-57, § 12, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-44. - Applicant to appear.     The applicant, if an individual, or the designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 13, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-45. - Application; investigation.     The city shall have up to 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the permit at its next regular meeting if it finds: (1)	The required fee has been paid.(2)	Application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter.(3)	The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application.(4)	The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application.(5)	The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses. (6)	Applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause involving moral character in this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. (7)	The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable zoning and distance laws. (8)	The applicant is at least 21 years of age.(9)	The applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined in section 4-2 to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined in section 4-2 openly occur. (10)	On the date the business for which an occupation tax certificate is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. (11)	The proposed premises is in compliance with those location restrictions as set out in section 4-8. (12)	A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 4-8. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 14, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-46. - Persons prohibited as applicants.     No occupation tax certificate provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: (1)	An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. (2)	Any person who is not of good moral character.(3)	Any corporation, any of whose directors are not of good moral character.(4)	Any partnership or association, any of whose partners or members are not of good moral character. (5)	Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 15, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-47. - Refusal; appeal.     If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within 45 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied an occupation tax certificate may appeal such denial to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the receipt of notice from the city clerk. A hearing before the city manager shall be scheduled within 45 days of such notice. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 16, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-48. - Renewal.     Occupation tax certificates for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishments permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. Renewal applications shall be due by January 1 of the year for which such permit is requested. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 17, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-49. - Nontransferable.     No adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided, and excepting, however, that if the applicant is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such occupation tax certificate, and in such case, the occupation tax certificate upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of an occupation tax certificate is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 18, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-50. - Change of location or name. (a)	No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its occupation tax certificate until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city, and approval has been obtained from the mayor and council for the city. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the city's codes, have been met. (b)	No applicant shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his occupation tax certificate. (c)	Any application for an extension of expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 19, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-51. - Appeal procedure. (a)	The applicant shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. (b)	The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the city manager and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the city, and the name and address of the applicant. (c)	If the appeal is not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, a written request may be made to the city clerk to appeal the decision of the city manager. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 20, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-52. - Council determines appeal procedure.     When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: (1)	Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. (2)	Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for the hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 21, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-53. - City council hearing.     Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefore, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the applicant, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule, or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 22, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-54. - Powers of hearing officer.     The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in section 4-52, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 23, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-55. - Rules of evidence inapplicable.     The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 24, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-56. - Report of hearing officer. (a)	The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions, and recommendation. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall be considered public records. (b)	A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city manager and chief of police. (c)	The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 25, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-57. - Action by council based on hearing officer's report.     The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: (1)	Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. (2)	Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 26, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-58. - Revocation and appeal. (a)	The city manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate previously granted herein. In the event the city manager seeks to suspend or to revoke an occupation tax certificate, the city manager shall give written notification to the applicant of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation and shall be served upon the licensee at least five days prior to the notice of hearing. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. (b)	The city manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate in the event of any one or more of the following: (1)	An applicant gave false or misleading information in the original application process;(2)	An applicant has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; (3)	An applicant has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; (4)	An applicant has violated any provision of this chapter;(5)	An applicant has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the state or the city regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter; and (6)	An applicant fails to pay any fee, occupation tax, fine, or other amount of money due to the city under this chapter or any other taxing ordinance of the city. (c)	In the event the city manager shall suspend or revoke any occupation tax certificate hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the city manager; provided, however, that the applicant shall be authorized to continue its business operations until that date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, unless, in the opinion of the city manager, such continued operation is not appropriate based on the reason or cause for the suspension or revocation. No applicant may apply for an occupation tax certificate during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing conducted by the city manager, the city manager shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension, revocation, and the duration of either. (d)	In the event of a suspension or revocation by the city manager, the applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date of the decision of the city manager. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the mayor and council within 45 days after the date of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After the hearing by the mayor and city council, city council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including the upholding of the action of the city manager or the imposition of such action as the mayor and city council may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of mayor and city council shall be final. Appeals from the decision of the mayor and city council shall be to the superior court of the county filed within 30 days to the final action of mayor and city council. In the event the applicant does not file an appeal from any decision of the chief of police, as provided herein, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 29, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-59. - Annual renewal fees.     The adult entertainment establishment occupation tax and any renewal fee for such occupation tax certificate shall be based on the gross receipts schedule pursuant to the ordinance providing for the issuance of such occupation tax certificate. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 30, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 4-60. - Change of location fee.     There is established an administrative fee of $10.00 to apply for a change of location for an adult entertainment establishment. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 31, 9-21-2006)
Secs. 4-61—4-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMPLOYEES 
Sec. 4-79. - Standards and restrictions. (a)	Qualifications. Employees of an adult use establishment shall not be less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this chapter. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult use establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any premises requiring licenses under this chapter for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty. The terms employed as an adult use establishment employee and work on any licensed premises shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. (b)	Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a regulated premises, he shall file a notice with the permitting officer of his intended employment on forms that require the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section. The city shall have 15 days to investigate the information required by the employee. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the permitting officer shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the regulated premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the chief of police for a hearing. The decision of the chief of police after hearing may be appealed within ten days thereafter to city council who shall issue such order as is required. The decision of the city council may thereafter be appealed, within 30 days, to the county superior court. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment, or a receipt of the permitting officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. (c)	Suspension; revocation of permit. Conviction of violating the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city, laws, and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of permit. (d)	Independent contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or applicant of any adult entertainment establishment. (Ord. No. 2006-57, § 10, 9-21-2006)
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note—Ord. No. 2011-41, adopted Dec. 8, 2011, amended ch. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-77, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 2004-35, §§ 7-1031—7-1057, adopted Aug. 19, 2004; Ord. No. 2004-43, § 7-1034, adopted Oct. 21, 2004; Ord. No. 2006-19, adopted Mar. 9, 2006; Ord. No. 2006-45, adopted Aug. 10, 2006; Ord. No. 2006-69, §§ 7-1033, 7-1044, 7-1054, adopted Nov. 20, 2006; Ord. No. 2008-30, adopted July 10, 2008; and Ord. No. 2010-13, adopted Apr. 8, 2010.Cross reference— Adult establishments, ch. 4; business regulations, ch. 22; public drunkenness, § 70-4; possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in parks, § 74-5; permits for alcoholic beverages in parks, § 74-12.State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49.
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alcoholic beverage means and includes all beverages containing alcohol, including but not limited to, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine.     Brown bagging means the bringing of alcoholic beverages into business establishments licensed for the retail consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.     City means the City of Valdosta, Georgia.     City manager means the Manager of the City of Valdosta, Georgia or his designee for implementation of this chapter.     Container means a receptacle in which food is served.     Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverages obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines.     Entertainment establishment means any business licensed by the city as a retail consumption dealer and in which also provides live music or provides pre-recorded music for the purpose of dancing, or provides entertainment such as, but not limited to, dancers, comedians, karaoke, performers or other like or similar entertainment. A business establishment which has its primary business as the operation of a restaurant shall not be a considered an entertainment establishment.     Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises.     Fortified wines means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to brandy.     Growler. The term growler means a bottle made of glass or other material customary to the industry, provided that the bottle is capable of being sealed with a cap and then sealed with a plastic collar for the purpose of complying with open container law; and further provided, that the bottle does not exceed 68 ounces and is filled by a licensee or employee of a licensed establishment from a keg.     Improved outdoor location means a privately owned area attached or immediately adjacent to the premises of a retail consumption dealer which meets all applicable building code requirements, including seating and tables in adequate and sufficient numbers to accommodate any customers allowed into the location and specifically designated for the consumption of food and alcoholic beverages. A varied and complete menu of food items must be available in the designated improved outdoor location during all hours in which alcohol is consumed therein for any such specifically designated location to qualify for this exemption of this subsection. For similar areas on public rights-of-way, please see the definition of outdoor public seating area.     Legal age means the age established by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended from time to time, as the age below which alcoholic beverages may not lawfully be sold to, furnished to, purchased by or possessed by a person.     License means the authorization granted by the City of Valdosta to engage in the sale of specified alcoholic beverages for a calendar year, or the remaining portion of a calendar year.     License year means the 12-month period for and with respect to which licenses under this chapter shall be issued. License years shall begin on January 1 of each year and end on December 31.     Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail consumption dealer who has been licensed pursuant to this article.     Licensee means a person holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by the city pursuant the terms of this chapter.     Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to the premises of a restaurant or its adjacent lobby or reception area, with a seating capacity of at least 20 persons, and with all access and all exits to and from the lounge opening into such restaurant or the lobby or reception area adjoining such restaurant except for emergency exits or exits used solely as service doors.     Malt beverages means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer, provided that the term "malt beverage" does not include sake, also known as Japanese rice wine.     Manager means the individual who supervises the regular operations of a business licensed under this chapter and who is physically present on-site at such business: (a) at least 35 hours per week; or (b) at least 90 percent of the hours such business is open to the public, whichever is less.     Outdoor public seating area means the location and use of tables and chairs on the public sidewalk or public right-of-way and for which an outdoor public seating area permit has been obtained in accordance with the section 6-84.     Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container.     Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public.     Premises means one physically identifiable place of business consisting of one room or two or more contiguous rooms operating under the same trade name, business license and ownership where alcoholic beverages are sold or otherwise dispensed to the public, such premises to be within the confines of the licensed building structure; provided, however that any outside area whether defined as an improved outdoor location or outdoor public seating area may be considered premises for the purpose of serving alcoholic beverages from a bar or other dispensing facility located within the confines of the building structure; except that in the case of hotels and motels, the term "premises" shall include only that portion of the property where alcoholic beverages are sold, delivered or served.     Private club means a nonprofit organization which is organized under state law which meets each of the following requirements: (1)	Has either a tax exempt status under Section 501 of the United States Internal Revenue Code or operates pursuant to a charter from a state or national parent organization which has such tax exempt status; (2)	Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; (3)	Has at least 50 members paying dues on a regular periodic basis;(4)	Is organized and operated exclusively for the pleasure and recreation of its members and their guests or for other nonprofit purposes; (5)	Has facilities which are available for use only by the membership thereof and their guests and not by the general public; (6)	Owns, rents or leases a building or space within a building for facilities for the use of its members and their guests; (7)	Maintains kitchen and dining room space, equipment and items necessary to appropriately provide food service of full course meals for its members and their guests; (8)	Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for the preparation and service of meals for its members and their guests; (9)	Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits, beyond a fixed salary, from the sale of alcoholic beverages to the club or to its members or their guests; and (10)	Has such licenses as are required for the operation thereof.    Restaurant means a business kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served for a period of at least five hours per day on at least five days per week with the exception of: (i) holidays, (ii) vacations not exceeding two weeks duration, and (iii) periods of redecorating not exceeding 30 calendar days duration except to the extent extended by the city manager in its discretion upon request therefore; and which meets all of the following requirements: (1)	Meets all health and sanitation requirements for food service establishments required under applicable federal, state and local laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations; (2)	Maintains upon the premises thereof, in operative condition, cooking and kitchen facilities and equipment appropriate to accommodate the preparation of meals for at least 30 food service customers at one time; (3)	Maintains upon the premises thereof seating facilities, at booths or tables designed for food service, sufficient for at least 30 food service customers at one time, not including seating provided by counters and stools, with booths and tables for purposes hereof being large enough to adequately accommodate at least two place settings of cutlery and dishes; (4)	Maintains at all times such additional facilities, equipment and items as well as employees as shall be necessary for the cooking, preparation and service of meals for consumption at tables or booths located upon the premises for at least 30 food service customers at one time; and (5)	Is at all times during the hours of operation thereof prepared to serve full course meals with substantial entrees from a substantial variety of culinary choices, or substantial substitutes thereof, chosen by food service customers from a printed menu available to all food service customers at prices which are competitive with other restaurants in the community whether or not such other restaurants engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages.     Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale.     Retail sale means the sale or offer of sale of any alcoholic beverage to any member of the public.     Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale and consumption of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products, including alcohol, does not exceed 50 percent of gross revenue.     Retailer or retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to consumers and not for resale.     Special event privilege permit may be issued by the City of Valdosta for special events that: (1) are considered to be of a community nature; (2) that are advertised and open to the entire community; and (3) for which the city or Central Valdosta Development Authority is a sponsor or co-sponsor. Such events must be submitted to and approved by the office of the city manager under the terms and conditions as determined by the city, which may be changed from time to time. Such conditions may include certain notification requirements, security, sanitation and clean-up, beginning and ending times, insurance, parking requirements, and more. At the city's sole discretion, the special event privilege permit may be issued on a one-time basis, or for ongoing events, on a weekly, monthly, or annual basis; provided that said ongoing event permits shall not exceed 12 months. Any permit issued is subject to revocation for cause at any time. The city reserves the right to review the history of previous events to determine future decisions in regards to the special event privilege permit and to approve or deny any and all requests.     Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, and combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section.     Wine tasting means the dispensing of wine in small quantities to customers for consumption on the premises at no charge as an instructional or educational promotion of wine products in accordance with subsection 6-36(b). Wine tastings may be allowed in establishments operating under a retail wine package license or in a facility approved through a special event privilege permit at the discretion of the city manager or his designee and per the terms of that permit. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011; Ord. No. 2015-4, § 1, 2-5-2015)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Activities are privileges.     The manufacture, distribution, sale and possession of alcoholic beverages within the city are declared to be privileges and not rights. Such privileges shall not be exercised except in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-3. - Compliance with chapter, license and applicable law.     No person shall: (1)	Distribute, sell, or offer to sell, either at retail or wholesale, any alcoholic beverage in the city except to the extent permitted pursuant to a current license issued by the city; (2)	Distribute, handle, possess, sell, or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage in the city in violation of any provisions of this article or any provision of any applicable federal or state law regulating the distribution, handling, possession, selling or offering to sell any alcoholic beverage in this state; and/or (3)	Assist or aid another in violating any provision of this article, or any federal or state law regulating the distribution, handling, possession, selling or offering to sell any alcoholic beverage in this state. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-4. - Knowledge of chapter.     The holder of any license as well as all employees, agents and servants of any business in which such license is utilized shall be conclusively presumed, for purposes of this chapter, to have at all times complete and full knowledge of all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Secs. 6-5—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Local permit or license required for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a); governing authority to set forth ascertainable standards pertaining to the granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage permits or licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(b)(1).
Sec. 6-31. - Required.     The privilege to engage in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the city, whether at wholesale or retail, shall in no event be granted to any person except by an issuance of a license as provided for in this article, and the privilege shall be held and enjoyed by the licensee only so long as such licensee shall comply fully with the requirements of this article and shall promptly pay all charges provided for in this article. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-32. - Classification of licenses.     Licenses authorized to be issued by the city and required pursuant to the provisions of this article to be held for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages are classified as follows: (1)	Wholesale malt beverage license;(2)	Retail malt beverage package license;(3)	Retail malt beverage consumption license;(4)	Wholesale wine license;(5)	Retail wine package license;(6)	Retail wine consumption license;(7)	Wholesale distilled spirits license;(8)	Retail distilled spirits package license;(9)	Retail distilled spirits consumption license;(10)	Sunday sales consumption license as set forth in section 6-82; and (11)	Sunday package sale license as set forth in section 6-82. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-33. - Activities authorized pursuant to licenses.     The holder of a license issued by the city, as well as the employees of such holder, shall be authorized subject to the provisions of this article, the laws of the State of Georgia and the rules, regulations and requirements of the Georgia Department of Revenue relative thereto to engage in the following respective activities but none other than those which are specifically authorized with respect to each such license: (1)	Wholesale malt beverage license: Wholesale sale only of malt beverages in original unbroken and sealed containers to the holders of effective retail malt beverage licenses issued by the Georgia Department of Revenue for the purpose of resale only. (2)	Retail malt beverage package license: Retail sale only of malt beverages in original unbroken and sealed containers to consumers for take-out only and not for consumption upon the licensed premises. (3)	Retail malt beverage consumption license: Retail sale only of malt beverages to consumers for consumption only upon the licensed premises. (4)	Wholesale wine license: Wholesale sale only of wine in original unbroken and sealed containers to the holders of current retail wine licenses issued by the Georgia Department of Revenue for the purpose of resale only. (5)	Retail wine package license: Retail sale only of wine in original unbroken and sealed containers to consumers for take-out only and not for consumption upon the licensed premises. (6)	Retail wine consumption license: Retail sale only of wine to consumers for consumption only upon the licensed premises. (7)	Wholesale distilled spirits license: Wholesale sale of distilled spirits in original unbroken and sealed containers to the holders of current retail distilled spirits licenses issued by the Georgia Department of Revenue for the purpose of resale only. (8)	Retail distilled spirits package license: Retail sale only of distilled spirits in original unbroken and sealed containers to consumers for take-out only and not for consumption upon the licensed premises. (9)	Retail distilled spirits consumption license: Retail sale only of distilled spirits to consumers for consumption only upon the licensed premises. (10)	Sunday sales consumption license: A license which allows the selling and dispensing of alcoholic beverages on Sunday for consumption on the premises as set forth in section 6-81. (11)	Sunday package sales license: A license which allows the packages selling of alcoholic beverages on Sunday as set forth in section 6-81. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-34. - Qualifications for license.     No license for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages required by the provisions of this article shall be issued to any person or for any location unless and until it has been successfully demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager that: (1)	Such person, or the person who shall actually and actively be in charge and manages the day to day operation of the business in which such license shall be utilized, is a citizen of the United States; (2)	Such person by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, moral character, mental capacity, physical capacity, trade associations, lack of criminal history, and reputation in communities in which he has lived is, in the opinion of the city manager, likely to operate the business in which the license will be utilized in conformity with federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, and requirements, including particularly the provisions of this chapter and the laws, rules and regulations of the state and the United States relative to the manufacture, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages. In making such determination, the city manager shall, in addition to the other and further provisions of this section, consider all information that would be considered by the city manager if this person was being denied a renewal license pursuant to the requirements of section 6-49 or, if this person was having his license suspended or revoked pursuant to the requirements of section 6-52; provided further that no license shall be issued to or for: a.	Any person whose business in which the license will be utilized is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses and meets all of the qualifications required hereunder for the holder of a license and would not be prohibited from being the holder of such a license; b.	A partnership unless all partners, members and managers of such partnership, as well as the manager of the business in which the license will be utilized, possess and meet all of the qualifications for the holder of a license and would not be prohibited from being the holder of such a license; c.	A corporation unless all officers thereof, all directors thereof and all shareholders thereof who shall either directly or beneficially as such word is defined and utilized in the Internal Revenue Code of the United States and regulations issued pursuant thereto own more than 20 percent of the outstanding shares of stock thereof, as well as the manager of the business in which the license will be utilized, possess and meet all of the qualifications for the holder of a license and would not be prohibited from being the holder of such a license; d.	Any person who has been convicted, has entered a plea of nolo contendere or has forfeited a bond with respect to any felony within ten years prior to the filing of any such application or with respect to any misdemeanor within five years prior to the filing of any such application including particularly but not being limited to those offenses involving force or violence, prostitution, gambling, tax law, or alcohol-related violations in the event that such conviction, plea or bond forfeiture tends to indicate, in the opinion of the city manager, that the applicant may not maintain or operate the business in which the license sought by the applicant would be utilized in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. The terms "felony" and "misdemeanor" as used in this subsection shall include the violation of any criminal law of the United States of America, the State of Georgia, or any other state of the United States of America; provided that the term "misdemeanor" shall not include those violations which are commonly referred to as "traffic violations". The term "conviction" as used in this subsection shall include an adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager, in his sole discretion, may decide to authorize the issuance of a license to a person who has in the past been convicted of, plead guilty to, entered a plea of nolo contendere to, or forfeited a bond on any crime when, after a thorough investigation of all the facts including parole or probation officer's reports, judge's recommendations, and any other evidence bearing on the character of the applicant, it has determined, in the sole discretion of the city manager, that such action is in keeping with the ends of justice and the public interest and welfare; e.	Any person who as either the previous holder of any license issued by any authority, or as a party interested in any business in which any license issued by any authority was utilized, either conducted, or allowed the conduct of, the business with respect to which such license was issued in such a manner as to cause, in the opinion of the city manager, greater than normal police activity, observation or inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law or regulation either relating to such license or the business associated therewith or in order to maintain public order; f.	Any location that does not satisfy the conditions of section 6-37; g.	Any location that does not have adequate parking relative to the potential occupancy load of the premises. For purposes of this section, whenever there is a difference in the allowed occupancy approved by the inspections department through the certificate of occupancy issued for the establishment and the occupancy approved by the Valdosta Fire Department, the more restrictive occupancy level shall prevail except where provisions of the Valdosta/Lowndes County Land Development Regulations govern shared parking; h.	Any location for which there is an unpaid or unsatisfied tax or other financial obligation due the city which is not then the subject of appeal or litigation; i.	Any person who has not attained the age of 21 years;j.	Any person who either held any license issued by any authority which was revoked by such authority within a one-year period immediately prior to the date of the filing of an application or was a party interested in any business in which any license issued by any authority was revoked by such authority within the one-year period prior to the date of the filing of an application; k.	Any location at which a license has previously been suspended or revoked by either the city or the Georgia Department of Revenue and where, in the opinion of the city manager, there exists the likelihood that the utilization of such license at such location would cause or necessitate greater than normal police activity, observation or inspection in order to either prevent violation of laws and regulations relating to such location or to maintain public order, due to the history of either: (i) violations of the provisions of this chapter or of the laws, rules and regulations of the state relative to alcoholic beverages by the holder of the previous license at such location or agents, servants or employees thereof; or (ii) activities or conduct of patrons of the business in which such previous license was utilized at such location, all as compared to the locations of other licensed premises, or would cause or tend to cause, in the opinion of the city manager, greater than normal community problems or conflict as compared to the locations of other licensed premises; and l.	Any location at which a license has previously been suspended or revoked by either the city or the Georgia Department of Revenue and where, in the opinion of the city manager, problems associated with the utilization of a prior license at such location were such that it would not be in the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare to grant any other license for such location.     Notwithstanding the above, any facility which has been utilized and permitted under this article during the previous six months prior to the application as a legally permitted and nonconforming facility, regardless of distance from churches or schools, shall be eligible for application and approval of license under this article, provided the business is in good standing per the requirements of this chapter and its history of operation. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-35. - Additional qualifications for retail malt beverage consumption license and distilled spirits consumption license. (a)	In addition to the requirements of this section 6-35, retail malt beverage consumption licenses and distilled spirits consumption licenses shall only be issued for individual locations that comply with all of the following: (1)	Meet all health and sanitation requirements set for food service establishments by the city, state and federal government; (2)	Have installed an operative cooking facility and kitchen equipment on the premises for accommodating the demand for 30 food customers in C-C zoning, 60 customers in C-H zoning and 30 customers in C-D zoning; (3)	Have a complete place setting of utensils and durable and reusable serving containers in regular use for 30 food customers in C-C zoning, 60 customers in C-H zoning and 30 customers in C-D zoning; (4)	Have seating facilities, at booths or tables designed for food service, sufficient for 60 food customers in C-C zoning, 60 customers in C-H zoning and 30 customers in C-D zoning, and such booths or tables shall each be large enough to accommodate at least two place settings of utensils and serving containers; (5)	For locations within C-D zoning, the applicant licensee, excluding private clubs as defined in this chapter, must derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food; (6)	At all times during the hours of operation are prepared to serve full course meals with a substantial variety of culinary choices, or substantial substitutes therefore, which must be prepared on-site; (7)	Shall print and maintain a complete menu and furnish such printed menu to each food customer, with prices which are competitive with other restaurants within the city, whether or not those restaurants engage in the business of serving alcoholic beverages; (8)	Requirements in subsections (2), (3), (4) and (5) above, shall all be provided within the same premises as the licensed establishment, and shall not be shared with any other business establishment unless such establishment is adjacent, under the same ownership, and internally connected to allow the free flow of patrons; (9)	Alcoholic beverages shall be served only during the hours in which all printed menu items, or substantial substitutes therefore, are available to the customers. The hours of service for food may be prolonged, but in no event shall alcoholic beverages be sold at any time contrary to the hours established for the sale of alcoholic beverages by other ordinances of the City of Valdosta. (b)	Additional qualifications and restrictions on growler license:(1)	The filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of the package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or other provisions of this chapter. (2)	Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. (3)	Only professionally and sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in the original sealed condition. (4)	Consumption on the premises is strictly prohibited, however, samples may be made available but shall not exceed three ounces in volume, nor shall any one individual be offered more than four samples within a 24-hour period. (5)	Growlers may not be sold at any establishment engaged in the sale of distilled spirits.(6)	The sale of growlers shall require the payment of an annual license fee of $250.00 from the local license holder and the payment of all excise tax. (c)	The additional requirements for acquiring a retail malt beverage consumption licenses and distilled spirits consumption licenses in subsection (a) shall not apply if the premises from which the alcoholic beverages are to be sold and consumed is located in the following: (1)	Hotels of 50 rooms or more;(2)	Hotels of less than 50 rooms for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages solely to occupants of the hotel and their guests by the drink for consumption only on the premises; or (3)	A private club.(Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011; Ord. No. 2014-29, 11-6, 2014; Ord. No. 2015-4, § 2, 2-5-2015) 
Sec. 6-36. - Wine only establishments, wine tastings and retail tobacco stores. (a)	If a license holder only sells wine, it shall not be required to meet the conditions of section 6-35 of this chapter. To demonstrate compliance with this section, the license holder shall allow the city manager, or his designee, full permission to inspect the premises of said location and produce upon demand, any and all information that may be relevant to same. (b)	Upon filing an application and payment of a license fee of $50.00 per year, the city manager may issue a permit to hold wine tastings. Wine tasting may be allowed in conjunction with an event through a special event privilege permit at the discretion of the city manager or his designee and per the terms of that permit. Additionally, wine tastings shall be allowed in premises operating under a retail wine package license provided the following conditions are met: (1)	The applicant shall be a licensee authorized to sell wine within the city pursuant to and in accordance with a retail wine package license; (2)	The applicant shall maintain on the premises and offer for sale at all times a variety of wines from not less than 30 manufacturers of wine; and (3)	The applicant's establishment shall have a maximum interior floor area of 1,850 square feet devoted to the storage, display and sale of wine. (c)	Retail tobacco establishments may be issued a retail malt consumption license, provided the retail tobacco establishment has a maximum interior floor area of 1,850 square feet devoted to the storage, retail sale and consumption of tobacco products and accessories. The occupancy of the establishment may not exceed more than 40 customers as set forth on the certificate of occupancy issued by the City of Valdosta for the business. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-37. - Location of alcoholic beverage businesses. (a)	Retail malt beverage, distilled spirits and wine package licenses. (1)	The provisions of any other ordinance of the city notwithstanding, retail malt beverage, distilled spirits or wine package licenses shall be issued only for locations in areas classified at the time of the issuance by the Valdosta Land Development Regulations (LDR), as amended, as zoned C-D, C-H, C-C, M-1 or M-2. (2)	No retail package licenses, whether it be for distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine, shall be issued for a premises unless it is in accordance with the provisions contained in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. (b)	Retail malt beverage, distilled spirits and wine consumption licenses. (1)	The provisions of any other ordinance of the city notwithstanding, retail malt beverage, distilled spirits and wine package licenses shall be issued only for locations in areas classified at the time of issuance by the LDR, as amended, as zoned C-D, C-H, or C-C. (2)	In all areas classified by the Valdosta Land Development Regulations, as amended, as C-D, a retail malt beverage, distilled spirits and wine consumption license shall only be issued if the building from which the business will operate is more than 50 feet from any church sanctuary, school building or education building. In all areas classified by the LDR, as amended, as zoned C-C or C-H, the retail malt beverage, distilled spirits and wine consumption license shall only be issued if the premises from which the business will operate is more than 50 feet from any private residence, church building, school building or educational building. The terms "school building" and "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). The terms "church sanctuary" and "church building" shall mean a stand-alone building owned in fee simple by the religious organization where regular worship services are performed and shall not mean a commonly platted area which has common or shared parking such as shopping centers, strip malls, etc. (c)	Measurement of distances. Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements to determine distances required by this chapter shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground in the following manner: (1) from the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; (2) to the front door of the building of a church, government-owned treatment center or other retail package store; or (3) the nearest property line of the real property being used for school or educational purposes. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)Cross reference— Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 6-38. - Applications.     Prior to the issuance of any license, the applicant shall file a written application with the city, in such form and substance as shall from time to time be determined by the city manager, together with a check payable to the City of Valdosta or cash for the application fee provided for in this article. Applications for licenses shall be presented to the city manager or his designee, shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by a duly authorized agent if a corporation shall be verified by oath or affidavit, shall contain the following statements and information and shall otherwise meet the following requirements: (1)	In the case of an individual applicant who will actually and actively be in charge and manages the day to day operation of the business in which the license applied for will be utilized, then the name, age, sex, height, weight, date of birth, Social Security number, current residence address, business addresses, and all previous such addresses of the applicant within the last ten years; (2)	In the case of an individual applicant who will not actually and actively be in charge and manages the day to day operation of the business in which the license applied for will be utilized, then the name, age, sex, height, weight, date of birth, Social Security number, current residence address, business addresses, and all previous such addresses within the last ten years of both the applicant and the person who will actively manage such business; (3)	In the case of a partnership or limited liability company, then the name, date and location of formation, federal tax identification number, current principal business address, and all prior business addresses within the past ten years of such partnership as well as the name, age, sex, height, weight, date of birth, Social Security number, current business address, current residence address, and all prior such addresses within the past ten years of all partners, members and managers of such partnership or company and the manager or managers of the business in which the license applied for will be utilized; (4)	In the case of a corporation, then the name, date and location of incorporation, federal tax identification number, current principal business address, name and address of registered agent for service of process, and all prior business addresses within the last ten years of such corporation as well as the name, age, sex, height, weight, Social Security number, current business address, current residence address, and all prior such addresses within the last ten years of all officers thereof, all directors thereof, and all shareholders thereof who own either directly or beneficially, as such word is defined and utilized in the Internal Revenue Code of the United States and regulations issued pursuant thereto, more than 20 percent of the outstanding shares of stock thereof, and of the manager or managers of the business, in which the license applied for will be utilized; (5)	A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section has made at any prior time any application to any governmental entity for any license, and, if so, the circumstances thereof, including the disposition and current status thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; (6)	A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section has ever held any license issued by any governmental entity, the circumstances thereof, and the present status of such license all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; (7)	A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section has ever held any license issued by any governmental entity which has been suspended or revoked and, if so, the circumstances thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; (8)	A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section has ever been convicted of, entered a plea or nolo contendere to, or forfeited a bond on, any crime other than traffic violations and, if so, the nature and circumstances thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; (9)	The classification of license applied for;(10)	The location with respect to which the license will be utilized, list of all businesses, religious institutions and/or residences within 500 feet and the name and nature of the business in which the license will be utilized, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; (11)	A statement that both the applicant and all other persons with respect to whom information is required under subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section are fully qualified in all respects under this chapter to be the holder of a license issued by the city and that all such persons are entitled to have the license requested issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; (12)	A head and shoulder photograph, such as is contained on a state driver's license, taken within the past three years of the applicant and all persons with respect to whom information is required under subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section; and (13)	Written consents of the applicant and all persons with respect to whom information is required under subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section that the city has continuing permission and authority of all such persons to monitor the public records of the city, county, the state and of the United States to ensure on-going compliance with the statements set forth in subsections (7) and (8) of this section. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-39. - Designation of agent.     All applicants for licenses shall name in the application one or more persons as the agent and representative to receive all communications, notices, service of process or other papers or documents in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any such license. The application shall give a physical mailing address of such person, or persons, with the mailing of any notice to any such person via certified U.S. Mail at the address so furnished being sufficient notice. If any such person shall cease to be the agent and representative of the licensee, another person shall immediately be appointed by the licensee and written notice shall be given the city stating the name and address of such new agent and representative. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-40. - Application fee.     The application for a license shall be accompanied by a check payable to the city or cash in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the clerk of council as an application fee to cover the cost of processing the application and conducting necessary investigations. Such fee shall be nonrefundable upon denial of the application and shall not apply toward any license fee or excise tax payable by the licensee if the application is approved. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-41. - Investigation of application.     Upon receipt by the city manager or his designee of any application for a license, such application shall be forwarded to the chief of police for investigation, who, following such investigation, shall report his findings with respect thereto in writing of every person named in the application. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-42. - Grant or denial of application; hearing. (a)	Following receipt by the city manager of an application for a license together with the written report of the chief of police and the written recommendations relative thereto, the city manager shall either grant such application and direct issuance of a license in connection therewith subject to compliance with the provisions of this article; or (b)	Direct written notice to be forwarded to the applicant by certified mail, informing the applicant of why his application was not immediately approved and advising him of his right to have a hearing before the city manager to show cause why the application should be approved. If the applicant desires a hearing, he shall submit a written request for same which must be received by the office of the city manager, 216 E. Central Avenue, Valdosta, Georgia within ten days of the notice. At said hearing, which shall take place at a time and place specified therein which shall not be less than five days nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the notice, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence against granting approval of the application, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceedings transcribed or recorded at the applicant's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time. (c)	Following the conclusion of such hearing, or within ten days of same, the city manager shall render his decision regarding the grant or denial of said application. (d)	If the applicant does not invoke a hearing in the timeframe provided by this section, the city manager shall make his decision without the necessity of a hearing and forward written notice via certified mail to the applicant. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-43. - Issuance of license. (a)	Upon the approval of an application for a license, the city manager shall cause to be issued to the applicant the license applied for with respect to the location listed in the application upon payment of all fees and charges required therefore and subject to the conditions and limitations imposed in this chapter relative thereto. (b)	All holders of licenses under this chapter must open for business within three months after issuance of the licenses at the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within such timeframe shall automatically forfeit and cancel the unused license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. (c)	Any holder of a license under this chapter who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall cease to operate the business as authorized in the license for a period of three consecutive months shall, upon completion of the three-month period, automatically forfeit his license. Such license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be cancelled by the city manager. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-44. - Conditions and limitation of license.     The grant and issuance of a license to an applicant shall be conditioned upon: (1)	Payment of all fees, charges and taxes applicable thereto;(2)	Obtaining and maintenance of a license issued by the Georgia Department of Revenue to the applicant for the location listed in the application for the same type activity which is authorized in the license issued by the city; (3)	Obtaining and maintaining an occupational tax certificate issued by the city with respect to the business in which such license is to be utilized; (4)	All statements, representations and information contained in the application for such license and all renewal and amended applications relative thereto continuing to remain materially unchanged except to the extent said changes are approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; (5)	Compliance with all requirements and provisions of this chapter and all laws, rules and regulations of the state relative to the sale, distribution and possession of alcoholic beverages; and (6)	Allowing unrestricted access to the Valdosta Police Department for inspection of the licensed premises. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-45. - License fees. (a)	In addition to all other charges, taxes, and fees relative thereto, annual license fees as set forth in this article shall be paid prior to the issuance of or renewal of any license. (b)	License fees for the sale of alcoholic beverages are due and payable immediately upon issuance thereof and immediately as of the date of renewal thereof. (c)	Any license issued at any time during a calendar year but before March 1 shall require payment in full for an annual license. Licenses issued after March 1 shall be prorated accordingly. (d)	All license fees payable under this section shall be paid either in lawful currency of the United States of America or by a cashier's check payable to the city. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-46. - Duration and expiration.     No license shall be issued for a period of time less than the remainder of such calendar year. In the event of revocation, suspension, termination, lapse or surrender of a license before the expiration of a calendar year, there shall not be any refund therefore. All licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued, with all applications for a renewal of the license for the ensuing year to be treated as applications for new licenses except to the extent otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-47. - Renewal.     Any licensee who desires to renew such license shall annually file with the city manager an application therefore in such form and content as shall be determined from time to time by the city manager on or before 12:00 noon on November 1 of the year preceding the year for which the application for renewal is made. Such application for renewal shall be accompanied by the applicable annual license fee for the ensuing year and a statement under oath that the licensee is still entitled to possess said license under this article. Failure of any licensee to file such application for renewal by such time and to pay together therewith the required applicable annual license fee for the ensuing year shall render the license void, lapsed, and non-renewed effective as of the last minute of December 31 of that year; provided however, that for providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the city manager, the city manager may, in his sole discretion, extend the time for filing of such application for renewal and payment of such license fee for a period of time not later than January 31 of such ensuing year. If the licensee fails to renew his license in accordance with this section, he shall immediately cease and desist any and all activity granted by said license, including but not limited to the sale and/or dispensing of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-48. - Operation pending renewal.     Upon the timely filing of an application for renewal of any license and the payment of the required license fee therefore pursuant to the provisions of section 6-46, a licensee shall be entitled to continue to engage in the activity authorized pursuant to the license issued for the previous year, subject to the provisions of this article, pending action on the application for renewal of such license. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-49. - Grant or denial of renewal. (a)	On or before December 31, the city manager shall grant the application; or(b)	Direct written notice to be forwarded to the applicant by certified mail or personal service informing him that his license has not been renewed, why it has not been renewed as of yet and advising him of his right to have a hearing before the city manager to show cause why the application for renewal should be approved. If the applicant desires a hearing, he shall submit a written request for same which must be received by the office of the city manager, 216 E. Central Avenue, Valdosta, Georgia within ten days of the notice. At said hearing, which shall take place at a time and place specified therein which shall not be less than five days nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the notice, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence against renewing the applicant's license, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceedings transcribed or recorded at the applicant's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time. (c)	Following the conclusion of such hearing, or within ten days of same, the city manager shall, render his decision regarding the approval or denial of said application for renewal. (d)	If the applicant does not invoke a hearing in the timeframe provided by this section, the city manager shall make his decision without the necessity of a hearing and forward written notice via certified mail to the applicant. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-50. - Grounds for denial of application for renewal.     The city manager shall be entitled to deny renewal of any license for any of the following reasons: (1)	Any violation by the licensee, by any other person required under this chapter to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of said license, or by any employee, agent, or servant of the licensee or the business in which such license is utilized, of any of the following: a.	Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages; b.	Any provision, condition, requirement, or limitation contained in this article;c.	Any other ordinance of the city;d.	Any ordinance, rule, regulation or law of any governmental entity otherwise regulating the business in which such license is utilized; e.	Any criminal law which is classified as a felony; orf.	Any criminal law involving moral turpitude.(2)	The initial application for issuance of such license, any application for renewal thereof, or any amended application relative thereto contained, as of the time made, material false or misleading statements or information or was otherwise misrepresentative or misleading; (3)	Failure of the applicant for renewal, or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license, to meet, as of the time of the application for renewal, the requirements established in this chapter for the initial issuance of such license; (4)	Suspension or revocation by the Georgia Department of Revenue of any license issued for the location of the business in which license issued by the city is utilized; (5)	Failure of the licensee or any employee or agent of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly report to the police department of the city any of the following which occurred on the licensed premises: a.	Any violation of this article;b.	Any other violation of law;c.	Any violation of any other city ordinance; ord.	Any breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation.(6)	Repeated failure of the licensee or the employees, agent or servants of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly control and prevent upon the premises of such business any of the following activities or conduct: a.	Fighting;b.	Disorderly conduct;c.	Utilization of controlled substances;d.	Gambling;e.	Indecent conduct;f.	Excessive noise;g.	Documented negative impact to adjacent private property owners (such as litter, parking, noise, property damage, etc.); h.	Adequate on-premises parking based on actual attendance at business.(7)	Failure of the licensee or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license to promptly pay and satisfy all taxes and other financial obligations due the city which are not the subject of appeal or litigation. (8)	Failure to allow unrestricted access to the Valdosta Police Department for inspection of the premises. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-51. - Transfer of licenses. (a)	All licenses issued by the city shall be personal to the person to whom issued and are applicable only to the premises for which application therefore is made and accordingly no license shall be transferable to any other person or entity or to any other premises. (b)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, in the event of the death of any licensee, or any person holding interest in a license, then upon application and approval by the city manager subject to the terms of this section, a license may be utilized by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person, or by the heirs at law of the deceased person, in the event that such administrator, executor, personal representative or heirs meet all of the qualifications contained in this chapter for the issuance of such license, with the license of such deceased person to be so utilized by the administrator, executor, personal representative, or heirs of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete the administration of the estate of such deceased person, but in no event longer than six months from the date of the death of such deceased person, with such license to lapse upon the earlier of such six-month period, completion of such administration, or December 31 of the year in which death shall occur. (c)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, in the event that the licensee certifies under oath in writing to the city manager that the business served by such license is relocating to another physical location within the city, the city manager may, upon payment to the city of an application amendment fee, provide for an amended license specific to the new location if such new location meets all of the requirements of this article. In no event shall any licensee operate under a license at more than one location within the city at any time. (d)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any change in the ownership interests of a partnership or corporation which holds a license, as reflected in the initial application for such license, shall cause the immediate cessation of sales or disbursement of any alcoholic beverages. No sales or disbursement of alcoholic beverages shall be made until such change in the ownership interests is approved by the city manager based upon the qualification of all persons then interested therein in accordance with the provisions hereof or until the issuance of another license to such corporation or partnership upon a new application therefore; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply in a situation in which one or more individuals who have existing interest in the entity which holds the license cease to have such interest and the remaining ownership interest in such entity remains unchanged except as to the division of the remaining interests therein. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-52. - Suspension or revocation of license; hearing. (a)	Upon a preliminary determination by the city manager that a ground or grounds may exist for the suspension or revocation of a license pursuant to the provisions of this article, then the city manager shall either: (1) temporarily suspend the license; or (2) advise the licensee that although the license is still in effect, suspension or revocation is being considered. (b)	The preliminary decision by the city manager as set forth in the preceding paragraph shall be reduced to writing and a notice shall be issued to the licensee informing him of the grounds and advising him of his right to a hearing to show cause why the license should not be suspended, revoked or reinstated. If the applicant desires a hearing, he shall submit a written request for same which must be received by the office of the city manager, 216 E. Central Avenue, Valdosta, Georgia within ten days of the notice. If the applicant does not invoke a hearing in the timeframe provided by this subsection, the city manager shall make his decision without the necessity of a hearing and forward written notice to the applicant. (c)	The date, time and location of the hearing shall be forwarded to the licensee and shall not be less than five days nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the notice. At said hearing, the licensee shall be given the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine adverse witnesses, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceedings transcribed or recorded at the applicant's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time. Continuances may be granted for good cause shown but in no event longer than 30 days from the original hearing date. (d)	Following the conclusion of such hearing, or within ten days of same, the city manager shall render his decision regarding whether the license should be suspended or revoked. If suspended, then the duration of such suspension shall not exceed 90 days and the amount of license reinstatement fee, if any, shall not exceed $500.00, as the city manager shall determine in his sole discretion to be appropriate under the circumstances. Such license reinstatement fee shall be paid as a condition to reinstatement of the license following suspension. (e)	Upon the suspension or revocation of such license then the city manager shall cause the licensee to be notified in writing within ten days of such decision of the nature of such decision and the grounds therefore, and thereupon the license shall immediately become suspended or terminated in accordance with such decision and the licensee shall immediately upon receipt of such notice cease and desist from all activity authorized under such license in accordance with such decision and physically surrender such license to the city manager. (f)	If the city manager determines that grounds do not exist to suspend or revoke a license or decides to not suspend or revoke such license notwithstanding the existence of grounds therefore, then the city manager shall notify the licensee in writing within ten days of such decision. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-53. - Grounds for suspension or revocation.     The city manager shall be entitled, in his sole discretion, to either suspend or revoke any license upon a finding by the city manager, of any of the following: (1)	Any violation by the licensee, by any other person required under this chapter to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of said license, or by any employee, agent, or servant of the licensee or the business in which such license is utilized, of any of the following: a.	Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages; b.	Any provision, condition, requirement, or limitation contained in this chapter;c.	Any other ordinance of the city;d.	Any ordinance, rule, regulation or law of any governmental entity otherwise regulating the business in which such license is utilized; e.	Any criminal law which is classified as a felony;f.	Any criminal law involving moral turpitude;g.	Any documented negative impact to adjacent property owners for which the owner or tenant has failed to remedy through good faith efforts; or h.	Failure to maintain parking lot of property in such a manner as to prevent littering, loitering, acts of disorderly conduct, excessive demand for public safety resources, and on-going disturbance of adjacent property owners. (2)	That the initial application for issuance of a license, any application for renewal thereof, or any amended application relative thereto contained, as of the time made, material false or misleading statements or information or was otherwise misrepresentative or misleading; (3)	Failure of the licensee or any other person required under this chapter to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of said license, to meet, as of the time of the notice of hearing relative thereto, the requirements established in this chapter for the initial issuance of such license; (4)	Suspension or revocation by the Georgia Department of Revenue of any license issued for the location of the business in which license issued by the city is utilized; (5)	Failure of the licensee or any employee or agent of the business in which said license is utilized to promptly report to the Valdosta Police Department: a.	Any violation of this chapter;b.	Any other violation of law;c.	Any other violation of any other city ordinance; ord.	Any breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation which occurs within or upon the premises of the business in which such license is utilized. (6)	Repeated failure of the licensee or the employees, agent and servants of the business in which said license is utilized to promptly control and prevent within or upon the premises of such business any of the following activities or conduct: a.	Fighting;b.	Disorderly conduct;c.	Utilization of controlled substances;d.	Gambling;e.	Indecent conduct; orf.	Excessive noise.(7)	Failure of the licensee or any other person required under this chapter to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of said license to promptly pay and satisfy all taxes and other financial obligations due the city which are not the subject of appeal or litigation. (8)	Failure to allow unrestricted access to the Valdosta Police Department for inspection.(Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-54. - Termination.     All rights and privileges conveyed by a license issued by the city shall terminate upon the first to occur of the following: (1)	Death of the licensee, except to the extent on any right to continue to utilize such license as provided in subsection 6-50(b); (2)	Dissolution of a corporation or partnership which are holder of such license;(3)	The filing of any voluntary bankruptcy proceedings under the Bankruptcy Code by the licensee or the failure of the licensee to, within 60 days of the date of filing thereof, obtain dismissal of the involuntary proceeding filed under the Bankruptcy Code against the licensee; (4)	Lapse of such license pursuant to the provisions of this article;(5)	Denial by the city manager of an application for renewal of such license;(6)	Revocation thereof by the city manager;(7)	Surrender of license;(8)	Automatically without any action on the part of the city upon revocation by the Georgia Department of Revenue of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the Georgia Department of Revenue to the licensee in issue with respect to such location; or (9)	The licensee ceases to be engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages permitted by such license. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Secs. 6-55—6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATIONS 
Sec. 6-81. - Hours of operation. (a)	Retail consumption dealers shall not sell, give away or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverages during the following time periods: (1)	Monday: 12:00 midnight - 10:00 a.m.;(2)	Tuesday—Saturday: 2:00 a.m. - 10:00 a.m.; and(3)	Sunday: 2:00 a.m. - 12:30 p.m. Additional alcohol sales on Sunday shall be governed by sections 6-82 and 6-83. (b)	Retail package dealers shall not sell, give away or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverages as follows; (1)	Monday: 12:00 midnight - 6:00 a.m.;(2)	Tuesday—Saturday: 2:00 a.m. - 6:00 a.m.; and(3)	Sunday: 2:00 a.m. - 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. - 12:00 midnight. Alcohol sales on Sunday shall be governed by sections 6-82 and 6-83. (c)	Entertainment establishments and retail consumption dealers shall close between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. This prohibition applies notwithstanding the fact that said entertainment establishment may also qualify as a restaurant under this article. (d)	Except as provided by subsection 6-83(c), no customer or other person not employed by the entertainment establishment or retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to remain on the premises later than 2:30 a.m. Employees of these establishments must depart the establishment building by 3:30 a.m. If an "entertainment establishment" has unique circumstances as a result of the load-in or load-out of entertainers, they may request additional time, specifically for this purpose only, by directly contacting the Valdosta Police Department, who may not unreasonably refuse such a request if conditions are verified and warranted. This section shall not apply, however, to restaurants, motels and hotels that are not designated as an entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, and whose primary sales and the majority of its business income is generated by products or services other than alcoholic beverages sales. Any business licensed to provide alcoholic beverages by the drink and designated as an entertainment establishment shall comply with the closing times established in the ordinance for entertainment establishments regardless of any other business product or service they may provide, including service as a restaurant or food services. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-82. - Sunday sales licenses. (a)	A retail consumption dealer may obtain a Sunday sales consumption license which allows the selling and dispensing of alcoholic beverages on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. to 12:00 midnight provided the retail consumption dealer: (1) pays Sunday sales license fee; and (2) demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city manager, or his designee, that he derives at least 50 percent of the total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served or in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. (b)	A retail package dealer may obtain a Sunday package sales license which allows the selling of packaged sale of alcoholic beverages between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. upon paying the applicable Sunday package sales license fee. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-83. - Sunday sales permitted; elections; New Years Day. (a)	Alcoholic beverages may be sold on Sunday from 12:00 midnight until 2:00 a.m. No further alcohol sales may take place on Sunday unless a Sunday sale license has been obtained in accordance with section 6-81. (b)	Alcoholic beverages may be sold on election days provided no selling, dispensing or giving away takes place within 200 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. (c)	Licensees may sell alcoholic beverages between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 4:00 a.m. on New Year's Day on any day of the week, including Sunday. All non-employees shall be off the premises no later than 4:30 a.m. and all employees no later than 5:30 a.m. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-84. - Consumption off-premises.     Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, it shall be unlawful to consume any alcoholic beverage or to be in possession of an open container of an alcoholic beverage within 500 feet of the premises of any retail consumption dealer or retail dealer. This provision shall not apply: (1)	To a geographical area covered by a special event permit;(2)	To a geographical area designated in a catering event permit; and(3)	To the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages in an improved outdoor location or outdoor public seating area. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-85. - Off-premises catering. (a)	A retail consumption dealer that is also a food caterer may become a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer by meeting all of the following requirements: (1)	Complying with all provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 3, ch. 11 (sales off-premises for catered functions); and by (2)	Meeting the requirement that at least 50 percent of the gross income for such business comes from the sale of prepared foods as set forth in section 6-35 of this article; and by (3)	Applying for an off-premises catering license on the form prescribed by the city; and by (4)	Paying an annual fee, not to exceed $1,000.00, to the city for such a license, with such fee being shown upon a schedule of fees maintained in the office of the city manager, provided that the combined license fees shall not exceed $5,000.00 as prescribed in section 6-179; and by (5)	Obtaining a catering event permit, as hereinafter defined and provided, for each and every such authorized catered function to which such alcoholic beverage caterer license shall be applicable. (b)	A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer is eligible to sell or furnish only those types of alcoholic beverages as he can sell or furnish pursuant to his underlying license or any other license issued by the State of Georgia and another Georgia municipality. (c)	A catering event permit, issued by the city manager or his designee, is required before an otherwise licensed alcoholic beverage caterer can sell or furnish alcoholic beverages off-premises, i.e., at any location other than the licensed premises utilizing the underlying license. In order to obtain a catering event permit, the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall be required to submit a fully accurate and completed application on the form prescribed by the city 14 days prior to the event to be catered and shall include the following information: (1)	Name of caterer;(2)	Date of event;(3)	Time (hours) of event;(4)	Location (address) of event;(5)	Host or sponsor of event;(6)	Estimated number of persons to attend the event that are of legal age;(7)	Estimated number of persons to attend the event that are not of legal age;(8)	Whether "open bar" or "cash bar" of alcoholic beverages at event;(9)	Estimated quantities of malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits (to the extent authorized by license) to be served at event; (10)	Whether facility is private or public;(11)	Whether location is within 300 feet of a church or school building;(12)	A plat or sketch showing the service area where alcoholic beverages will be served indicating whether said area is within the building or in an open area; (13)	An event fee in the amount of $50.00 shall be submitted along with the application;(14)	Comply with the reporting provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3;(15)	Provide security and parking enforcement plans and personnel as required by the city.(d)	A catering event permit cannot be obtained unless the event permit application referenced in subsection (b) above is accurately completed in full and submitted to the city manager or his designee at least 14 calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the event or function. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager in his sole discretion may issue a catering event permit within a shorter timeframe if the applicant has been previously approved for a catering event permit and if the proposed event location has been previously approved. (e)	A catering event permit may be refused by the city manager or his designee for any of the following reasons: (1)	Inadequate parking or enforcement personnel at the location designated;(2)	Criminal record of host or applicant;(3)	Previous complaints on location or of applicant;(4)	Previous damage to facility by applicant or permit holder.(f)	The city reserves the right to define and/or restrict the service area for serving of alcoholic beverages. (g)	The city shall control the dispensing of alcohol in all of its facilities by requiring the use of a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer if alcohol is furnished at any such facility. Consistent with this article, alcohol may also be dispensed by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer who has been issued an event permit at facilities of any local, state or federal public entity. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-86. - Brownbagging.     No person shall be permitted to carry or otherwise take an alcoholic beverage of any kind into a business or establishment licensed under this chapter to sell or dispense beer, wine, liquor, or other spirited beverages by the drink nor shall any business licensee of the city allow patrons to carry or otherwise take beer, liquor, or spirited beverages of any kind into a business in the city. However, at the sole discretion of the licensee, wine may be brought onto the premises for consumption subject to the following: (1)	Only one bottle per patron of legal drinking age at a table or booth shall be allowed;(2)	Before opening, the wine must be sealed in the original seal;(3)	The bottle must be commercially manufactured;(4)	The bottle may not exceed 1,000 ML in volume;(5)	The bottle must be given to the licensee or his staff designee before the patron is seated; (6)	No bottle may be returned to the patron unless the staff has re-corked the bottle to make the cork flush with the top of the bottle. The original seal be set as close to the original condition as possible and secured to the bottle. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Secs. 6-87—6-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MINIMUM AGE 
Sec. 6-111. - Consumption by persons not of legal age.     No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized, permit or allow any person who has not attained legal age to consume any alcoholic beverage upon the licensed premises. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-112. - Possession by persons not of legal age.     No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant, or employee of any business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operations of the business in which such license is utilized, permit or allow any person who has not attained legal age to possess any alcoholic beverage upon the premises licensed. Notwithstanding the above, employees of alcoholic beverage license holders who have not obtained the legal age may engage in such activities described in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23(e) or O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24(b) without violating this section. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-113. - Verification of age.     All entertainment establishments are required to verify the age of all persons prior to entry with a government issued photo identification such as a driver's license. Any person under the age of 21 years old who is admitted into an entertainment establishment holding a license shall be identified by a red wrist band or strap which shall be attached around the wrist of the underaged person. Such wrist band must be approved by the chief of police or his designee. All persons age 21 and over entering an entertainment establishment after 8:00 p.m. must be identified with a green wrist band or strap. Such wristband or strap must be approved by the chief of police or his designee. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-114. - Presence of a minor in grandfathered establishments.     No individual who has not attained the age of 18 shall be allowed into/onto the premises operated by a retail consumption dealer where said retail consumption dealer, because of continuity of operation, does not have to meet the additional qualifications specified in section 6-35. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Secs. 6-115—6-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYMENT 
Sec. 6-136. - Employment of persons by retail and retail consumption licensees. (a)	No holder of a license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which such license is utilized shall permit or allow any person who has not attained 18 years of age and who is employed by any business operated upon premises for which a license is issued by the city to engage in the sale, distribution, or acceptance of orders for alcoholic beverages. (b)	It shall be unlawful for any person licensed for the retail sale of beer or liquor in the city to employ any person upon the premises where beer is sold at retail or is consumed any part of whose wages or compensation is computed on the basis of a percentage of moneys deposited upon such premises and music playing machines, pinball machines or other coin-operated devices. (c)	It shall be unlawful for any such licensee to employ any person upon such premises whose duties are to encourage or induce customers to operate coin machines upon the premises. (d)	It shall be unlawful for any such licensee to employ any person who has been convicted of a felony within the previous five years, unless approval is granted in written form by an appropriate judicial officer or as approved terms of any probation requirements. For the purposes of this section transient or temporary personnel, such as musicians, dancers, magicians, or similar entertainers who are contracted to, or actually perform for a period of no more than 15 continuous business days, as determined by the establishment's regular and routine schedule, shall not be considered employees of the business. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Secs. 6-137—6-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SECURITY 
Sec. 6-151. - Security cameras required in certain retail establishments.     Any retail business establishment licensed by the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages, beer or malt beverages by the package for off-premises consumption is required to install security cameras in accordance with this article. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-152. - Security camera requirements; responsibility; exception. (a)	Cameras meeting the requirements of this section must be capable of producing a retrievable image on film, tape, or digital media that can be made a permanent record and can be enlarged through projection or other means. Cameras meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the chief of police or his designee. In addition, the location of all such cameras shall be approved or determined by the chief of police or his designee. (b)	If the system camera used is a still frame camera, it shall contain the following equipment capabilities: (1)	Automatic still frame.(2)	Capable of being concealed.(3)	Remote activation.(4)	Quiet activation.(5)	Must be digital format of at least four megapixels quality.(6)	Produce good-quality color photographs.(7)	Must have automatic focus.(8)	Easily accessible for maintenance checks, film loading, etc.(9)	Capable of showing signs or signals of activation covertly.(10)	Must have wide-angle capacity.(11)	If the system camera is a still video camera, it must be capable of following:a.	All components must be compatible to produce sharp, detailed, still frame video images in color. b.	The recording equipment shall be able to transfer images to a CD or other digital media within 24 hours of activation. c.	Remote activation.d.	Quiet activation.e.	Color images.(c)	Retail establishments required to install the camera security system shall be responsible for the maintenance, supplies and periodic check of such systems. (d)	In the event of an actual robbery or other crime in any establishment containing a security camera, the police department shall be given, upon demand, the recording media that captured the incident. Under such circumstances, the recorded media shall become the property of the police department and shall be retained by it for use in any criminal proceedings. (e)	The city manager may, at his discretion, require a security camera system in the parking lot of any business licensed for the sale of alcohol and consumption on-premises based upon any history of fighting, disorderly conduct, crime or evidence of criminal acts, loitering, or a demand on public safety resources greater than such demand from other licensed alcohol establishments. The police department will have access to such security cameras at all times. Such security camera equipment will comply with subsection (b)(11)b. of this section, or as determined by the city manager or his designee. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-153. - Additional security for entertainment establishments only.     For those businesses defined as entertainment establishments or any business operating as an entertainment establishment, the city manager may, at his discretion, based upon documented incidents and demand on public safety resources, require any such establishment to provide security or parking lot attendants in its parking lot(s). Such attendants will be required during the hours of operation as determined by the city and in a number determined by the city. Based on the size of the parking lot(s) and their proximity to the business, a minimum of one and a maximum of four may be required. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Secs. 6-154—6-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TAXES 
Sec. 6-176. - Distilled spirits.     There is imposed and levied upon each retail distilled spirits dealer a privilege tax for and with respect to each license year, graduating in amount and measured and computed in accordance with the following: (1)	An initial tax upon each dealer of $1,075.00 payable with the filing of the application for license; however, with respect to dealers who are clubs or organizations making sales to members only and having a charitable purpose, the initial tax shall be $750.00; and with respect to veterans organizations making sales to members only and having a charitable purpose, the initial tax shall be $500.00. If the initial license of the applicant is applied for after the beginning of the license year, the initial tax provided shall be prorated with the remainder of the initial year. (2)	For a bottle or container of distilled spirits purchased, acquired or received for resale during the license year, the city imposes an excise tax of $0.22 per liter on same. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-177. - Wines.     There is imposed and levied upon each retail wine dealer who is a retailer of wines a privilege tax for and with respect to each license year, graduating in an amount and measured and computed in accordance with the total of the following: (1)	An initial tax upon each such dealer of $500.00, payable with the filing of the application for license; however, should the application for license be made after the beginning of the license year, the initial tax shall be prorated for the remainder of the initial tax year. (2)	For a bottle or container of wine purchased, acquired or received for resale during the license year, the city imposes an excise tax of $0.22 per liter on same. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-178. - Malt beverages.     There is hereby levied and imposed upon each retail beer dealer a privilege tax in an amount equaling the total of the following: (1)	An initial tax upon each such dealer of $500.00, payable with the filing of the application for a license for the consumption of beer on the premises and an initial tax upon each such dealer of $500.00, payable with the filing of the application for a license for the package beer sales; however, should the application for licenses be made after the beginning of the license year, the initial taxes provided for in this section shall be prorated for the remainder of the initial tax year. (2)	A tax of $0.004166 per ounce of beer purchased, acquired or received by such dealer during the license year. (3)	A tax of $6.00 per container of beer of not more than 15 ½ gallons where sold in or from a barrel or bulk container (being commonly known as a tap or draft beer). (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-179. - Consumption licenses fees.     In addition to the initial taxes provided for in sections 6-176, 6-177 and 6-178, retail dealers desiring to obtain a consumption licenses, shall pay an additional privilege tax in the following amounts: Distilled spirits consumption license .....$2,475.00 Wine consumption license .....$165.00 Malt beverage consumption license .....$165.00 (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-180. - Sunday sales license fees. (a)	There is imposed and levied upon each retail consumption dealer obtaining a Sunday sales consumption license pursuant to subsection 6-82(a) an additional privilege and license tax in the amount of $450.00, payable with the filing of the application for such license and payable in full on each renewal on each license. License years shall be the same as provided for all retail consumption licenses. Calculation of the amount of the fee pursuant to this section shall be made in accordance with section 6-181. (b)	There is imposed and levied upon each retail package dealer obtaining a Sunday package sales license pursuant to subsection 6-82(b) an additional privilege and license tax in the amount of $1,000.00, payable with the filing of the application for such license and payable in full on each renewal on each license. License years shall be the same as provided for all retail consumption licenses. Calculation of the amount of the fee pursuant to this section shall be made in accordance with section 6-181. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-181. - Total amount of fees for all licenses.     Notwithstanding the above, the total amount of fees for all licenses allowing the sale, distribution or disbursement of alcoholic beverages in the City of Valdosta shall not exceed an aggregate total of $5,000.00. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-182. - Method of collection.     The taxes imposed by this article shall be collected and paid in the following manner: (1)	Initial tax. The initial taxes provided for in sections 6-176, 6-177 and 6-178 applicable to any specific license shall be paid by check attached to the application for license as required by section 6-38. (2)	Retail dealer of distilled spirits and wine. Each retail dealer shall pay the taxes imposed by this article and measured and computed with respect to a container of distilled spirits and wine purchased or received by him after December 31 of each calendar year to the wholesale liquor dealer from whom such container of liquor is purchased or received, and the taxes shall be paid by such wholesaler to the city in the following manner: a.	Each wholesale dealer who ships or delivers any distilled spirits, or wine by rail, truck or otherwise to a retail dealer licensed under this article, whether the distilled spirits or wine is delivered to the place of business of that retailer or elsewhere, shall, prior to such shipment or delivery, prepare for the city legible copies of the invoices or other records of the shipment or delivery and before the tenth day of the month file with the city such legible copies of all invoices or other records made with respect to such shipments or deliveries made during the periods subsequent to December 31 of each calendar year and up to the time of filing such invoice copies or other records excepting only such information which have been previously filed with the city; and at the time of such filing, the wholesale dealer shall remit to the city the sum of taxes imposed by this article and measured by the containers of liquor or beer shipped or delivered and reflected by such invoices. b.	All invoices or copies of invoices furnished to the city by wholesalers shall have written thereon the acknowledgement of the retailer for whom delivery has been made, or the acknowledgment of such dealer's agent or employee. Each retailer licensed under this chapter shall furnish to the city monthly statements showing the amounts of total purchases such retailer has made of each wholesaler from whom such retailer has made purchases during the period covered by such statements. Statements shall be due on July 10, and on the tenth day of every succeeding month and shall cover the period of the proceeding calendar month. (3)	Wholesale malt beverage dealer. a.	The local excise taxes imposed pursuant subsections 6-178(2) and (3) is imposed upon and shall be collected by each wholesale malt beverage dealer selling malt beverages within the city. The wholsale malt beverage dealer must file a monthly report on or before the tenth day of each month with the city, indicating sales in the city for the preceding month. The monthly report shall itemize for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. The licensee shall file the report with each municipality or county wherein the beverages are sold by the licensee. b.	The wholsale malt beverage dealer shall remit to the city, along with the monthly report specified in the preceding subsection, the taxes imposed by subsections 6-178(2) and (3). (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-183. - Unlawful possession by retail dealers.     It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retail alcoholic beverage package licensee and after the commencement of business to own, hold, possess or sell any liquor or beer within the corporate limits of the city, with respect to which licensed taxes have not been paid as prescribed and required by this article. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Sec. 6-184. - Unlawful possession by individuals.     It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person other than a wholesale alcoholic beverage licensee to keep or possess any liquor within the corporate limits of the city unless the license tax imposed by this article, measured by each bottle or container of such liquor, has been paid; however, it shall not be a violation of this article to keep or possess not more than eight half pints or four pints, or one case of fifths, quarts or half-gallon containers of liquor within the city with respect to which a similar tax imposed by the county or by any other county or city of the state has been paid. (Ord. No. 2011-41, 12-8-2011)
Secs. 6-185—6-210. - Reserved. 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Business regulations, ch. 22.State Law reference— State licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.
Sec. 10-1. - Pool rooms, similar places.     No pool table, bowling alley, boxball alley, or other similar game shall be allowed to run in places screened from public view, except in private homes and in the clubrooms of private clubs not run for profit or gain to the owners. (Code 1976, § 11-5002)
Sec. 10-2. - Sweepstakes parlors. (a)	Gambling and non-sanctioned lotteries are illegal in the State of Georgia.(b)	With daily advances in electronic and computer technology, attempts at circumventing state law regarding illegal gaming has evolved from readily apparent methods to more veiled and camouflaged schemes. (c)	In recognition of this, the State of Georgia specifically prohibited the use of video poker machines in 2006. (d)	Since 2006, various programs have been created that allow computers and other electronic machines and devices to conduct a sweepstakes which purportedly entitle participants to have a chance to win various prizes and rewards in return for the purchase of token services or products such as internet service, telephone cards, and office supplies, among other products. (e)	Certain companies are advertising on the internet that these sweepstakes are legal in the State of Georgia (see www.cashoutgaming.com). (f)	These websites explain how to evade the gambling laws in states such as Georgia by establishing sweepstakes parlors. (g)	These business models appear to represent an attempt to circumvent the laws of the State of Georgia that generally prohibit gambling and illegal lotteries. (h)	The sale of goods or services to patrons appears to be no more than a subterfuge for promoting gambling on the premises. (i)	A number of jurisdictions around the United States either have passed or are contemplating the passage of laws, statutes, or ordinances banning or prohibiting such sweepstakes parlors. (j)	On March 10, 2011, the mayor and council passed a 120-day moratorium on accepting and processing applications for businesses that intended on operating sweepstakes parlors. (k)	The mayor and city council finds that promoting and establishing non-sanctioned lotteries is illegal in the State of Georgia and constitutes commercial gambling. (l)	The mayor and council find that requiring participants in a sweepstakes scheme to pay any tangible consideration to the operator of such business in the form of money or other property or thing of value and/or to purchase any goods, wares, merchandise, services or anything of value from such business to be eligible for a prize further constitutes an illegal lottery. (m)	The mayor and council find that it is in the best interest of the health and general welfare of the residents and businesses of the City of Valdosta that sweepstakes conducted by requiring a participant to access, play, or enter the sweepstakes only through the purchase of a product or service should be banned in the city. (n)	The mayor and council further find that requiring a participant to purchase goods and services, even if the goods and services have an independent value equal to that charged to the participant, is a mere token form of consideration and is illegal. (o)	On March 15, 2011, the Hon. Samuel Olens, Attorney General of the State of Georgia, also concluded that such a method of business was illegal. (p)	Any such method of operating a sweepstakes as described above shall be banned in the City of Valdosta. (q)	Any and all businesses that plan on utilizing such a sweepstakes shall be informed of the ordinance codified herein prohibiting the use of same. (r)	The refusal to abide by the terms of this section shall be grounds for the denial of any permit the business applicant seeks. (s)	The effective date of the ordinance codified herein is July 1, 2011.(Ord. No. 2011-23, 6-23-2011)
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Environment, ch. 42; noise control concerning animals and birds, § 42-37; health and sanitation, ch. 54; animal control in parks, § 74-11.State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 14-1. - Domestic animals running at large.     It shall be unlawful for any person owning or keeping any horses, mules, cattle, goats, chickens, ducks, geese or other domestic animals or fowl to allow or permit them to run at large within the city; and any such person who allows or permits any such domestic animals or fowl to trespass upon the premises of any person, or to injure or damage his property, shall be guilty of a violation of this section. (Code 1976, § 11-6001)
Sec. 14-2. - Impounding stock running at large.     All horses, heifers, cows, bulls, calves and yearlings running at large on the streets of the city shall be impounded by the police, and a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for each such animal so impounded shall be collected. In all cases where any of such stock is in the custody of the police, such fees shall be collected before the stock is released. A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for each sheep or goat so impounded shall be collected. All stock shall be advertised and sold after ten days' advertising before the city hall; and if the stock is advertised, the advertising cost shall be added to the fees and shall likewise be collected as provided in this section. (Code 1976, § 11-6002)
Sec. 14-3. - Regulations for keeping fowl.     Any person who shall have fowl in the city shall be required to provide suitable coops, pens and enclosures for such fowl and keep them confined there so that such fowl cannot escape. (Code 1976, § 11-6003)
Sec. 14-4. - City declared a bird sanctuary.     The city is declared to be a bird sanctuary, and the city manager is authorized to post notice of such designation at appropriate locations within the city. (Code 1976, § 11-6004)
Sec. 14-5. - Pigpens prohibited.     No person shall keep or maintain within the corporate limits of the city any pigpen, or other enclosure, room or building, in which one or more pigs, pot bellied pigs or hogs are kept. (Code 1976, § 11-6005)
Sec. 14-6. - Vermin harborage.     It shall be unlawful for any person to store or accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, in the city, any abandoned, deteriorating, decayed or deteriorated buildings, automobiles, trucks, house trailers, appliances, building materials, trash, rubbish, debris, or any other material which is conducive to the spread of rodent infestation which would create a place of vermin harborage hazardous to the health and welfare of the residents of the city. (Ord. No. 97-16, § 11-6006, 4-10-1997)
Sec. 14-7. - Trapping in corporate limits.     It shall be unlawful for any person to set or place any steel trap or bait the trap within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of catching or trapping wildlife or domestic animals. (Code 1976, § 11-6007; Ord. No. 80-9, 3-5-1980)
Sec. 14-8. - Report of bite cases by physicians and veterinarians. (a)	It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the proper health officials the names and addresses of all persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as may be reasonably requested in order to locate and detain or have detained the animal inflicting the bite. (b)	It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian in the city to report to the proper health official his diagnosis of any animal observed by him as a rabies subject. (Code 1976, § 11-6025; Ord. No. 81-9, 2-19-1981)
Sec. 14-9. - Humane treatment of animals.     It shall be unlawful for any person having ownership or custody of any animal to fail to furnish that animal with adequate food, water, shelter and protection from the elements. It shall be unlawful for any person to treat any animal in a cruel manner, to abandon any animal, or to release any animal upon public or private property with the intention of abandoning it. (Code 1976, § 11-6026; Ord. No. 81-9, 2-19-1981)
Secs. 14-10—14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note—Ord. No. 2008-9, adopted Feb. 21, 2008, repealed the former art. II., §§ 14-41—14-54 and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II, entitled "Dogs", pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1976, §§ 11-6011—11-6024; Ord. No. 81-9, adopted Feb. 19, 1981; Ord. No. 87-5, adopted Jan. 22, 1987; Ord. No. 87-18, adopted Mar. 19, 1987; Ord. No. 88-55, adopted Dec. 22, 1988.State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6.
Sec. 14-41. - Title.     This article shall be known as the "Valdosta Animal Control Ordinance". (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-42. - Purpose and intent.     Together with the purposes set forth in the preamble of the ordinance from which this article derives, the purpose of this article is to provide humane treatment of animals by regulating the care and control of animals within the City of Valdosta, to provide for the classification of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs, to provide for the prohibition and investigation of cruelty to animals, and to make such cruelty unlawful, to provide for prohibitions, procedures and enforcement pertaining to sick, injured, abandoned or free roaming or running animals, to provide for an animal control board, and other matters set forth herein, and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Valdosta. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-43. - Definitions.     When used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Abandoned animal means an animal that is owned or stray, unattended and uncared for and additionally: (1)	Has been placed or is found on public property or within a public building; or(2)	Has been placed or is found on private property or within a private building without the consent of the private property's owner, custodian or tenant; or (3)	Is on or within the property of the animal's owner or custodian and has remained unattended or uncared for in excess of 36 hours.     Adequate food and/or water means wholesome food and water which is sufficient in quality and quantity and consisting of essential materials for good health, growth and general life functions, and is appropriate for the particular type of animal consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, age, species, breed and physical condition. This shall also include clean water in sufficient quantity and quality to sustain vital functions of the animal and provide sufficient hydration consistent with the normal requirements and drinking habits of the animals' size, age, species and breed, and to which the animal has constant access. Both such food and water must be in containers designed and situated to allow the animal easy access to them. Adequate food and water shall also mean food and water which is sufficient in quality, quantity and accessibility so as to prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from a lack of proper quantity and quality of food or water.     Adequate shelter means a pen, structure, lean-to, animal house or other provision to provide shelter to the animal from the extreme cold, heat, sun or other climatic elements, and designed to keep the animal off the ground. It must be of sufficient size, design and dimensions to allow the animal reasonable ability to stand up and turn around, to permit sufficient ventilation, and which is otherwise adequate given the animal's size, age, species, breed and physical condition. Such shelter must at a minimum have three sides, a roof and a floor.     Animal means any live creature, both domestic and wild, except humans. "Animal" also includes birds, fish and reptiles.     Animal control means the Animal Control Department of Lowndes County.     Animal services officer means an employee of animal control designated to administer and enforce the provisions and requirements contained within this article. An animal services officer shall be considered and is designated a "dog control officer" for purposes of the Georgia Dangerous Dog Control Law. Any sworn police officer or marshal for the City of Valdosta is authorized to perform the duties of an animal control officer for enforcement and animal impoundment purposes.     Animal nuisance means any nuisance arising out of the keeping, maintaining, or owning of, or failure to exercise sufficient control over an animal.     Animal shelter means the Lowndes County Animal Shelter where animals impounded under the terms of this article shall be kept (unless otherwise provided herein).     At heel means that a dog is directly behind or next to a person and obedient to that person's command under all circumstances.     At large means that an animal is off the premises of its owner or custodian and not on a leash or otherwise under the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal.     Cat means any member of the animal species felis catus or felis domesticus.     Certificate of registration means a current valid certificate of registration for the possession of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog issued pursuant to this article.     Council means City Council of the City of Valdosta, Georgia.     City means City of Valdosta, Georgia.     Cruelty means any act of commission or omission whereby unjustifiable physical or mental pain or suffering, abuse, overwork, maiming, disfigurement or death of an animal is caused or permitted including, without limitation, failure to provide nutritious and adequate food, clean and adequate water, clean and adequate air for breathing, proper and adequate ventilation, proper and adequate space, shelter and protection from the elements, a sanitary and safe living environment, or necessary veterinary care. In the case of bona fide activities where physical pain is necessarily caused, such as medical and scientific research, food processing, customary and normal veterinary and agricultural husbandry practices, pest elimination, and animal training and hunting, "cruelty" shall mean a failure to employ the most humane method reasonably available.     Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority, inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property or which aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification.     Disposition means adoption, quarantine, voluntary or involuntary custodianship or placement, or euthanasia humanely administered to an animal in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1. "Disposition" also includes placement or sale of an animal to the general public.     Dog means any member of the animal species canis familiaris.     Domestic animal means any dog, cat, domesticated sheep, horse, cattle, goat, swine, fowl, duck, goose, chicken, turkey, livestock, confined domestic hare and rabbit, pheasant, bird or other domesticated animal regularly or customarily raised and/or maintained in confinement.     Equine means any member of the equidae species, including horses, mules and asses.     Exotic animal means any monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, member of the feline species other than domestic cat (felis domesticus), member of the canine species other than domestic dog (canis familiaris), or any other animal that would require a standard of care and control greater than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops or domestic farm animals. Excotic animal also means those animals as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 27, ch. 5.     Georgia Dangerous Dog Control Law means the State of Georgia's Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.     Governing authority means the Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta.     Guard or attack dog means a dog trained to attack on command or to protect persons or property, and who will cease to attack upon command.     Hopelessly disabled animals means any animal which is the subject of any disease, injury or condition which is a cause of immediate and significant suffering by the animal and from which there is no reasonable probability of recovery.     Humane care means, but is not limited to, the provision of adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter and wholesome and adequate food and water, in each case consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, age, species, breed and physical condition.     Impound or impoundment means the taking into custody of an animal by any law enforcement official, animal services officer, or any authorized representative thereof.     Livestock means all animals of the equine, bovine, fowl or swine class, including, but not limited to, chickens, roosters, goats, sheep, mules, horses, donkeys, hogs, cattle and other grazing animals, and all ratites, including, but not limited to, ostriches, emus and rheas.     Owner means any person (as defined herein), owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, maintaining, or having custody or control of an animal.     Person means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity, any public or private institution, the State of Georgia, or any county, municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state.     Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that, without provocation, bites a human being on public or private property or acts in a threatening or aggressive manner towards a person that places said person in reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury.     Proper enclosure or proper, secure enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over, through, or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements and sufficient ventilation for the dog.     Public nuisance animal means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall include but not be limited to: (1)	Any animal that is repeatedly found running or roaming at large.(2)	Any dog or cat in any section of a park or public recreation area, unless the dog or cat is under restraint by way of a leash or similar physical restraint; however, this provision shall not apply to any park or recreation facility specially designed or provided for the purpose of a dog or animal park, whether such designation is temporary or permanent. (3)	Any animal that repeatedly damages or destroys any property other than that of its owner. (4)	Any animal that repeatedly soils, defiles or defecates on any property other than that of its owner. (5)	Any animal that repeatedly makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. (6)	Any animal that causes or is left in unsanitary or unhealthy conditions created by an accumulation of excreta, or that cause fouling of the air by noxious or offensive odors due to unsanitary or unhealthy conditions and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. (7)	Any animal in heat that is not confined so as to prevent attraction or contact with other animals of the same species or breed. (8)	Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner that: (i) without provocation, molests, attacks, threatens, or otherwise interferes with the freedom of movement of persons in a public right-of-way; (ii) creates a traffic obstruction by their presence in the public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, bicyclists or pedestrians. (9)	Any animal that, without provocation, attacks or threatens domestic animals.(10)	Any animal that is a danger to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the number of animals maintained at a single location or the inadequacy of the facilities for such animals.     Rabies control tag means a valid tab evidencing the currently in effect annual inoculation against rabies (as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5) of a dog, cat or ferret, as the case may be, by a licensed veterinarian or other rabies inoculator approved under the rules and regulations of the county board of health or the Georgia Department of Health or Agriculture (or their respective successor agencies).     Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency, records of any federal or state department of agriculture, records of any state, county, or municipal board, or department of health, records of any federal, state, or local court, or records of an animal services officer or of a dog control officer provided for in Georgia's Dangerous Dog Control Law provided for in this article.     Responsible person means a competent person of at least 18 years of age.     Sanitary means a condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of disease creation or transmission and of unhealthy conditions.     Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death.     Sexually mature animal means any dog or cat that has reached the age of six months or more or an animal that has come into heat-estrous or has the ability to breed and create a pregnancy.     Sterilization means the surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a dog or cat in order to render the animal unable to reproduce.     Sterilized means when a dog or cat has undergone sterilization.     Stray cat means any cat which is found off the property of its owner, is not under restraint and without attached to such cat a valid rabies control tag together with an identification microchip, tattoo or tag.     Stray dog means any dog which is found off the property of its owner, is not under restraint and without attached to such dog a valid rabies control tag together with an identification microchip, tattoo or tag.     Under restraint means that an animal is secured by a leash, lead or chain of sufficient tensile strength held by a person of sufficient age who is physically capable of restraining the animal and obedient to that person's commands, is at heel, or is securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's property.     Unsanitary conditions means any condition which is not sanitary, including, but not limited to, a buildup of excreta, spoiled or moldy food, unclean or stagnant water, pests, vermin, and any health code violation.     Vicious dog means a dog which, without provocation, has bitten or attempted to bite any person or another animal.     Wild animal means any monkey, nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other warm-blooded animal that can normally be found in the wild state. The term "wild animal" does not include domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm animals, livestock, rodents, any hybrid animal that is part wild and captive-bred species of common cage birds. Wild animal shall also mean those animals as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 27, ch. 5.     Without provocation and unprovoked shall mean that the animal at issue was not or had not been assaulted, teased, tormented or abused by the person or domestic animal which was the subject of the act by the animal at issue, or that the animal at issue was not coming to the aid of or defending its young or was not acting against a person who was willfully trespassing or committing another willful tort or criminal act on the premises of such animal at issue's owner or custodian. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-44. - License required; fee; dog license tag required; rabies control tag required. (a)	It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep any dog in the city without having first obtained annually a license therefore from the clerk or such other agent as the mayor and council shall designate. (1)	A license fee of $3.00 shall be paid to the city for each dog annually; such license shall be acquired prior to May 1 of each year. The clerk or designated agent shall issue to the owner a dog license tag which must be securely fastened to the collar or harness of the dog and which must be worn at all times by the dog for which the license was issued. (2)	Upon satisfactory proof that a license tag has been lost or worn or damages beyond further use the clerk shall issue a new license for the fee of $0.50. (3)	It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep any dog in the city unless that dog, at all times and at all places is wearing a tag indicating that the dog has been inoculated against rabies as set forth in the Georgia Health Code, Control of Rabies and the Rabies Control Rules and Regulations of the county board of health. (b)	Procedure required for rabies check.(1)	The owner or custodian of any animal which has bitten a human or which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies shall immediately confine such animal so it shall not have access to persons or animals, and shall give immediate notice to animal control, an animal services officer, or county health department official, in order that said animal may be inspected for rabies as follows: a.	Upon demand, said owner or custodian must promptly surrender the animal to the animal services officer for quarantine with the expense of such quarantine to be borne by the owner. b.	The animal may be home quarantined or quarantined at the owner's expense in a veterinary hospital of the owner's choice at the animal services officer's discretion. c.	Quarantine of such animal under this section for inspection for rabies shall be for a minimum of ten days measured in the case of a bite of a human from the date of such bite. d.	The animal may be reclaimed by the owner or custodian if such animal is determined to be free of rabies, upon payment of all seizure fees and maintenance fees attributable thereto, and upon compliance with all other applicable provisions of this article (including, without limitation, the requirements regarding an identification microchip and registering the animal's microchip with animal control). (2)	Where any animal has bitten a human where evidence of rabies appears, the animal services officer may, in his discretion, take charge of such animal for the purpose of full inspection required by subsection (b)(1), this section and other applicable laws, rules and regulations. (3)	Any animal services officer, law enforcement officer or county health department official may seize any animal in the city reasonably believed to have rabies and/or may destroy such animal by a reasonably humane method suitable to the circumstances if such destruction is deemed by such official to be reasonably necessary to protect the health, welfare and safety of the city. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-45. - Emergencies involving animals. (a)	Hopelessly disabled animals. Licensed veterinarians, federal, state and local law enforcement officials, animal services officers, and those authorized by the city manager to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, in each case while acting within the scope of their authority, are authorized to induce the death of hopelessly disabled animals by an appropriately humane method. (b)	Contagious animals. (1)	In any situation deemed appropriate by an animal services officer involving a sick, diseased or infected animal which sickness or disease, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, or an employee acting within the scope of his authority of the city or Georgia Health Departments or the Federal or Georgia Departments of Agriculture, will likely spread to other animals or humans, an animal services officer may impound and take custody of any such animal, the animal shall be isolated, and the owner or custodian of such animal shall be promptly notified. If the owner or custodian cannot be located, the owner or custodian fails to take immediate steps to remove the animal from impoundment, and take immediate steps to isolate the animal to properly eliminate the likelihood of infecting other animals or humans or otherwise spreading the sickness, disease or infection, or, if in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, destroying the animal is the most reasonable course of action to eliminate the health or safety risk of the animal spreading the sickness, disease or infection, then in any such event, the infected animal shall be humanely destroyed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1. (2)	The owner of any such animal impounded pursuant to this section shall be liable for reimbursement to the county for all expenses related to the impoundment, boarding, treatment and destruction of any such animal. (c)	Vicious animals. (1)	Any animal that without provocation has: (i) killed, bitten or otherwise severely injured a person (excluding injuries resulting from an equine or llama activity as defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-12-2 and injuries resulting from activities for which the law similarly provides immunity to the animal's owner or custodian from liability) or another domestic animal; (ii) repeatedly chased or otherwise threatened persons or other domestic animals in a vicious or menacing manner indicating a reasonable likelihood that the animal will cause imminent physical injury; (iii) repeatedly caused significant damage to the property of other than that of its owner or custodian, in each case may be immediately confiscated and held by the animal services officer, any law enforcement official, or those authorized by the city manager to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, while acting within the scope of their respective authority and confined in the Lowndes County Animal Shelter pending a hearing by the animal control board, if necessary, to determine whether such animal should be destroyed as a public nuisance and, if not, in the case of a dog, classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. The owner of any animal that has been so confiscated shall be given notice of said animal's confiscation. The notice to the owner shall be in writing and sent by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the last known address of the owner. The notice shall give a description of the animal and set forth the reasons that the animal has been confiscated, together with the date, time and place of the hearing (if so needed) set forth below before the Lowndes County Animal Control Board. (2)	A hearing before the animal control board shall be scheduled within 15 days from the date of notice to the owner of the animal's confiscation to determine if the animal should be destroyed as a public nuisance. At said hearing, the owner of the confiscated animal shall have the right to present testimony and evidence as to why the animal should not be destroyed as a public nuisance. The animal control board, after receiving all pertinent testimony and evidence on the matter, shall decide whether the animal shall be destroyed as a public nuisance. In making its decision, the animal control board shall consider whether the animal constitutes such a physical threat to persons or other animals, or of significant destruction or harm to property, by virtue of one or more unprovoked attacks on persons, other domestic animals, or physical property that destruction of the animal is reasonably necessary to protect the health, welfare or property in the city. If the animal control board decides that said animal should be destroyed, then the owner shall promptly be given written notice thereof, and the animal shall be humanely destroyed any time after five business days after the date of such written notice of the decision of the animal control board in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1. (3)	If the animal control board decides the animal should not be destroyed, the animal services officer shall determine whether such animal shall be classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. If the animal services officer determines that such dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the owner shall promptly be given written notice thereof, the dog shall continue to be impounded by animal control until the owner shall have complied withal the requirements of this article, after which the animal will be returned to the owner. If the owner fails to meet said requirements within ten business days following written notice of the decision of the animal services officer classifying the dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, or to timely request a hearing appealing such decision, the dog shall be humanely destroyed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1, provided; however, that the director of animal control may extend said time for up to an additional 15-day period(s) upon payment by the owner of the per diem boarding costs for said dog. (4)	The owner of an animal confiscated under the provisions of this section shall pay a fee of $50.00 and reimburse the county for all costs of housing, feeding and any medical treatment of said animal. (5)	It shall be unlawful for an owner or custodian of a vicious dog to permit the dog within the city to be outside a proper, secure enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be constructed and worn in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-46. - Restraint, confinement and identification. (a)	It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to fail to keep such animal under restraint or to permit such animal to roam or run at large, except as otherwise provided in this article. (b)	Any dog, while off the property of the owner or upon any private property without the consent of the owner of the property, shall be under restraint by its owner or custodian. (c)	No owner or custodian of any animal shall fail to exercise proper care and control of such animal to prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance. (d)	Every female dog or cat, which is not sterilized, during the period it is in heat, shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal of the same species of breed, except for planned breeding. (e)	Any animal, whether, on or off the property of the owner or custodian, which according to the records of an appropriate authority is vicious, is a potentially dangerous dog, is a dangerous dog, or has without provocation killed, bitten, or otherwise severely injured a person, or repeatedly chased or otherwise threatened persons in a vicious or menacing manner indicating a reasonable likelihood that the animal will cause imminent physical injury, shall at all times have implanted into such an identification microchip and which animal's microchip is registered with animal control. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-47. - Restraint of guard or attack dog. (a)	Every owner or custodian of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog confined in a building, compartment or other secure enclosure. Any such enclosure shall be completely surrounded by a fence at least six feet in height and shall be topped with an anti-climbing device constructed of angle metal braces with at least three strands of equally separated barbed wire stretched between them, and contain flooring sufficiently sturdy to prevent the guard or attack dog from digging out or otherwise escaping. Any such building, compartment or enclosure shall provide adequate shelter. (b)	All anti-climbing devices required by subsection (a) above, shall extend inward at an angle of not less than 45 degrees, nor more than 90 degrees when measured from the perpendicular. (c)	The areas of confinement for a guard or attack dog shall all have gates and entrances thereto securely closed and locked, and all fences properly maintained and escape proof. (d)	Each entrance and exit location to (or side, on which is not located an entrance or exit) of a building, compartment, structure or fenced area, in which a guard or attack dog is maintained shall at all times have posted on it prominent signage with the words "DANGER - GUARD [OR ATTACK] DOG" which shall be in size and style easily read at a distance of at least 25 feet. (e)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs owned or controlled by government law enforcement or military agencies. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-48. - Impoundment. (a)	In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, an animal services officer may seize and impound at the animal shelter any of the following animals: (1)	Any dog, cat or ferret not wearing a valid rabies control tag or without an identifying microchip, tattoo or identification tag. (2)	Any animal at large and not under restraint.(3)	Any public nuisance animal or animal considered a danger to the public welfare, health or safety. (4)	Any animal in violation of any quarantine or confinement order issued by the county board of health or the county public health director. (5)	Any unattended animal that is ill, suffering, injured, without adequate food, water or shelter, or is otherwise in need of immediate care or attention. (6)	Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been the subject of cruelty, abuse or neglect. (7)	Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having or having been exposed to rabies.(8)	Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having (or having been exposed to) a contagious disease, sickness or illness, which animal could thereby be a threat to the health and welfare of other animals or of the public. (9)	Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous or dangerous where an animal services officer determines that there is an immediate threat to public welfare, health or safety. (10)	Any exotic or wild animals found to be owned, harbored or permitted at large in each case in violation of this article or Georgia or federal law. (11)	Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or destroyed.(12)	Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in situations where the owner or custodian is deceased or has been incarcerated or evicted from his regular place of residence and there is no other person who will take custody of and provide adequate care to the animal. (13)	Any animal that is reasonably suspected to be the subject of a violation or breach of the requirements of this article. (b)	Any animal services officer or law enforcement official may also, or in lieu of seizure and impoundment, issue to the owner a citation of violation of this article. Such citation will cite the owner to appear on a date certain before the Municipal Court of the City of Valdosta for adjudication as provided in this article. (c)	Any person finding an animal at large upon his property may use reasonable means to remove the same to the animal shelter or hold the animal in his own possession, and as soon as possible, notify animal control. The property owner shall provide a description to animal control of the animal and the name of the owner, if known. Animal control shall dispatch an animal services officer to impound the animal as soon as possible. (d)	Any animal services officer or other person authorized under this article, who seizes and impounds an animal pursuant to this article that cannot be housed at the animal shelter shall be authorized to contract with and arrange transportation of the animal to a private farm or other appropriate facility which agrees to accept and humanely care for such animal. The disposition of the animal shall be handled in the same manner as though the animal were confined at the animal shelter except that, in addition to the charges imposed for impounding and redemption of the animal or otherwise provided for under this article, the owner shall also pay the actual transportation, boarding and veterinary care costs incurred while said animal was impounded. (e)	Any animal services officer or other person who discovers or is notified of livestock (as that term in defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-3-2) running at large, shall notify the Valdosta Police Department. The seizure, impoundment and disposition of such livestock shall be in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 4, ch. 3. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-49. - Impounded, abandoned and surrendered animals. (a)	Reclaiming. (1)	An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay a $25.00 impoundment fee (or other such fee provided in this article) plus a fee of $10.00 for each day the animal is impounded as a boarding fee if impounded at the animal shelter or the actual costs of impoundment and boarding if impounded off-site, and the actual veterinary care costs. The impoundment fee and daily boarding fee charged for any subsequent impoundment of the same or any other animal when owned or in the custody of the same owner occurring within 12 months of the last impoundment shall be double that which was charged during the last impoundment. (2)	An owner reclaiming impounded livestock shall pay a $50.00 impoundment fee plus a fee of $10.00 for each day the animal is impounded as a boarding fee if impounded at the animal shelter or the actual costs of impoundment and boarding if impounded off-site, and the actual veterinary costs. The impoundment fee and daily boarding fee charged for any subsequent impoundment of the same animal when owned or in the custody of the same owner occurring within 12 months of the last impoundment shall be double that which was charged during the last impoundment. (3)	Any livestock impounded pursuant to this article may be subject to testing for contagious diseases as required by the Federal or Georgia Departments of Agriculture or other health officials. Such testing will be at the owner's expense before release of the animal to the owner. Testing may include, but not be limited to: (i) Coggins testing for horses; and (ii) Brucellosis testing for cattle, goats and other livestock. (4)	This section shall not apply to any animal that was an object or instrumentality of a crime which animal shall not be returned to the owner or disposed of without the prior approval of the prosecuting attorney or court of competent jurisdiction. (b)	Unclaimed animals. (1)	Except as otherwise provided in this article, any stray animal which has been impounded and is not taken up by the owner within three business days of the date impounded shall be subject to destruction or other disposition (including adoption) by animal control. (2)	Except as otherwise provided in this article, any animal reasonably believed to have an owner or custodian which has been impounded and is not taken up by its owner or custodian within five business days of the date impounded shall be subject to destruction or other disposition (including adoption) by animal control. (3)	Animals not wearing traceable ID tags, rabies tags or microchips when impounded and which are observed to be in agony due to disease, sickness or injury, or otherwise appear to be hopelessly disable, may be destroyed promptly by animal control staff unless the animal has bitten a person and must be held for observation for rabies pursuant to section 14-44 of this article. (c)	Surrendering of unwanted animals. (1)	Any owner or custodian of any animal which is not wanted or who desires to dispose of any animal may do so by surrender of the same to an animal services officer or to the animal shelter. (2)	All animals so surrendered shall be conclusively deemed abandoned and forfeited by the owner and shall be subject to destruction or other disposition (including adoption) by animal control. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-50. - Animal found at large. (a)	If the name of the owner of an animal found at large is known or can be obtained with reasonable dispatch, the animal services officer at his discretion may return the animal to the residential address of the owner. If there is no responsible person present, or if the animal services officer determines in his discretion to otherwise not return the animal, the officer shall impound the animal and leave written notice of whom the owner must contact to reclaim the animal. If the animal is not reclaimed within five business days, then the animal may be disposed of. (b)	The animal services officer may cite the owner of such animal found at large for a violation of this article, and in addition if such animal is impounded, the owner shall be liable for fees and costs imposed by this article in reclaiming an impounded animal. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-51. - Keeping of exotic or wild animals. (a)	It shall be unlawful for anyone to own, keep, maintain, harbor or permit at large any exotic or wild animal within the incorporated areas of the city except in accordance with all applicable federal and state laws, including permitting and registration requirements of this article. Any exotic or wild animal in violation of this section may be impounded by an animal services officer or any law enforcement official. (b)	Any person who owns, keeps, maintains, harbors or permits at large any exotic or wild animal within the incorporated areas of the city is required to notify the Valdosta Police Department in the event said exotic animal escapes from its enclosure or restraint and its whereabouts are unknown, or the location of the animal is known; however, the animal presents a danger to humans or domestic animals. Said notification shall occur within the first 30 minutes from the time that the exotic animal was determined to have escaped or its whereabouts determined to be unknown. Failure by the appropriate person to make a timely notification as required by this subsection is a violation of this article and is punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00, at the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court for the City of Valdosta. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-52. - Nuisances.     It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any property located within the incorporated limits of the City of Valdosta when the keeping of such animal constitutes a public nuisance or menace to public health, welfare or safety. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-53. - Dangerous dog control. (a)	Investigations. (1)	Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within an animal services officer's jurisdiction from a citizen, law enforcement agency, other animal control agency, rabies control officer, or county board of health, or such officer's own investigation, an animal services officer shall make such investigations, inquiries and classifications of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog with regard to such report or investigation as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. (2)	A dangerous dog, for purposes of this article, shall not include a bona fide law enforcement dog while assisting a law enforcement officer in performance of his official duties. (b)	Procedures for classification as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; notice; hearing. (1)	As applied to the owner of a potentially dangerous dog, the procedures provided for in this section must be carried out as a necessary condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this section against such owner. As applied to the owner of a dangerous dog, the procedures provided for in this section shall not be an essential element of any crime provided for in this section or in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. (2)	When an animal services officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog, reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, or classifies a dog as a potentially dangerous dog, the animal services officer shall notify the dog's owner. Such notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: a.	The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address. b.	The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potential dangerous dog. c.	The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. d.	The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the animal control board. e.	The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this article on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing. f.	The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to animal control and will advise the owner that failure to appear at the requested hearing will be deemed a withdrawal of the appeal and consent to the classification. (3)	When the animal control board receives such timely request for a hearing, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. Animal control shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of the date, time and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog's owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the animal control board shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the animal control board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. (4)	Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the animal control board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. (c)	Requirements for possessing dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. (1)	It is unlawful for any person to have or possess within the City of Valdosta a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. (2)	The director of animal control shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner or custodian possessing in the city a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog if the owner or custodian presents to the director of animal control or the director of animal control otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: a.	A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog.b.	The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property which sign shall substantially conform to the design provided by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. c.	A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner and custodian of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog, or a surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. (3)	The owner or custodian of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify animal control within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner or custodian shall also provide animal control with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner or custodian of the dog. (4)	The owner or custodian of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify animal control if the owner or custodian is moving from the address shown on the registration (or moving such dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog from such address) and provide animal control with the new address. The owner or custodian of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the City of Valdosta shall register such dog as required in this section within 30 days after becoming a resident of the City of Valdosta (and of municipalities therein). (5)	The animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. (6)	An annual fee of $50.00 shall be charged to obtain or renew a certificate of registration registering a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog as required in this section. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, animal control shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. (7)	Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the City of Valdosta does not warrant, guarantee, determine or indicate that the requirements specified in this section are being observed or maintained by the owner or custodian of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any renewal of such certificate. (d)	Restrictions on permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs to be outside proper enclosure. (1)	It is unlawful for an owner or custodian of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper, secure enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be constructed and worn in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. (2)	It is unlawful for the owner or custodian of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper, secure enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be constructed and worn in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. (e)	Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. (1)	A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement official if the: a.	Owner of the dog does not secure the aforesaid liability insurance or bond;b.	Dog is not validly registered hereunder;c.	Dog is not maintained in a proper, secure enclosure;d.	Dog is outside a proper, secure enclosure in violation of subsection (d)(1).(2)	A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: a.	Not validly registered hereunder;b.	Not maintained in a proper, secure enclosure;c.	Outside a proper, secure enclosure in violation of subsection (d)(2).(3)	Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions or this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this section and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner or custodian of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog has not complied with the provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog's classification as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, as the case may be, becomes final or, in the case of a dog previously so classified, 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1; however, upon a showing of good cause, the director of animal control may extend said time, for up to an additional 15-day period(s), upon the payment by the owner of the per diem boarding costs for said dog. (4)	Violations and penalties are as follows:a.	In addition to any other penalties imposed by Georgia law, the owner or custodian of a dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of this section or whose dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under this section shall be guilty of a violation of this article. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for the second conviction a fine of not less than $300.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $500.00 shall be imposed. b.	In addition to any other penalties imposed by Georgia law, the owner or custodian of a potentially dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of this section or whose potentially dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under this section shall be guilty of a violation of this article. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for a second conviction a fine of not less than $150.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $300.00 shall be imposed. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-54. - Caring for animals. (a)	It shall be unlawful to keep more than two horses, two dogs or two cats on any one lot; provided, however, that an exception is made and an additional dog may be kept on a lot when the occupant or owner of the premises has a medical need or is handicapped and the dog in question is a trained animal used to benefit or aid a handicapped or medically ill individual. (b)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to refuse or fail to provide such animal adequate food and water, adequate shelter and humane care, including without limitation as reasonably necessary to prevent malnutrition, dehydration, or physical suffering taking into account the animal's size, age, physical condition, breed and species. (c)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to willfully abandon such animal on any street, road, highway or public place, or on private property of another person. (d)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to permit the accumulation of waste matter from such animal to collect and remain on the property of the owner or custodian, or on the property of others, so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous, noxious or offensive living condition for the animal or condition on the owner's or custodian property, or the abutting property of others. (e)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to permit or cause unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous, noxious or offensive conditions by virtue of the size or number of animals maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy of the facilities for such animal(s) taking into account each such animal's size, age, physical condition, breed and species. (f)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any cat to allow the cat to roam free on the property of another without permission of the owner or person in possession of that property, or without such cat wearing a collar with a current rabies tag attached. (g)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any dog to allow the dog to roam or run free on the property of another without the permission of the owner or person in possession of that property, or without such dog wearing a collar with a current rabies control tag attached. (h)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee of property located in a residential neighborhood, regardless of the designated zoning of said property, to keep or maintain livestock in said residential area, unless the applicable zoning ordinance expressly allows otherwise. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-55. - Cruelty to animals. (a)	General care; prohibited acts. (1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to inflict, cause or permit cruelty to or upon any animal, including without limitation, to negligently, willfully or maliciously strike, beat, physically or mentally abuse, overwork, overload, maim or disfigure, intentionally chase or run down with a vehicle, bicycle or motorized or powered implement, or otherwise engage in any act or omission causing, inflicting, or resulting in unnecessary pain, injury, physical or mental suffering, abuse or death to an animal, in each case taking into account the animal's age, size, physical condition, breed and species, except that reasonable force may be used in self-defense to destroy a vicious or dangerous animals or to drive away trespassing animals as authorized by Georgia law. Examples of such aforesaid prohibited acts or omissions regarding animals include, but are not limited to the following: a.	Allowing a collar, rope, chain or other item to become embedded in or cause injury to an animal's neck or other portion of the body. b.	Allowing a slip-type choke, or pinch-type collar to be used as a primary collar to tether an animal. c.	Intentionally causing or allowing animals to engage in a fight.d.	Allowing animals to live in unsanitary conditions.e.	Allowing animals to live in regularly overcrowded conditions.f.	Failure or refusal to obtain veterinary medical treatment for an animal when, in a veterinarian's, animal services officer's, or law enforcement officials opinion, such treatment is needed. g.	Shooting a domestic animal, either on or off of the owner's property unless such domestic animal is then in the act of attacking or maliciously chasing a human being, horse, hog, goat, poultry, any other domestic animal or sheep or cattle and shooting such domestic animal is then the most reasonable action under the particular circumstance. An exception to this is allowed under the direction of a veterinarian or law enforcement official where the animal is hopelessly suffering. h.	Inhumanely trapping an animal (except for nondomesticated animals for which the person conducting such trapping possess a valid and currently in effect permit for such trapping of such animal issued by the Georgia Department Natural Resources) with any trap other than a live trap which must be checked at least every 24 hours. The following trapping requirements must be followed: 1.	Trapping is not allowed with the intention to harm any animal or to abandon or relocate any animal upon public or private property (except, in each case, to the extent specifically authorized by a valid and currently in effect permit for trapping of such animal issued by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to the person conducting such trapping). 2.	Any domesticated animal trapped must be relinquished to animal control if said animal is not to be retained for ownership. Any nondomesticated animal (except for nondomesticate animals for which the person conducting such trapping possesses a valid and currently in effect permit for such trapping of such animal issued by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources) trapped while attempting to live trap a domesticated animal shall be surrendered to animal control. i.	Permitting any exhibit, function or activity where animals are not receiving humane care, are bring cruelly treated, or such animals run the risk of causing injury to the public or themselves. Animal control, city, or state law enforcement officials, and representatives acting in their official capacity of the county or state departments of health or the state or federal departments of agriculture shall have the authority to inspect and to close down public exhibits in the city of animals, and/or impound any or all such animals, which are part of fairs, carnivals, festivals, fundraising events, petting zoos or any other activity or function carried out in the city if it is determined that animals in such activity or function are not receiving humane care, are being cruelly treated, run the risk of causing injury to the public or themselves, or do not in each case have are complying with all applicable lawfully required licenses, registrations and permits. (2)	It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally administer poison to any animal, or knowingly leave any poisonous substance of any kind or ground glass or other harmful substance in any place with the intent to injure any animal. This provision is not applicable to licensed pest control exterminators using poisons as part of an insect pest control program of the use of commercial insecticides, rodenticides or rodent baits used to control insect and wild rodents, or to licensed veterinarians using veterinary pharmaceuticals in providing bona fide veterinary services. (3)	All animals shall be kept and treated under sanitary and humane conditions, and it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in one or more of the following acts or omissions (in each case taking into account the animal's size, age, physical condition, breed and species). (b)	Failure to provide adequate food and water and adequate shelter. Food, water and shelter shall be provided by the owner or custodian of an animal as follows: (1)	All animals shall be given at suitable intervals, not to exceed 24 hours, a quantity of adequate food. (2)	All animals shall be supplied and have access to a constant supply of adequate water.(3)	All animals shall be provided by its owner or custodian with adequate shelter from the weather at all times. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to the following: a.	Underneath outside steps, decks and stoops.b.	Underneath houses.c.	Inside or underneath motor vehicles.d.	Inside metal or plastic barrels.e.	Inside cardboard boxes.f.	Inside temporary animal carriers or crates.g.	Shelters located in flood-prone areas.h.	Shelters surrounded by debris, obstructions or impediments that may endanger or harm an animal. (c)	Medical care. (1)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of a sick, diseased, suffering or injured animal to fail or refuse to provide proper veterinary medical treatment for the animal or to otherwise promptly surrender the animal to animal control. (2)	It shall be the duty of any person who allows a stray or abandoned animal to stay on their property to either: a.	Notify animal control of its sick, diseased, injured, suffering or abandoned condition for impoundment; or b.	Provide proper veterinary medical treatment, adequate food and water and adequate shelter for the animal. (3)	It shall be the duty of any person who has knowledge of a sick, diseased, injured, suffering or cruelly or inhumanely treated animal to notify animal control or law enforcement officials as soon as possible. (d)	Chaining or tethering. It shall be unlawful for any person to chain or tether an animal to a stationary object for a period of time or in such a way as to be in violation of the conditions as outlined below: (1)	Using a length, tensile strength or weight of a chain or other tether that is not appropriate for the animal's size, age, species, breed or physical condition. A chain or other tether may not exceed ten percent of the animals' body weight. Guidelines for the proper weight and length of chains or tethers can be obtained from animal control. (2)	Using a chain or other tether that is less than ten feet in length and also that does not have swivels on both ends. All chains or other tethers, must be attached to the animal by means of a properly fitting harness or collar of not less than one inch [or one-half inch in the case of animals weighing less than 20 lbs.] in width so as to prevent embedding into the body. (3)	Allowing an animal to be chained or tethered such that the animal is not confined to the owner's property or such that the chain or tether can become entangled and prevent the animal from moving about freely, lying down comfortably, or having access to adequate food and water and adequate shelter. (e)	Leaving an animal in a closed vehicle or other enclosure. (1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave an animal in a closed vehicle or other enclosure at such internal temperatures (or where the internal temperatures that may reasonably be expected to occur or result) or other conditions and/or lack of air, ventilation or water will cause or result in, or reasonably be expected to cause or result in, harm or distress to the animal. (2)	Should an animal services officer or law enforcement official find an animal in a closed vehicle or other enclosure in violation of subsection (1) above, or otherwise believes that such animal is in eminent danger, harm or distress, and the owner of the vehicle or enclosure is not immediately available to release such animal, then in such event, the animal services officer or law enforcement official may then use such reasonable force as necessary to extract the animal from such closed vehicle or other enclosure. (f)	Transporting in open bed of vehicles. Any animal being transported in an open bed, platform or other open area of a motor vehicle or trailer from which the animal can easily escape or be ejected, shall be confined in a humane manner inside a securely latched or locked animal carrier or restrained by a minimum of two tethers, with one tether each being securely affixed to the opposite site of such open bed, platform or other open area, and both tethers being securely attached to the collar or harness of such animal. It is a violation of this provision for the owner or custodian of an animal, as well as the driver of the motor vehicle being used to transport an animal, to refuse or fail to confine and restrain the animal being transported as required by this provision. (g)	Impoundment. An animal control officer, the City of Valdosta' Police Department, or other law enforcement officer may seize and impound any animal that is reasonably suspected to be the subject of a violation of this section. If an animal is impounded pursuant to this article because of cruelty to an animal or other violation of this article, and the owner thereof refuses to enter into a written consent agreement with animal control of and on behalf of the city that such animal will be given humane care and adequate and necessary veterinary care, the shelter may dispose of the animal in accordance with this article. (h)	Reports to solicitor. Animal control shall promptly report to the solicitor of the Municipal Court for the City of Valdosta cases of violations of this section. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-56. - Investigations, enforcement and interference. (a)	Investigations. Any animal services officer or law enforcement official of the City of Valdosta shall have the authority to investigate any circumstances, facts, conditions or complaints regarding a possible violation of the requirements or prohibitions of this article. Any animal services officer may request the assistance of the City of Valdosta's Police Department or other appropriate law enforcement officials with respect to such investigations or violations. (b)	Enforcement. (1)	Lowndes County Animal Services Officers and law enforcement officials of the city shall be enforcement officials for this article. These officials shall have the authority to act on behalf of the city and in investigating complaints, impounding, and destroying animals, executing warrants, issuing citations, making arrests and taking other lawful action as required to enforce the provisions of this article. It shall be a violation of this article to interfere with any animal services officer or other law enforcement official in the performance of his duties under this article. (2)	Upon the sworn affidavit of any citizen alleging a violation of this article or upon their own initiative, an animal services officer or law enforcement official may issue a citation to a person to appear before the Municipal Court of the City of Valdosta for an adjudication of the complaint against such person. (c)	Interference. (1)	It shall be a violation of this article for anyone to interfere or hamper, or cause the interference or hampering, of the facilities, personnel or operation of the animal shelter or any other property or facilities maintained or operated by the city or the Humane Society or similar organizations, for the confinement or protection of animals by, for, at the request of, or under supervision of the city, or to remove from any such facility without the prior consent of the operator of the animal shelter or similar facility, or an animal services officer, any animal kept therein. (2)	It shall be a violation of this article for anyone to resist, hinder, delay, interfere with or molest any person, agent, employee or member of any organization or entity operating the animal shelter or facility of the Humane Society of similar organization in the performance of his duties or responsibilities therewith. (3)	It shall be a violation of this article to tamper with, interfere with, remove, remove animals from, harass or harm animals within, damage, remove or destroy any device for trapping animals owned or operated by animal services, law enforcement agency or other city department. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 11-57. - Animal control board.     Where necessary and called for throughout this article, the city shall utilize the animal control board established by Lowndes County. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-58. - Hearings and appeals. (a)	Hearings. (1)	The animal control board shall conduct hearings when requested under this article by the owner aggrieved by a decision of an animal control officer with respect to classifying such owner's dog as a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the reclassification of a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, or whether a vicious animal confiscated pursuant to subsection 14-45(c), shall be destroyed. Except as otherwise provided in this article, such hearings shall be requested on forms furnished by animal control within five business days of receiving a notice of a right to request such hearing. (2)	Any person who requests a hearing before the animal control board provided for in this article but who, after receipt of notice of the hearing, fails to appear at said hearing shall be deemed to have abandoned the hearing request and the decision of the animal services officer which was to be the subject of such hearing shall be affirmed and final. (3)	The owner of an animal requesting a hearing before the animal control board shall pay the additional daily boarding and other fees as established in this article. Failure to pay the fees and costs accessed against the owner, if affirmed by the animal control board, shall constitute an abandonment of any claim to the animal and will result in the animal being disposed of as otherwise provided in this article. (b)	Appeals. All decisions of the animal control board may be appealed to a judicial court of competent jurisdiction within 20 days of receiving notice of the animal control board's decision. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-59. - Violations and penalties.     Violations. (1)	It shall be a violation of this article to:a.	Fail to comply with any provision of this article.b.	Fail to comply with any lawful order of an animal control officer, law enforcement official, or other authorized enforcement officer enforcing this article unless such order is lawfully stayed or reversed. c.	Fail to pay fees, expenses or costs imposed by this article unless payment thereof is lawfully stayed or reversed. (2)	Each day's, or part thereof, violation of any provision of this article shall be a separate offense under this article. (3)	Any person who violates any provision of this article or who fails to do anything required by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be guilty of a violation of this article, amenable to the process of the Municipal Court of the City of Valdosta and, upon conviction, shall (except where a different penalty is otherwise specifically provided in this article) be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by confinement in jail not to exceed 60 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. In lieu of, or in addition to, any fine or incarceration, the court as punishment for a violation of this article may order community service. Said community service shall be not less than 20 hours, but not more than 250 hours, which must be performed within one year from the date of conviction for a violation of this article. Any person placed on community service, or otherwise placed on probation, for a violation of this article shall pay such supervisory fees as may be authorized by law. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Sec. 14-60. - Remedies.     In the event any provision of this article has been violated or is being violated, in addition to any other remedies, the city may institute an injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate such violation. (Ord. No. 2008-9, 2-21-2008)
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Environment, ch. 42; noise control for construction or repairing of buildings, § 42-42; fire protection and prevention, ch. 46; floods, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 54; historical preservation, ch. 58; landscape development, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 86; building numbering, § 86-201 et seq.; utilities, ch. 98; zoning ordinance, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B; airport zoning ordinance, app. C.State Law reference— Ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 18-1. - Self inspection by plumbers, utility contractors.     The city is exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d) relating to the self-inspection of certain water and sewer lines, and such provisions shall not be applicable in the city. 
Sec. 18-2. - Fire limits.     The fire limits of the city shall be as indicated on the official map on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1976, § 9-1004)
Secs. 18-3—18-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12).
Sec. 18-41. - Adopted.     The city does hereby adopt, for enforcement, the latest edition of the following state minimum standard codes as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs: (1)	International Building Code.(2)	National Electrical Code.(3)	International Fuel Gas Code.(4)	International Mechanical Code.(5)	International Plumbing Code.(6)	International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings.(7)	International Energy Conservation Code.(8)	International Fire Code.(9)	International Existing Building Code.(10)	International Property Maintenance Code.(Code 1976, § 9-1001; Ord. No. 2002-25, §§ 1—3, 6-27-2002; Ord. No. 2005-15, 2-10-2005)State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25. 
Sec. 18-42. - Compliance.     It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the construction or erection of any building, whether commercial, business or residential, unless such construction is accomplished in strict compliance with the various construction codes adopted by this article. 
Sec. 18-43. - Enforcement. (a)	When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in the various construction codes adopted by this article, the designated city official shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the enforcement of such codes. (b)	The administrative procedures for the enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction, set forth in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 2002-26, are hereby adopted for the enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction in the city. (Ord. No. 2002-26, § 1, 6-25-2002)
Sec. 18-44. - Fire limits.     The fire limits of the city shall be as shown on the map on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1976, § 9-1004)
Sec. 18-45. - Penalty for violation. (a)	Any person violating any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. (b)	A conviction of any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall automatically suspend the business license of the offending contractor. The license may be reinstated by an application to the mayor and council upon a showing of good cause. 
Sec. 18-46. - Permit and inspection fees.     Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1976, § 9-1001)
Sec. 18-47. - Public utilities. (a)	No public utility may furnish temporary electrical, water or gas connection, for construction purposes, unless the contractor has been issued a construction permit by the chief building official. (b)	No public utility may furnish permanent electrical, water or gas connections until the contractor has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the chief building official. (c)	No public utility may furnish power to a mobile home site until the owner has been issued either a building permit or a certificate of occupancy by the chief building official. 
Sec. 18-48. - Water supply and sewage disposal facilities. (a)	Building permits will not be issued until plans for water supply and sewage disposal have been approved by the county board of health. (b)	Certificates of occupancy will not be issued until the completed water supply and sewage disposal facilities have been approved by the board of health. State Law reference— Regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas, conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1. 
Secs. 18-49—18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER CONSERVATION RESTRICTIONS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Water service, § 98-31 et seq.State Law reference— Water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3.
Sec. 18-81. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commercial means any type of building other than residential.     Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucets, showerheads, toilets or urinals in an existing building.     Residential occupancy means the use of a building or structure, or any portion thereof, for sleeping accommodations not classed as a group I occupancy by the Standard Building Code. Such occupancies shall include, but are not limited to, the following: (1)	Residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily transient in nature, including:a.	Boardinghouses (transient).b.	Hotels.c.	Motels.(2)	Multiple dwellings where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature, including:a.	Apartment houses.b.	Convents.c.	Fraternities and sororities.d.	Monasteries.e.	Rectories.f.	Roominghouses (not transient).g.	Dormitory facilities which accommodate six or more persons over 2½ years of age who stay for more than 24 hours. (3)	Residential occupancies, including:a.	Child care facilities which accommodate five or less children of any age for any period of time. b.	One-family and two-family dwellings where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature, and not classified as R1, R2 or I. c.	Roominghouses (transient).(Code 1976, § 9-1007; Ord. No. 91-7, 6-30-1991)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-82. - Restrictions. (a)	On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which employs a: (1)	Gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; (2)	Showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; (3)	Urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush;(4)	Lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or (5)	Kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. (b)	There shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections (a)(1)—(5) of this section. (c)	The requirements of subsections (a)(1)—(5) of this section shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. (Code 1976, § 9-1008; Ord. No. 91-7, 6-30-1991)
Sec. 18-83. - Exemptions. (a)	Any new construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of section 18-82 when: (1)	The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; (2)	When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; (3)	Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or (4)	Units to be installed are specifically designed for use by the handicapped; specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or toilets for juveniles. (b)	The owner or his agent of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of building inspector for the city. A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. (Code 1976, § 9-1009; Ord. No. 91-7, 6-30-1991)
Sec. 18-84. - Enforcement; penalty.     The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector for the city. (Code 1976, § 9-1010(a); Ord. No. 91-7, 6-30-1991)
Secs. 18-85—18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATING AND TRENCHING 
Sec. 18-121. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Certificate means the certificate issued by the city upon satisfactory completion of a mandatory training/educational program regarding excavation and trench safety practices, such program to be provided by the city.     Certificate holder means the holder of a certificate.     Excavation means any manmade cavity or depression in the earth's surface, including its sides, walls or faces, formed by earth removal and producing unsupported earth conditions by reason of the excavation. If installed forms or similar structures reduce the depth-to-width relationship, an excavation may become a trench.     OSHA means the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or its successor agency.     Supervisory personnel means any person who has the responsibility for layout, oversight, superintending, directing or controlling an excavation or trenching site.     Trench means a narrow excavation made below the surface of the ground. In general, the depth is greater than the width, but the width of a trench is not greater than 15 feet. (Code 1976, § 3-4001; Ord. No. 92-7, 1-23-1992)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-122. - Prohibition.     No individual shall engage in any excavation or trenching except in compliance with the provisions of this article and in compliance with any applicable laws of the state or of the United States or any rules and regulations of the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or any other state or federal governmental entity or department promulgating rules and regulations applicable to excavating and trenching. (Code 1976, § 3-4002)
Sec. 18-123. - Adoption of OSHA safety and health regulations.     All safety and health regulations adopted by OSHA with regard to excavating and trenching operations, particularly part 1926, subpart P, "Excavations, Trenching, and Shoring," sections 1926.650, 1926.651, 1926.652, 1926.653 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended, are adopted as a part of this article, the same as if quoted verbatim in this section. (Code 1976, § 3-4003)
Sec. 18-124. - Certificate required. (a)	No equipment operator or supervisory personnel shall participate in any excavation or trenching or in any way work in an excavation or trench five feet and over in depth unless such person holds a valid certificate from the city evidencing satisfactory completion of a required educational program on safe trench/excavation practices provided by the city. No other person shall participate in or work in any excavation or trenching site five feet or over in depth unless a certificate holder is present at the excavation or trench site where work is being performed. (b)	If any person who holds a valid certificate is found to be in violation of the safety standards and requirements on any jobsite, the certificate may be revoked after notice and hearing as provided in this article. In the event of revocation, the certificate may be reinstated one time upon repeat by the person of the educational program required for issuance of the initial certificate. (c)	No certificate shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause, and after a hearing before the mayor and council upon written notice to the holder of such certificate of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. Three days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the mayor and council may deem the circumstances justify. Due cause for revocation shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating excavating or trenching. At any such hearing, the certificate holder shall be entitled to be represented by an attorney and to cross examine any witnesses who may appear and to present evidence in his own behalf. (Code 1976, § 3-4004)
Sec. 18-125. - Permit required. (a)	No excavating or trenching five feet and over in depth shall be performed until a permit or authorization has been obtained from the city. Any applicant will be required to acknowledge receipt and understanding of safety requirements before any permit will be issued. All such permits shall be conspicuously posted upon the jobsite. No such permit shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing before the mayor and council after such notice to the permit holder of the date, time and place of hearing, along with notice of charges. Due cause shall consist of the violations of any laws or ordinances regulating excavating or trenching. Three days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the mayor and council may deem the circumstances to justify. At such hearing, the permit holder shall be entitled to be represented by an attorney, to cross examine any witnesses who may appear against him, and to present evidence in his own behalf. (b)	No permit or authorization shall be issued unless an authorized agent of the applicant holds a certificate. (Code 1976, § 3-4005)
Sec. 18-126. - Inspection by city.     City personnel (city marshals, city building inspectors, city engineering inspectors and the fire department) shall periodically inspect trench/excavation sites. Such inspectors shall, among other things, verify the presence of the required permit, verify existence of required certificates, and verify compliance with OSHA safety standards adopted in this article. (Code 1976, § 3-4006)
Sec. 18-127. - Violations. (a)	Violations of this article may result in revocation or suspension of any certificate issued under this article. (b)	Violations of this article may result in revocation or suspension of any permit issued under this article. (c)	A notice of violation shall be issued for any deficiency. Upon receipt of such notice, the deficiency shall be corrected immediately. (d)	All excavation and trenching work five feet and over in depth shall cease immediately when there is trench activity by any person not a certificate holder and/or when the deficiencies cannot be corrected immediately and/or when there is a refusal or failure to correct immediately and/or when such work is being done without a permit. (e)	If deficiencies identified in a notice of violation are not corrected, the building permit, land disturbance permit or any other permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked for due cause upon the conditions identified in this article for revocation of permit. (f)	Flagrant and/or repeated violations shall be reported by the city to OSHA for action by that agency. (g)	Any person violating any of the provisions as set out in this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or six-month imprisonment or both for each violation. (h)	In addition, every violation of the terms of this article by any person shall be deemed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued; and such violation is subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by the laws of this state. (i)	Any violation of this article shall be subject to injunction.(j)	The remedies specified in this section are cumulative. Pursuance of any one remedy shall not be deemed an election of remedies and shall not prohibit pursuance of more than one remedy simultaneously. (Code 1976, § 3-4007; Ord. No. 92-7, 1-23-1992)
Secs. 18-128—18-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONTRACTORS[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Business regulations, ch. 22.State Law reference— Electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors, and utility contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; registration of nonresident contractors with state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-31.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 18-161. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Building contractor means any person that undertakes, or offers to undertake, or purposes to have the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from or improve any building or other structure.     Engage in business means engaging in the business or supervising the construction, alteration or repair of building in the city (even if a person does part of the manual work himself), and having the general direction and control of the carpenters, masons or other parties employed in the work, regardless of the method by which the person is compensated for his services.     Firm means a partnership, copartnership, corporation, association or any other type of organization.     Qualified building contractor means a person who holds a valid city or county license as a qualified building contractor pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 97-36, § 7-1071, 6-5-1997)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-162. - Exemption from article.     The provisions of this article do not apply to the following: (1)	An authorized representative of the United States government, the state, the county or the city, provided the operation of a trade is done by its own salaried employees. (2)	An owner of residential property constructing, altering or repairing his own bona fide residence not intended for sale. It is the intent of this section to permit an owner of residential property to construct a residence for his own use and occupancy without qualifying for a contractor's license, but the application for a building permit for construction of more than one residence in a two-year period shall be construed as engaging in the contracting business and compliance with this article shall be required. (3)	An owner of residential or commercial property performing ordinary minor repairs to his own property. It is the intent of this subsection to permit an owner of residential or commercial property to perform ordinary maintenance and minor repairs without complying with the provisions of this article. As used in this subsection, the term "ordinary maintenance and minor repairs" means small, minor repairs or maintenance of property, and shall not include the cutting away of any wall or partition, or portion thereof; the removal or cutting of any structural beam or loadbearing support; the removal or change of any required means of egress or arrangement of parts of the structure affecting the egress requirements; nor the addition to, alteration of, or replacement or relocating of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electrical wiring or mechanical or other work affecting the public health or general safety. (Ord. No. 97-36, § 7-1083, 6-5-1997; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 1(7-1083), 4-19-2001)
Sec. 18-163. - Certificate of qualification required for business license.     The director of inspections shall not issue a building contractor's license under the provisions of this article unless the contractor has passed the required test, has current worker's compensation coverage and general liability coverage in accordance with section 18-167, and holds a business license in the city and/or county. No person shall engage in the building or supervision of construction, alteration, adding to, subtracting from, improvements or repair of buildings in all of the county, where applicable, without holding a valid certificate of qualification issued by the director of inspections. No person shall engage in the provision of state licensed contracting trades in all of the county, where applicable, without a valid license from the state. The city/county clerk shall not issue any contractor's, builder's, or construction trade occupational and/or business license or occupation tax receipt unless the requestor possesses a valid certificate of qualification from the director of inspections. (Ord. No. 97-36, § 7-1084, 6-5-1997)
Sec. 18-164. - Application for examination and fees. (a)	An examination shall be administered by the International Code Council at the current rate at time of examination. The exam fee must be paid to the director of inspections prior to the scheduled exam date. (b)	The contractor renewal fee will be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk due annually by June 30 of the current year. (Ord. No. 97-36, § 7-1085, 6-5-1997)
Sec. 18-165. - Examination required.     The city and county shall require a verbal or written examination of the applicant to be given by the SBCCI. This reciprocity will be honored, provided, that the same identical test is passed in another jurisdiction and the appropriate certificate is provided. The applicant will still be required to pay the full registration and administration fee. (Ord. No. 97-36, § 7-1086, 6-5-1997)
Sec. 18-166. - Issuance of certificates.     The director of inspections shall issue a license when it is found that the applicant, or if the applicant is a firm, the qualifying representative, has made a passing grade on the written or verbal examination. (Ord. No. 97-36, § 7-1087, 6-5-1997)
Sec. 18-167. - Renewal of certificates. (a)	Certificates of qualification shall be renewed annually by the director of inspections at a cost as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk and the license fee paid to the director of inspections, to be paid on or before June 30. If a contractor's certificate of qualification becomes invalid due to failure to renew or other reasons, the contractor may be subject to the following penalties: (1)	After one year: $50.00.(2)	After two years: $100.00.(3)	After three years: Retake exam.(b)	All persons engaged in the business of a building contractor in the city or the county shall, at the time of original issue of certificate of qualification as a contractor and/or upon renewal of the annual certificate, furnish the director of inspections a certificate of insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the state verifying and certifying to the city and the county that the applicant has in full force and effect general liability insurance coverage in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 per person, $300,000.00 per occurrence, and worker's compensation insurance. This certificate shall be signed by an agent or principal of the issuing insurance company and the agent or principal of the issuing insurance company, and the agent or principal of the issuing insurance company shall be required to notify the city and county immediately in the event of revocation or cancellation of insurance coverage. (Ord. No. 97-36, § 7-1089, 6-5-1997)
Sec. 18-168. - Display of licenses. (a)	All electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors, and utility contractors holding a license issued by the state construction industry licensing board, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq., shall display such license in a conspicuous place at his place of business. (b)	All commercial vehicles regularly used by the licensee and certificate holders in the daily operation of their business shall have prominently displayed on the vehicles the company or business registration number issued by the secretary of state. These numbers are to be displayed on both sides of the vehicles with numbering no smaller than three-fourths of an inch in size. (Ord. No. 98-33, 9-24-1998)
Sec. 18-169. - Violations. (a)	No person shall engage in the business of a building contractor in the city unless such person holds a valid unrevoked and unsuspended license as a qualified building contractor issued by the director of inspections. (b)	It shall be unlawful for any building contractor operating within the city or the county as a contractor to permit any one of the following acts or omissions: (1)	To contract to do any work outside the scope of operations as defined under the particular type of contractor for which he is licensed; (2)	To depart from or disregard in any material respect, the plan or specifications of a construction job without approval of the building inspector of the city; (3)	Disregard or violate in the performance of his construction job any of the building code or safety requirements, or health regulations of the city and the county; (4)	Misrepresent any material fact in his application and attendant papers in obtaining a certificate under this article; (5)	Aid or abet an unqualified person to evade provisions of this article, or allow one's certificate to be used by an unqualified person or act as an agent, partner or associate of an unqualified person with an intent to evade the provisions of this article; (6)	Fail to fulfill contractual obligations through failure to pay all creditors for material furnished or work or services performed which result in the successful termination by the courts in favor of the lienholder who files a mechanic's or materialman's lien against the property upon which work was performed in the operation of his business for which he is qualified under this article; or (7)	Abandon without legal excuse, construction projects or operations engaged in or under contract as a contractor. (Ord. No. 97-36, § 7-1090, 6-5-1997)
Sec. 18-170. - Grounds for revoking or suspending certificate.     The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall suspend or revoke the license if after due hearing it is found that the contractor violated any of the provisions of section 18-169. (Ord. No. 97-36, § 7-1091, 6-5-1997)
Sec. 18-171. - Appeals.     Appeals from a decision of the construction board of adjustment and appeals may be made to the mayor, city council or county commission provided an appeal is filed with the clerk within 30 days after an advance ruling by the board relating to suspension or revocation of a contractor's certificate of qualification. (Ord. No. 97-36, § 7-1093, 6-5-1997)
Secs. 18-172—18-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-271 et seq.
Sec. 18-191. - Creation.     There is hereby established the construction board of adjustment and appeals (the board), which shall consist of seven members plus two nonvoting ex-officio members as provided herein, all of whom shall be residents of the county. (Ord. No. 2002-26, § 6.1, 6-25-2002)
Sec. 18-192. - Method of appointment and terms. (a)	The county board of commissioners shall appoint three members, one of whom shall be from the plumbing industry, one of whom shall be a professional engineer, and one of whom shall be from the mechanical construction industry. The mayor and council of the city shall appoint three members, one of whom shall be a licensed architect, one of whom shall be a licensed electrician, and one of whom shall be a licensed home builder. The final member shall be a licensed general contractor appointed by the governing authorities on an alternating basis, with the initial appointment to be made by the mayor and council of the city. In addition, one elected official from each of the governing authorities shall be appointed as a nonvoting ex-officio member. (b)	The board shall be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience of the construction codes as indicated in subsection (a) of this section. An effort will be made by the governing authorities to obtain input from the various construction associations regarding appointments. With the exception of the nonvoting ex-officio members who are elected officials of the governing authorities, none of the board members shall hold any other public office of the city or county or be employees of the city or the county. (c)	In making their initial appointments, the city and the county shall designate one of their appointees to serve a term to expire June 30, 2005, one to serve a term to expire June 30, 2004, and one to serve a term to expire June 30, 2003. The initial general contractor appointee shall serve a term to expire June 30, 2005. (d)	Thereafter, each member shall be appointed to serve a term of three years with the term of each member to expire June 30 of the applicable year. (e)	All members shall serve at the pleasure of the authority appointing such member. Any member may be removed with or without cause by the authority appointing such member and a new member appointed to take his place for the remainder of the removed member's unexpired term. (f)	In the event any member resigns from the board, the governing authority which appointed him shall appoint a new member to take his place for the remainder of the resigning member's unexpired term. (g)	The board members shall receive no compensation for their service except that they shall be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenditures made in connection with their duties. (Ord. No. 2002-26, § 6.2, 6-25-2002)
Sec. 18-193. - Officers of the board.     A chairman, vice-chairman and secretary shall be elected by the members at the first quarterly meeting of the board. Thereafter, at the first quarterly meeting of each year, a new chairman, vice-chairman and secretary shall be elected by the members. (Ord. No. 2002-26, § 6.3, 6-25-2002)
Sec. 18-194. - Regular meetings.     The board shall hold, at a minimum, quarterly meetings, on a date and at a place and time specified by the chairman. (Ord. No. 2002-26, § 6.4, 6-25-2002)
Sec. 18-195. - Special meetings.     Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairman, the director of inspections or any two members of the board. Reasonable advance notice of the place, time and date thereof shall be given to all members of the board. The time, date and place of the meetings will be determined by the individuals calling such meeting. (Ord. No. 2002-26, § 6.5, 6-25-2002)
Sec. 18-196. - Records.     The department shall provide secretarial services to the board and shall make a detailed record of all proceedings which shall set forth the reasons for all decisions and the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and the failure of a member to vote. These records shall be submitted to the board for their approval and kept on file in the department as a public record. (Ord. No. 2002-26, § 6.6, 6-25-2002)
Sec. 18-197. - Quorum and vote required of board; attendance.     Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum, and the vote of a majority present shall be required to enable the board to act. To encourage attendance, if any member shall miss three consecutive meetings, he shall automatically be deemed removed and a new member appointed to take his place for the remainder of the removed member's unexpired term. (Ord. No. 2002-26, § 6.7, 6-25-2002)
Sec. 18-198. - Conflicts of interest.     If a board member has any interest in any matter which may result in a gain or loss to that board member or to his immediate family by blood or by marriage, such member shall not participate in the consideration, discussion, questioning and voting on that particular matter before the board, nor shall the member take any action which may influence the vote of any other member. If the chairman has a conflict of interest, the vice-chairman shall preside over the meeting during consideration of that particular matter. (Ord. No. 2002-26, § 6.8, 6-25-2002)
Sec. 18-199. - Duties and powers.     The purpose of the board shall be to: (1)	Review and decide specific appeals made by individuals concerning the interpretation or administration of the construction codes; (2)	Review and decide upon waiver requests; and(3)	Advise the governing authorities, the department and any other affected department on issues and matters of concern as to procedures of the board or interpretation or construction of the construction codes. (Ord. No. 2002-26, § 6.9, 6-25-2002)
Sec. 18-200. - Appeals and variances; hearings. (a)	Appeals. (1)	The holder of a permit, owner of a building, structure or service system or his duly authorized agent may appeal a decision of the director of inspections to the board regarding any of the following: a.	The rejection or refusal to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of the building structure or service system. b.	Whether or not the provisions of the construction codes apply to this specific case.c.	Whether or not an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. d.	Whether or not the true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued and incorrectly interpreted. (2)	All appeals must be in writing and filed within 20 days of the decision of the director of inspections; provided, however, that in the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the director of inspections is unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous and/or poses a fire hazard, the director of inspections may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeal to a shorter period. The notice of appeal shall be on such forms as may be approved by the board from time to time and shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: a.	The nature of the complaint;b.	The code or ordinance section purported to be misinterpreted or misconstrued;c.	Why the decision, if applicable, represents an undue hardship on the appellant;d.	The appellant's interpretation or suggestion to resolve the complaint within the relevant ordinance or code sections. The board shall have no authority to reduce the requirements of any of the construction codes. (3)	The board may establish a fee from time to time which shall accompany such notice of appeal. (b)	Variances. (1)	The board may, upon written petition and after a hearing, vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would be manifest injustice and create a hardship and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the construction code or public interest. In all cases, a finding of all of the following shall be necessary to grant a variance: a.	That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others; b.	That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant; c.	That the granting of the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures or service system; d.	That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system; and e.	That the grant of the variance will be consistent with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. Notwithstanding the foregoing, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(a)(7), the board shall not have the authority to grant any variance or waiver which relieves any building, structure or use or the proposed plans from compliance with state minimum fire standards. (2)	The board may establish a fee from time to time which shall accompany each variance application. (3)	In granting a variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may, in its discretion, prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. (c)	Hearings. (1)	Hearings shall be called as provided for in section 18-195 and may be held in conjunction with any regular or special meeting of the board. At or following each hearing, the board shall endeavor to reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote on the decision. Each decision shall be promptly filed in the department and shall be open to public inspection. A copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the applicant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the department for two weeks after filing. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the director of inspections or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the director of inspections shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. (2)	Each decision of the board shall be final, subject to such remedies as any appellant or aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. (Ord. No. 2002-26, § 6.10, 6-25-2002)
Sec. 18-201. - Rules and regulations.     The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this division. (Ord. No. 2002-26, § 6.11, 6-25-2002)
Secs. 18-202—18-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOUSING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-271 et seq.
Sec. 18-221. - Created. (a)	Appointment, terms. There is hereby created by the mayor and council a board to be known as the housing board of adjustments and appeals, which shall consist of not less than three members appointed by the mayor and council. The members shall be residents of the governed area. Members of the board shall be appointed for three-year terms, except that on the initial appointment, one shall be appointed for one year, one for two years, and one for three years. Any one or more members of said board shall be subject to removal or replacement by the mayor and council at any time for cause of stated charges after a public hearing before the mayor and council, and a vacancy on said board shall be filled by the mayor and council for the unexpired term of such vacancy. The members of said board shall serve without compensation. (b)	Organization. As soon as practical after their appointment, the members of the housing board of adjustments and appeals shall meet and organize by electing a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary. Thereafter officers of the board shall be elected by the members at the first annual meeting of the board. (Ord. No. 2003-46, § 10.1, 8-7-2003)
Sec. 18-222. - Meetings.     The board shall meet at regular intervals to be determined by the chairman but in any event the board shall meet within ten days after notice of appeal has been received. Reasonable notice of the place, time and date of such meetings shall be given all the members of the board and all interested parties in each case to be heard by the board. (Ord. No. 2003-46, § 10.2, 8-7-2003)
Sec. 18-223. - Records.     All minutes of the board meetings shall be public records and the secretary of the board shall keep all records and perform such additional duties as the board may deem proper. (Ord. No. 2003-46, § 10.3, 8-7-2003)
Sec. 18-224. - Duties. (a)	The duties of the housing board of adjustments and appeals shall be to:(1)	Consider and determine appeals whenever it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this Code or any of its regulations have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted. (2)	Permit, in appropriate cases where the application of the requirement of this Code in the allowance of the stated time for the performance of any action required hereunder would appear to cause undue hardship on an owner, one or more extensions of time, not to exceed 120 days each, from the date of such decision of the board. Applications for additional extensions of time shall be heard by the board. Such requests for additional extensions of time shall be filed with the housing official not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the current extension. (b)	An appeal should not be considered where an appeal case has been previously decided involving the same premises. (Ord. No. 2003-46, § 10.4 8-7-2003)
Sec. 18-225. - Procedure.     The housing board of adjustments and appeals shall establish its own rules of procedure for accomplishment of its duties and functions, provided that such rules shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this Code and the laws of the state. (Ord. No. 2003-46, § 10.5, 8-7-2003)
Sec. 18-226. - Decisions.     All decisions of the housing board of adjustments and appeals to vary the application of any provision of this division or to modify an order of the housing official shall specify in what manner such variance or modification is made, the condition upon which it is made, and the reasons therefore. Every decision shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. A copy of all decisions shall be promptly filed in the office of the housing official and shall be open to public inspection. The secretary shall notify the appellant in writing of the final action of the board. (Ord. No. 2003-46, § 10.6, 8-7-2003)
Sec. 18-227. - Appeals.     Any person receiving written notice from the housing official of deficiencies in his property under this division may within 30 days following the date of such notice enter an appeal in writing to the housing board of adjustments and appeals. Such appeal shall state the location of the property, the date of the notice of violations, and the number of such notice. The appellant must state the variance or modification requested, the reasons therefore, and the hardship or conditions upon which the appeal is made. (Ord. No. 2003-46, § 10.7, 8-7-2003)
Secs. 18-228—18-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 
Sec. 18-261. - Definitions. (a)	Except as specifically designated in this section, all words used in this article shall be defined in The New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (1993, Rutgers). Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence, section and article in which they occur. (b)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Airport height restriction area means the area within one mile of the property boundaries of the Valdosta Regional Airport.     Alternative tower structure means a clock tower, bell tower, water tower, church steeple, light/power pole, electric transmission tower, manmade tree (without accessory buildings/structures) and similar natural or manmade alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.     Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication or radio or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.     City council means the mayor and city council of the city.     Collocation means the placement of antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower or alternative tower structure.     Comprehensive plan means the Greater Lowndes Comprehensive Plan, as prepared, adopted and amended pursuant to state law.     Director of inspections means the director of the city inspections department or other jointly-provided inspections department with other local governments as established by interlocal agreement.     Erected includes the term "constructed," "located" or "relocated."     FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.     FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.     Geographic antenna placement area means the general vicinity within which the placement of an antenna is necessary to meet the engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting needs.     Governing authority means the city council of the city.     Group location means a predetermined site approved through the special exception process that contains more than one tower structure.     Height means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on a tower structure or appurtenance, when referring to a tower or other structure.     Inspections department means the city department of inspections or other jointly-provided inspections department with other local governments as established by interlocal agreement. Such department is managed by a director of inspections.     Map and zoning map means the official zoning map of the city.     Parcel includes the term "plot" or "lot."     Person includes the terms "individual," "firm," "partnership," "corporation," "association," "governmental body" and all other legal entities.     Planning commission means the Greater Lowndes Planning Commission.     Preexisting towers or antennas means structures as set forth in section 18-263(e).     Scenic views means the geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features as identified in the comprehensive plan or determined as such by the planning commission.     Shall is always mandatory and never discretionary.     Special exception means the special use permit and review process as prescribed in appendix A (zoning ordinance) of this Code.     Tall structure means any manmade structure exceeding 25 feet in height and used to support an antenna or other telecommunications device.     Tower means any structure, including base and foundation components, that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. Such term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telecommunication towers, manmade trees (with accessory buildings/structures) and other similar structures.     Tower/antenna owner means the owner of the physical tower structure and/or lessee of such tower.     Used and occupied include the terms "intended," "arranged" or "designed to be used or occupied."     Visual quality means the appropriate design arrangement and location of the tower and antenna structures in relation to the built or natural environment to avoid abrupt or severe differences.     Zoning administrator means the zoning administrator for the city as designated by the city council.     Zoning board of appeals means the Valdosta-Lowndes County Zoning Board of Appeals.     Zoning ordinance means the officially adopted zoning ordinance for the City of Valdosta, Georgia (appendix A of this Code). (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. II, 5-11-2000)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-262. - Purpose; goals. (a)	The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for the siting of all wireless, cellular, television and radio telecommunications towers and antennas. (b)	The goals of this article are to:(1)	Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to effectively and efficiently deliver such services to the community; (2)	Locate telecommunications towers and antennas in areas where adverse impacts on the community are minimized and promote harmonious coexistence of telecommunications towers with other land uses; (3)	Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers within residential areas; (4)	Encourage the innovative use of alternative tower structures, such as church steeples, outdoor advertising signs, electric transmission towers, etc., where technologically feasible; (5)	Encourage the design and construction of towers and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts and promote visual quality; and (6)	Encourage the joint use or collocation of new and existing tower sites among service providers. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. I, 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-263. - Interpretation and application; exemptions. (a)	Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the regulations set forth in this article, the requirements contained in this section are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of the regulations set forth in this article. The zoning administrator shall be the official interpreter of this article where official interpretation is needed, required or requested. (b)	Height thresholds. Except as set forth in subsection (d) of this section, the requirements of this article shall govern the location of all telecommunications towers and/or antennas that exceed a height of 25 feet within the airport height restriction area, or exceed a height of 50 feet elsewhere within the city. (c)	Governmental exemption. The provisions of this article shall not apply to governmental facilities and structures. (d)	Amateur radio, receive-only antennas. For locations outside the airport height restriction area, this article shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that is 75 feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator from the operator's residence, or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna. For locations outside the airport height restriction area, this article shall not govern any device designed for over-the-air reception only of television broadcast signs, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service whose tower and/or antenna is 75 feet or less in height. (e)	Preexisting towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall not be required to meet the provisions of this article, except the requirements of sections 18-276 and 18-277. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this article as "preexisting towers" or "preexisting antennas." If an additional antenna is collocated upon a preexisting tower after the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, then the fencing and landscaping requirements of sections 18-273 and 18-274 shall be met as part of the permitting process. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. III, 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-264. - Conflict with other laws.     Whenever the regulations of this article require a greater width, depth or size of yard, or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or covenant, the requirements of this article shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or covenant requires more restrictive standards than the requirements of this article, the provisions of such statute or covenant shall govern. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. VIII, 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-265. - Variances and appeals. (a)	Variances. The city council may approve variances from the terms of this article that will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this article will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this article shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted in such individual cases of undue hardship upon a finding by the city council that the denial of the variance presents a significant detriment to the communications service provider making application for such variance, and that the denial of the variance is unsubstantially related to the public welfare. (b)	Public hearing required. The city council may take action on a requested variance at a public hearing held in conjunction with the special exception approval, where applicable, or take action at a public hearing that has been advertised in the same manner as a special exception. (c)	Appeals. Applicants or persons aggrieved by the zoning administrator's interpretation of the provisions of this article may appeal such interpretation to the zoning board of appeals in the same manner as prescribed for appeals in the zoning ordinance (appendix A) of this Code. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. V, 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-266. - Administrative approvals. (a)	Generally. (1)	The director of inspections and the zoning administrator may administratively approve the placement of additional antennas upon towers or alternative tower structures as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. (2)	Each applicant requesting an administrative appeal under this article shall submit a scaled site plan, scaled elevation view and supporting drawings, calculations and other documentation, signed and sealed by the appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including topography, tower height requirements, setbacks, access driveways or easements, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses and any other information deemed by the director of inspections or the zoning administrator to be necessary to assess compliance with this article and compatibility with surrounding uses. Amateur radio antennas shall meet the requirements of the city's adopted building codes. Certain documentation requirements of this section may be waived by the director of inspections and the zoning administrator for amateur radio antenna applications. (3)	If a request for administrative approval is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council to be acted upon at a public hearing during a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. (b)	Uses allowed by administrative approval. The following uses may be approved by the inspections department and the zoning administrator after conducting an administrative review and special review provisions of section 18-275, where applicable: (1)	Installation of an antenna on any alternative tower structure, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with such antenna, as long as such addition does not add more than 20 feet to the height of the existing structure. (2)	Installation of an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including a preexisting tower, and including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with such antenna, as long as the addition of such antenna does not add more than 20 feet to the height of the existing tower. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. VI, 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-267. - Principal or accessory use.     A tower and/or antenna is considered a principal use if it is located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary structure, and is considered an accessory use if it is located on a lot or parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structure. An existing use or structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning district requirements, including, but not limited to, setback, buffer and other requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or tower may be located in a leased area within such lot or parcel. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. IV(400), 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-268. - Preapplication meeting.     Prior to applying for a building permit or special exception approval, the applicant is required to participate in a preapplication meeting with local development review staff. The purpose of such meeting shall be for fact finding and determining the correct or most feasible course of action for review and potential approval of the project. The preapplication meeting shall be scheduled at least two weeks in advance. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. IV(401), 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-269. - Inventory of existing sites. (a)	To facilitate the collocation review of antennas, each applicant seeking to locate a new tower, alternative tower structure or antenna, or modify any such existing structure, shall have provided to the zoning administrator and the inspections department, and to the planning commission as part of the special exception review, an updated inventory of its existing towers or alternative tower structures. Applicants seeking to erect an amateur radio tower or antenna, or receive-only antenna as described in section 18-263(d), shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection. The required inventory information shall be maintained by the inspections department and the zoning administrator in the form of a digital database that is geographically referenced and encoded as part of the city's geographic information system (GIS). It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the inventory data is accurate and kept up-to-date. (b)	The inventory shall include all such structures that are within the jurisdiction of the city council; within unincorporated Lowndes County that is within five miles of the city limits; or within one-quarter mile outside the border of Lowndes County that is also within five miles of the city limits. Such inventory shall include specific information about the location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, tower type and general suitability for antenna collocation of each tower, and other pertinent information as may be required by the director of inspections or the zoning administrator. The director of inspections or the zoning administrator may share such information with other applicants under the terms of this article, or other organizations seeking to locate towers or antennas within the jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that the director of inspections or the zoning administrator is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. IV(402), 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-270. - Collocation of antennas. (a)	Required. Applicants for the erection of a tower or placement of an antenna shall be required to collocate upon an existing tower or alternative tower structure. An exception to such collocation shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for collocation does not exist in the graphic antenna placement area utilizing the tower inventory maintained by the inspections department, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in subsection (c) of this section. (b)	Design requirements. In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all towers, except amateur radio towers, shall be designed to accommodate the collocation of other telecommunication antennas in accordance with the following: (1)	For towers up to 150 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least two providers; and (2)	For towers 150 feet in height or greater, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least three providers. (c)	Availability of suitable existing structures. No new tower, except amateur radio towers, shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director of inspection, the zoning administrator and the city council that no existing tower or alternative tower structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of one or more of the following: (1)	No existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within the geographic antenna placement area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. (2)	Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. (3)	Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and related equipment. (4)	The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. (5)	The cost or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure, or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. (6)	The applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. (d)	Alternative options. If it is adequately demonstrated that antenna collocation as required in this section is not possible for a given geographic antenna placement area, the following options are allowed pursuant to the special exception process. However, all such options shall comply with all applicable requirements of this article, as well as all other applicable codes and ordinances. (1)	Constructing a new tower, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with such tower or antenna, provided, that all structures shall meet the setback, screening and buffer requirements contained in this article, and are located a minimum distance of 110 percent of the height of the tower from any residentially zoned property. Such towers cannot locate within a five-mile radius of an existing tower or antenna structure governed by this article, or they must locate in an area that has been set aside for group location. (2)	Installation of an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower or other freestanding nonresidential structure) that is 50 feet in height or greater, if the additional antenna height adds no more than 20 feet to the height of the existing structure, subject to the special review provisions of section 18-275. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. IV(403)—(406), 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-271. - Aesthetics.     The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the design and construction of all towers and the installation of all antennas governed by this article. (1)	Towers/antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. (2)	At all tower sites, the design of all buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and building environment. (3)	For antennas installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical ground equipment shall be of a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive. (4)	Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or applicable authority. If lighting is required, the city council may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. (5)	No signage or other identifying markings of a commercial nature shall be permitted upon any tower. (6)	Towers shall not be located where they will negatively affect historic structures or districts, or scenic view corridors. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. IV(407), 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-272. - Setback requirements.     The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers: (1)	Towers/antennas shall be setback a minimum distance equal to one-third of the height of the tower from its base to any public right-of-way or property line of the lot or parcel containing the tower. (2)	Guy wires and accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum accessory use location and setback requirements prescribed in the zoning ordinance (appendix A) of this Code. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. IV(408), 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-273. - Security fencing; anticlimbing devices.     All towers and supporting equipment governed by this article shall be enclosed by fencing not less than seven feet in height and shall also be equipped with appropriate anticlimbing devices. Fencing shall be of chainlink, wood or other alternative as approved through the special exception process. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. IV(409), 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-274. - Landscaping.     The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all towers governed by this article: (1)	Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a landscaped area of plant materials which effectively screen the view of the tower compound. Landscaped areas shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and located outside the fenced perimeter of the compound. Landscaped areas shall satisfy the minimum design and planting requirements for buffers established in the zoning ordinance (appendix A) of this Code. Where applicable, specific landscape plans shall be submitted and approved as part of the special exception process. (2)	Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Where natural vegetation around the perimeter of the site would provide an adequate visual screen, an undisturbed buffer may be utilized. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. IV(410), 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-275. - Review of tower and antenna erection by Valdosta Regional Airport Authority and Moody Air Force Base.     If, upon receipt of an application for the erection of any tower or alternative tower structure governed by this article within the airport height restriction area, or the director of inspections and the zoning administrator otherwise deem that the proposed structure may interfere with the use of the aircraft traffic pattern around Valdosta Regional Airport or Moody Air Force Base, or interfere with the operation of existing or proposed airport facilities, a copy of the application shall also be submitted to the Valdosta Regional Airport Authority and/or Moody Air Force Base for review and recommendation. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. IV(411), 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-276. - Federal requirements.     All towers must meet or exceed current standards and the regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more or less stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the city council shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. IV(412), 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-277. - Building codes; safety standards.     To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner, permittee or lessee of the tower constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon receipt of written notice to the owner, permittee or lessee of the tower, such party shall have 15 days to bring the tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner, permittee or lessee fails to bring the tower into compliance within the 15-day period, the city council may remove the tower at the expense of the owner, permittee or lessee. Prior to the removal of any tower, the inspections department may consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee for the repair of substandard towers, and may grant a reasonable extension of the 15-day compliance period. Any such removal by the city council shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. IV(413), 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-278. - Change of ownership; notification.     Upon the transfer of ownership of any tower, alternative tower structure or lot upon which a structure has been erected, the tower permittee shall notify the inspections department of the transaction in writing within 30 days. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. IV(414), 5-11-2000)
Sec. 18-279. - Abandonment.     Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period exceeding 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the structure and return the site back to its original condition within 90 days of receipt of notice from the inspections department notifying the owner of such abandonment. Foundation components shall be removed to a minimum depth of 24 inches below original grade. If such tower or antenna is not removed within such 90-day period, the city council may, in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8—41-2-17, remove such tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then the provision of this section shall not become effective until all users cease utilizing the tower. (Ord. No. 2000-37, art. VII, 5-11-2000)
Secs. 18-280—18-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - UNFIT BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 
Sec. 18-311. - Findings.     It is the finding of the mayor and city council and it is hereby declared that there exists in the City of Valdosta dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the City of Valdosta or, vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings or structures in which drug crimes are being committed. Wherefore, pursuant to the authority granted by O.C.G.A. tit. 41, ch. 2, the City of Valdosta hereby enacts the following provisions. (Ord. No. 2011-38, 11-10-2011)
Sec. 18-312. - Definitions.     As used in this article the following term:     "Applicable codes" means: (1)	Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2, as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to safe use of real estate; (2)	Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 2; and(3)	Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2, after October 1, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real estate improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real estate improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law.     "Closing" means causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated or secured against unauthorized entry.     "Drug crime" means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substance Act."     "Dwellings, buildings or structures" means any building or structure or part thereof used or occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, including any outhouses, improvements or appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article the term "dwellings, buildings or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agriculture facility, other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry or other farm products.     "Governing authority" means the Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta.     "Interested parties" means: (1)	Owner;(2)	Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; (3)	Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9;(4)	Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the courthouse or by the clerk of court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and (5)	Persons in possession of said property and premises.    "Municipality" means the City of Valdosta.     "Owner" means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record.     "Public authority" means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the City of Valdosta.     "Public officer" means the officer or officers who are authorized by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by the ordinance codified herein or any agent of such officer or officers.     "Repair" means altering or improving a dwelling, building or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the City of Valdosta and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash or other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure.     "Resident" means any person residing on the property located in the City of Valdosta on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. (Ord. No. 2011-38, 11-10-2011)
Sec. 18-313. - Duties of owner of dwelling, building, structure or property.     It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the City of Valdosta to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes and ordinances in force within the City of Valdosta which regulate and prohibit activities on the property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of said codes and ordinances. (Ord. No. 2011-38, 11-10-2011)
Sec. 18-314. - The public officer designated to exercise powers.     The building inspector of the City of Valdosta is hereby designated and appointed to exercise the powers and duties pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article as hereinafter set forth, including but not limited to the following: (1)	The building inspector may determine that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for current commercial industrial or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure, or of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residence of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): a.	Defects therein increasing the hazard of fire, accident or other calamity;b.	Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitation facilities;c.	Dilapidation;d.	Disrepair;e.	Structural defects;f.	Violations of the building and housing codes of the City of Valdosta which create unsafe conditions which are dangerous or injurious to the health safety of the occupant and/or neighborhood. (2)	The building official or his designee may determine that a dwelling, building, or other structure is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of law enforcement agencies and evidence of drug crimes being committed therein. (Ord. No. 2011-38, 11-10-2011)
Sec. 18-315. - Powers of building inspector in regard to unfit buildings or structures.     The building inspector is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary and convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 42-2-17, including the following powers in addition to others granted in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-10 and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-12 through 41-2-17: (1)	To investigate the dwelling condition in the incorporated area of the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial industrial business use or are vacant dilapidated or being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; (2)	To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided however, that such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; (3)	To appoint and affix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and (4)	To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such agents as he may designate. (5)	Whenever a request is filed with the building official or his designee by a public authority or by at least five residents of the City of Valdosta chagrining, or whenever it appears to the building official or his designee on his own motion that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary of unsafe conditions, the building official or his designee shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the building official or his designee to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the Municipal Court of the City of Valdosta, at a date and time certain and at a location within the City of Valdosta. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. Interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. (6)	If after notice and hearing pursuant to subsection (5), the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: a.	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner within the time specified in the order to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or b.	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure in order to bring into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property.     For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as established by O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building officials or their designees without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the City of Valdosta. In no event shall the city require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration or improvement thereof exceeds the value such dwelling, building or structure will have when repaired. (Ord. No. 2011-38, 11-10-2011)
Sec. 18-316. - Failure to comply. (a)	If the owner and interested parties fail to comply with a court order issued pursuant to section 18-315 to repair, improve, or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the building official or his designee may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner and interested parties. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13, or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words:  "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." (b)	If the owner and interested parties fail to comply with a court order issued pursuant to section 18-315 to repair, improve, or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the building official or his designee may exercise the powers described in section 18-315 provided, however, the mayor and city council have by ordinance ordered the building official or his designee to proceed to effectuate the purpose of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, with respect to the particular property or properties which the building official or his designee has found to be unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. (Ord. No. 2011-38, 11-10-2011)
Sec. 18-317. - Collection costs incurred. (a)	The amount of the cost of repair, improvement, or demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the City of Valdosta, and all other costs necessarily associated with the action to obtain and enforce a court order issued pursuant to sections 18-313, 18-314 and 18-315 of this article, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Said lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair or demolition and an itemized statement of costs in the office of the clerk of the superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(2)(c). The clerk of superior court shall record and index said certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien established by this section as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b)(1) shall be superior to all other liens on the property except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior and shall continue in force until paid. (b)	If the building official or his designee has the structure demolished, reasonable efforts shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any monies received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of the sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The building official or his designee and City of Valdosta are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. (Ord. No. 2011-38, 11-10-2011)
Sec. 18-318. - Lien imposed.     The City of Valdosta may enforce a collection of amounts due on liens arising under this article in the following manner: (1)	The owner or interested parties shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due of such lien by paying to the City of Valdosta, within 30 days after perfection of said lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city the remaining balance due on such lien together with interest and penalties, in an amount equal to that assessed on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary of the initial payment. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. (2)	Should the property upon which such lien is perfected and sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or interested parties at any time prior to the termination of the said three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be payable to the city. (3)	Should the owner or interested parties fail to timely make the payments prescribed in subsection (1) of this section, the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city. (4)	Should the obligations secured by this lien not be paid in strict accordance with this section, the city may collect past due amounts in the same manner as provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4, and all other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person have any right, title or interest or lien on said property, all as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-3. (Ord. No. 2011-38, 11-10-2011)
Secs. 18-319—18-340. - Reserved. 