THE CODE OF ORDINANCES COFFEE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the Board of County Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted: November 15, 2010  Effective: November 15, 2010 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of 
COFFEE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
James E. Kitchens, Chairman 
Charles Deen, Vice Chairman 
Frank Jackson 
Earl Brice 
Tom Rice 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Wesley Vickers 
County Administrator 
____________ 
Anthony A. Rowell 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Jo Ann Metts 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Coffee County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2002 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Board of County Commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2002 Code, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and K. Barrington, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Jo Ann Metts, County Clerk, and Mr. Wesley Vickers, County Administrator, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the County readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the County's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Coffee County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Coffee County, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Coffee County, Georgia. 2010. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 10-4 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for Coffee County, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Coffee County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 66, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 7, 2010, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 6 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the County may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the County to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 7, 2010, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective November 15, 2010. 
Passed and adopted by the Board of County Commissioners this 15 th day of November, 2010. 

ATTEST: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1937 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 341), p. 1294, as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. The General Assembly did not amend the text in every section of the original Act to change references from "the Commissioner of Roads and Revenues," "the Commissioner and his advisors" to "the Board of Commissioners." Accordingly, where such obsolete references appear, they should be considered as referring to the board of commissioners in proper grammatical context. Any provisions regarding the notice to introduce legislation and the jurat have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, §§ II, III; counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I; county officers, election, term, compensation, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III; power of county governing authority to fix salary and compensation of persons employed by governing authority, Ga. const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I(f); county government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1 et seq.; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; authority to control property of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(1); matters over which governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

Sec. 1. - Membership; districts. 
The Board of Commissioners of Coffee County which existed on December 31, 2001, is continued in existence but on and after January 1, 2002, shall be constituted as provided in this Act. The Board of Commissioners of Coffee County so continued and constituted, sometimes referred to in this Act as the 'board,' shall continue to have the powers, duties, rights, obligations, and liabilities of that board as existed immediately prior to January 1, 2002. 
(1951 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 256) § 1, p. 2773; 1960 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 491) § 1, p. 2147; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1281) § 1, p. 6613; 1994 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 656) § 1, p. 3663; 2001 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 2EX28) § 1, p. 747) 
Sec. 2. - Qualifications of commissioners. 
(a)  Those members of the Board of Commissioners of Coffee County who are serving as such on December 31, 2001, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. On and after January 1, 2002, the Board of Commissioners of Coffee County shall consist of five members all of whom shall be elected from commissioner districts described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  For purposes of electing members of the board of commissioners, Coffee County is divided into five commissioner districts. One member of the board shall be elected from each such district. The five commissioner districts shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan Name: coffeewk3 Plan Type: LOCAL User: Buck Administrator: CNTY-COFFEE. 
(c)  When used in such attachment, the terms 'Tract' and 'BG' (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a 'BG' heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Coffee County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Coffee County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any commissioner district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(1951 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 256) § 1, p. 2773; 1960 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 491) § 1, p. 2147; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1281) § 1, p. 6613; 1994 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 656) § 1, p. 3663; 2001 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 2EX28) § 1, p. 747) 
Editor's note— Sections 1, 2, 3, and 4 of the original Act were stricken in their entirety and replaced by sections 1 and 2 of 1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No.1281) § 1, p. 6613, which were later amended by sections 1 and 2 of 1994 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 656) § 1, p. 3663. 2001 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 2EX28) § 1, p. 747 amended sections 1 and 2, and added new sections 3 and 4. The attachment referred to as "Plan Name: coffeewk3 Plan Type: LOCAL User: Buck Administrator: CNTY-COFFEE," has been omitted from this printing at the discretion of the editor. It may be found at 2001 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 2EX28), p. 747. 
Sec. 3. - [Eligibility.] 
(a)  No person shall be a member of the board if that person is ineligible for such office pursuant to Code section 45-2-1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 45-2-7] or any other general law applicable to that office. 
(b)  In order to be elected as a member of the board from a commissioner district, a person must receive the number of votes cast as required by general law for that office in that district only. Only electors who are residents of that commissioner district may vote for a member of the board for that district. At the time of qualifying for election as a member of the board from a commissioner district, each candidate for such office shall specify the commissioner district for which that person is a candidate. A person elected or appointed as a member of the board from a commissioner district must continue to reside in that district during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
(2001 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 2EX28) § 1, p. 747) 
Sec. 4. - [Initial terms and designations.] 
(a)  The first members of the reconstituted Board of Commissioners of Coffee County shall be elected at the general election on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2002. Those members of the board elected thereto from Commissioner Districts 1 and 3 in November 2002 shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 2006, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those members of the board elected thereto from Commissioner Districts 2, 4, and 5 in November 2004 shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 2008, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those and all future successors to members of the board whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the time of the statewide general election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and shall serve for terms of office of four years each. Members of the board shall serve for the terms of office specified therefor in this subsection and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  All members of the board who are elected thereto shall be nominated and elected in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)  Commissioner Districts 1 through 5, as they exist on December 31, 2001, shall continue to be designated as Commissioner Districts 1 through 5, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and on and after January 1, 2002, such members of the board serving from those former commissioner districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this section. 
(2001 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 2EX28) § 1, p. 747) 
Sec. 5. - Oath. 
The Commissioner of Roads and Revenues  [ ] shall qualify by taking and subscribing before any officer authorized to administer oaths an oath for the faithful discharge of the duties of the office to which each is herein appointed or hereafter elected or appointed. And members of said board of commissioners shall qualify in a like manner. 
(1951 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 256) § 5, p. 2773) 
Sec. 6. - Bond. 
[Section superseded by O.C.G.A. § 45-4-11 et seq.] 
Sec. 7. - Salaries. 
[Section superseded by O.C.G.A. § 36-5-24] 
Editor's note— Section 7A was added to the original Act by 1957 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 144) § 2, p. 2299. It was later stricken in its entirety by 1965 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 31) § 1, p. 2080. 
Sec. 8. - Meetings; reports; chairman. 
[ ] On and after January 1, 1953, the above provisions shall not be effective and the entire fiscal affairs of the County of Coffee shall be under the control of said board of commissioners of roads and revenues of Coffee County, Georgia. Said three commissioners [are] to elect one of their members to be chairman of said board for the ensuing year at their meeting to be held on the 1st Monday in January of each year, by a majority vote. [ ] Said board shall meet regularly twice each month on days designated by them. 
(1951 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 256) § 8, p. 2773) 
Sec. 8-A. - Payment to probate court. 
The board of commissioners of roads and revenues of Coffee County is hereby authorized to pay to the office of the Ordinary [Probate Court Judge] of Coffee County a sum not to exceed one hundred seventy-five dollars per month for clerical aid. 
(1953 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 605) § 1, p. 2382; 1957 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 176) § 1, p. 2393; 1962 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 660) § 1, p. 2367) 
Sec. 9. - Advisors. 
[Section 9, which appeared in the original Act, was superseded by 1951 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 256), p. 2773.] 
Sec. 10. - Recall Election. 
[Section 10, which appeared in the original Act, was specifically repealed by 1949 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 211) § II, p. 929.] 
Sec. 11. - Vacancy in office. 
[Section superseded by O.C.G.A. § 36-5-21.] 
Sec. 12. - Election. 
[Section 12, which appeared in the original Act, was superseded by 1951 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 256), p. 2773.] 
Sec. 13. - Commissions. 
[ ] 
Sec. 14. - Clerk. 
[1]  The board of commissioners of Coffee County is hereby authorized to employ a clerk at an annual salary of $5,000.00 and a road foreman at an annual salary of $9,600.00. The said clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond in sum of $5,000.00 to be approved by the Ordinary [Probate Court Judge], and payable to the Ordinary [Probate Court Judge], for the use of said county, conditioned for the faithful discharge of his duties and to account for all funds and property of said county coming into his possession as clerk. The surety on said bond shall be [a] corporate surety company, duly licensed to do business in the State of Georgia, and the premium therefor shall be paid out of the revenue of said county without any deduction or contribution from said clerk. 
[2]  The board is also authorized to employ a bookkeeper at an annual salary of $3,600.00 and an assistant bookkeeper at an annual salary of $3,000.00. The salaries provided for herein shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Coffee County. The board shall prescribe the duties of such personnel. 
(1951 Ga. Laws (Act No. 256) § 10, p. 2773; 1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 31) § 2, p. 2080; 1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 988) § 1, p. 2505) 
Sec. 14A(1). - Annual audits; inspection; compensation of auditors. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the board of commissioners of Coffee County to have conducted an annual certified audit of the financial affairs, books and records of the County of Coffee. Such certified audits shall be made in accordance with the generally accepted auditing and accounting procedures as recognized by the Georgia Society of Certified Public Accountants and the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. The person or persons making such audits shall be a member or members of, and in good standing with, the Georgia Society of Certified Public Accountants and the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. 
(b)  Should such auditor discover any violation of the laws of Georgia or any irregularities in any of the finances or accounts of the county, its departments and agencies, it shall be the duty of such auditor to immediately report such violation of irregularity to the board of commissioners and to the grand jury then in session, or if no grand jury is in session, then to the first grand jury convened after such violations or irregularities are discovered. 
(c)  All audits, as provided for herein, shall be reproduced in sufficient number, and five copies shall be delivered and filed with the clerk of the superior court of Coffee County, and such copies shall be maintained in the clerk's office for public inspection. The office of the board of commissioners and the records maintained therein shall be open to inspection by the public at all times during normal office hours. 
(d)  The compensation of such auditor shall be fixed by agreements between the board of commissioners and the auditor selected to make such audit. The compensation of said auditor as determined herein shall be payable from the funds of Coffee County. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 651) § 1, p. 2098; 1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 364) § 1, p. 3093; 1976 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 923) §§ 1, 0.2, p. 2864) 
Editor's note— Subsection (e) of section 14A, as enacted by 1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 364) § 1, p. 3093, was deleted in its entirety by 1976 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 923) § 2, p. 2864. Furthermore, 1972 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 988) § 2, p. 2505 added a section 14A to the original Act, and designated that it be inserted "between section 14 and section 15" without mention of the other section 14A which had been enacted by 1968 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 651) § 1, p. 2098. At the discretion of the editor, section 14A as enacted by the 1968 Act was designated as "section 14A(1)," and section 14A as enacted by the 1972 Act was designated as "section 14A(2)." 
Sec. 14A(2). - Compensation, generally. 
[Section superseded by O.C.G.A. § 36-5-24.] 
Sec. 15. - Meetings. 
The meetings to be held by the commissioner[s] [ ] shall be for the transaction of all matters which, by law, come under the jurisdiction of said commissioner, and shall be held in such office or offices as may be designated in the courthouse at Douglas, Georgia, for that purpose. The powers, duties and limitations of this section shall be on the board of commissioners on and after January 1, 1953. 
(1951 Ga. Laws (Act No. 256) § 11, p. 2773) 
Sec. 16. - Official duties. 
The commissioner shall keep his office open during regular office hours to suit the convenience of the public during each day of the week; the Sabbath and legal holidays excepted, for the transaction of public business in connection with his office, and notice of said hours shall be placed upon the door of said office by said commissioner. It shall be the duty of said commissioner to devote his time to the personal supervision of the laying out of road work, the construction and repair of bridges and other property of the county, and in giving general direction and management to the county affairs whenever and howsoever needed; and he shall have no other salaried position of public trust while acting as commissioner. The powers, duties and limitations of this section shall be on the board of commissioners on and after January 1, 1953. 
(1951 Ga. Laws (Act No. 256) § 12, p. 2773) 
Sec. 17. - Duties and powers. 
[ ] 
Sec. 18. - Receipts and expenditures. 
It shall be the duty of such commissioner, at the expiration of the first three months next succeeding his taking office, and monthly thereafter, to cause his clerk to make up a list of receipts of the county and the sources thereof and of the disbursements or expenditures, and to whom and for what purpose made, and cause the same to be published in the official gazette of said county. 
(1951 Ga. Laws (Act No. 256) § 14, p. 2773) 
Sec. 19. - Unlawful agreements. 
It shall be unlawful for any candidate for commissioner of roads and revenues of Coffee County to enter into any agreement with any person or persons as to the disposal of any work, the purchase of any supplies, or as to any appointment under his control; and any person so offending shall be ineligible to hold said office, and he shall be removed therefrom if the fact of such agreement is not discovered until after he takes office. 
Sec. 20. - Financial interest forbidden. 
It shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as such for said commissioner of roads and revenues to have any financial interest in the transaction of any business in connection with the purchase or sale of any goods or supplies, machinery, or other thing or things for the County of Coffee or for which the County of Coffee may be called upon to make payment; and upon conviction such commissioner shall be ineligible to longer hold office and shall be removed therefrom. The provisions of this section likewise applies to each member of the board of commissioners of roads and revenues. 
(1951 Ga. Laws (Act No. 256) § 15, p. 2773) 
Sec. 21. - Legal advice. 
The commissioner of roads and revenues shall have authority to employ competent legal representation and to secure competent legal advice in connection with all matters affecting the county's affairs or its fiscal business, and shall be authorized and empowered to pay for such representation and advice such reasonable sum or sums, amount or amounts, as to him shall be deemed proper, the same to be paid out of the general funds of the county; provided, however, no such attorney or legal advisor shall be eligible for such employment or to be paid therefor if he is at the time receiving or has within six months next prior thereto received remuneration from Coffee County, either directly or indirectly, for any other service or purpose than purely legal advice or representation. 
Sec. 22. - Audit of clerk's books. 
[Section 22, which appeared in the original Act, was superseded by 1969 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 364), p. 3093.] 
Sec. 23. - Commissioner and advisors named. 
[ ] 
Sec. 24. - Constitutionality. 
Should any of the sections of this Act be held to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, only such section or sections, provision or provisions, shall be affected and such holding of unconstitutionality or invalidity of any such section or provision shall not affect the remaining sections or provisions, but they shall remain in full force and effect. 
Sec. 25. - Repealing clause. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act shall be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Approval Date: Approved March 26, 1937. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY OFFICERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1965 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 33), p. 2087, as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Any provisions regarding the notice to introduce legislation and the jurat have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Salary basis. 
The present mode of compensating the clerk of the superior court, the sheriff, the ordinary [probate court judge] and the tax commissioner of Coffee County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, annual salaries for such officers are prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 2. - Clerk of superior court. 
[Section superseded by O.C.G.A. §§ 15-6-88 et seq.; 15-1-10; 15-6-86; 36-9-5.] 
Sec. 3. - Sheriff. 
[Section superseded by O.C.G.A. § 15-16-20 et seq.] 
Sec. 4. - Ordinary [Probate Court Judge]. 
[Section superseded by O.C.G.A. §§ 15-9-63; 15-9-67.] 
Sec. 5. - Tax commissioner. 
The tax commissioner shall receive an annual salary as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-183 [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183], payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Coffee County. 
(1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 989) § 4, p. 2508; 2005 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 249) § 1, p. 3836) 
Sec. 6. - Fees. 
After the effective date of this Act, said officers shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed as compensation for services in any capacity in their respective offices, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the 15th day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, each of said officers shall furnish the governing authority of the county a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. 
Sec. 7. - Tax commissioner salary in lieu of fees. 
The salary provided for the tax commissioner herein shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions, costs, fines, emoluments, and perquisites of whatever kind, notwithstanding the fact that such services for which the commissions are derived may have been performed in the capacity of an agent for the Georgia Department of Revenue and the tax commissioner shall have the duty to act as said agent for the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 249) § 2, p. 3836) 
Editor's note— O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183 now regulates the minimum salaries of tax collectors and tax commissioners. 
Sec. 8. - Deputies. 
The above-named officers shall have the authority to appoint such deputies, clerks, assistants and other personnel as they shall each deem necessary to efficiently and effectively discharge the official duties of their respective offices. Each of said officials shall, from time to time, recommend to the governing authority of said county the number of such personnel needed by his office. It shall be within the sole power and authority of each of said officers, during his respective term of office, to designate and name the person or persons who shall be employed as such deputies, clerks, assistants or other employees, and to prescribe their duties and assignments, and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within his sole discretion. 
(1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 989) § 5, p. 2508) 
Sec. 9. - Sheriff; fiscal year; budget. 
[1]  The fiscal year of the sheriff of Coffee County shall commence on January 1 and end on December 31 of each year. At such time as is designated for preparation of county budgets, but in any event no later than October 1 of each year, the sheriff shall certify to the governing authority of Coffee County a proposed budget of expenditures for the carrying out of the powers, duties and operations of his office for the ensuing fiscal year. The sheriff shall submit with the proposed budget his sworn certificate, stating that the proposed expenditures are reasonable and necessary for the proper and efficient operation of the office for the ensuing year. Each proposed budget shall show the estimated amounts of all proposed expenditures for operating and equipping the sheriff's office and jail other than construction, repair or capital improvement of county buildings during said fiscal year. The expenditures shall be itemized as follows: 
(a)  Expenses, other than salaries. 
(b)  Equipment. 
(c)  Investigations. 
(d)  Such other items as may be required by the governing authority. 
[2]  The sheriff shall furnish to the governing authority of Coffee County all relevant and pertinent information concerning expenditures made in previous years and to the proposed expenditures which said governing authority of the county shall deem necessary, except that the governing authority of the county may not require confidential information concerning details of investigations. The governing authority of the county may require the sheriff to correct mathematical, mechanical, factual and clerical errors, and errors as to form in the proposed budget. Not later than December 1 of each year, the governing authority of Coffee County may amend, modify, increase or reduce any or all items of expenditure in the proposed budget and, said budget as fixed by said governing authority shall be the budget for said officer for the ensuing fiscal year and all expenses connected with the sheriff's office shall be paid from county funds in accordance with said budgetary provisions. All purchases required by the sheriff's office shall be made in accordance with procedure prescribed for other purchases made by the county. 
[3]  If in the judgment of the sheriff an emergency should arise by reason of which the sheriff would be unable to perform his duties without the expenditure of larger amounts than are provided in the current budget, he may apply to the governing authority of Coffee County for appropriation of additional amounts. The governing authority shall then act upon the request for additional funds within fifteen days from the submission of the request by making available to the sheriff such sums of money as will be needed to meet said emergency as shall be determined by the governing authority, or by refusing to make any such funds available. 
[4]  For those fiscal years immediately following that year in which sheriffs are elected, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the sheriff-elect to submit the proposed budget as provided for hereinabove not later than December 1 after his election. It shall be the duty of the incumbent sheriff to make available to the sheriff-elect such information as may be in his possession and required of the sheriff-elect by the governing authority of Coffee County, and in this respect, the sheriff shall cooperate fully in the preparation of the sheriff-elect's budget. 
[5]  The governing authority of Coffee County shall not act arbitrarily or capriciously in regards to the budget proposed by the sheriff or sheriff-elect, or his request for additional funds, but shall act in good faith and for the best interests of the county in all respects thereto. 
Sec. 10. - Clerk of superior court. 
The clerk of the Superior Court of Coffee County, or the clerk-elect of the Superior Court of Coffee County whenever applicable, shall be required to submit an annual budget at the same time and in the same manner as the sheriff of Coffee County, except that those provisions of section 9 which peculiarly related to the sheriff shall not apply to the clerk or clerk-elect of the Superior Court of Coffee County. 
Sec. 11. - Ordinary [Probate Court Judge]; budget. 
The ordinary [probate court judge] of Coffee County, or the ordinary-elect of Coffee County whenever applicable, shall be required to submit an annual budget at the same time and in the same manner as the sheriff of Coffee County except that those provisions of section 9 which are peculiarly related to the sheriff shall not apply to the ordinary or ordinary-elect of Coffee County. 
Sec. 12. - Tax commissioner; budget. 
The tax commissioner of Coffee County, or the tax commissioner-elect of Coffee County whenever applicable, shall be required to submit an annual budget at the same time and in the same manner as the sheriff of Coffee County except that those provisions of section 9 which are peculiarly related to the sheriff shall not apply to the tax commissioner or tax commissioner-elect of Coffee County. 
Sec. 13. - Operating expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of each of said offices, expressly including the compensation of all personnel and employees, shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture, utilities, uniforms, vehicles and equipment, and the repair, replacement and maintenance thereof, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of each office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements for each office shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority of Coffee County. 
Sec. 13A. - Salaries; cost of living adjustments. 
The officers and personnel provided for in this Act shall continue to receive the compensation they were receiving on January 1, 1977, until such time as said compensation shall be changed by the Board of Commissioners of Coffee County. 
(1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 989) § 6, p. 2508; 1977 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 494) § 1, p. 3699) 
Sec. 14. - Bonds. 
The official bonds of each of said officers, and the respective deputies, clerks, assistants and other personnel, as may be required by law, shall be procured by each elected officer, and the premiums and costs thereof shall be paid out of any county funds available for that purpose. 
Sec. 15. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this Act shall become effective on March 1, 1965. 
Sec. 16. - Repealing clause. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
Approval Date: Approved February 26, 1965. 
ARTICLE III. - TAX COMMISSIONER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1931 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 90), p. 443, as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly. The original Act, as amended, was repealed in its entirety by 1937 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 115) p. 1303, and later revived by 1939 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 379), p. 548. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Any provisions regarding the notice to introduce legislation and the jurat have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Offices of tax receiver and tax collector abolished. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that the offices of tax-receiver and tax-collector of Coffee County, Georgia, are hereby abolished, and the duties of the two offices aforesaid are hereby consolidated into one office. 
Sec. 2. - Office of tax commissioner created. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the office of county tax-commissioner of Coffee County, Georgia, is hereby created in lieu of said abolished offices, and the rights, duties, and liabilities of the said office of the county tax-commissioner of Coffee County shall be the same as to the rights, duties, and liabilities of the tax-receiver and tax-collector of said county, so far as same are applicable. 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
This Act shall not take effect until January 1, 1933, at the expiration of the term of office of the present tax-collector and tax-receiver of Coffee County, Georgia. 
Sec. 4. - Election and term of commissioner. 
There shall be held, at the general election for county officers in the year 1932, an election for county tax-commissioner of Coffee County, Georgia, who shall be elected at the same time and in the same manner as other officers of Coffee County, and whose term of office shall begin on January 1, 1933, and be for a term of four years thereafter, or until his successor is elected and qualified. The duties of said tax-commissioner shall be as herein provided. 
Sec. 5. - How commissioned and qualified. 
Said tax-commissioner shall be commissioned and qualified as the clerks of the superior courts are. 
Sec. 6. - Vacancy. 
[Section superseded by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-211.] 
Sec. 7. - Second election. 
Should any two or more candidates at an election to fill said vacancy, or any regular election, have the highest and an equal number of votes, said ordinary shall call and advertise another election within twenty days, in the manner above provided, and so do until a choice is made. 
Sec. 8. - Taxes due when Act becomes effective; collection. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all taxes that are due and payable at the time the provisions of this Act become effective, and all tax fi. fas. theretofore issued by the tax-collector of Coffee County, Georgia, shall have full force and effect, and be collectible as issued. 
Sec. 9. - Collection of fees for county. 
[Section superseded by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183.] 
Sec. 10. - Pay of commissioner. 
[Section superseded by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183.] 
Editor's note— Section 5 of 1965 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 33), p. 2087, as amended by 1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 989) § 4, p. 2508 and 2005 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 249) § 1, p. 3836, superseded this provision of 1931 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 90), p. 443 regarding compensation of the tax commissioner, by stating that "[t]he tax commissioner shall receive an annual salary as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-183." 
Sec. 10A. - Tax to pay salary. 
[Section superseded by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183.] 
Editor's note— The section designated as "§ 10A- Tax to pay salary," was enacted by the General Assembly under 1933 Ga. Laws (Act No. 292) § 2, p. 482, without a specific placement relative to the other sections appearing in the original Act of 1931 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 90), p. 443. Designation of the section as "§ 10A- Tax to pay salary" and placement of it at this location were at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 11. - Oath and bond. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that before entering upon the duties of his office the said county tax commissioner shall take the oath now prescribed by law for the tax-collector, and shall give bond in double the amount of money reasonably estimated to pass through his hands annually, which bond shall be signed as surety by a bonding company legally authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, and the fee or cost for the suretyship on said bond shall be paid out of the funds of Coffee County, Georgia, as part of the expense of county government. 
Sec. 12. - Severability. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if for any reason any portion of this Act shall be held by the court of last resort of this State to be unconstitutional, the whole of this Act shall not thereby become void, but only so much of the same as may be held to be unconstitutional; the purpose of this Act being to put into effect the constitution of this State, as is contained in article eleven, section three, paragraph one. 
Sec. 13. - Repealing clause. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Approval Date: Approved August 14, 1931. 
ARTICLE IV. - COUNTY MARSHAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2006 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 714), p. 4019, as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Any provisions regarding the notice to introduce legislation and the jurat have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Position created. 
Pursuant to subsection (c.1) of Code section 15-10-100 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 15-10-100], the governing authority of Coffee County is authorized to employ marshals to perform the duties of constables. Such marshals shall be employed at such time as a majority of the judges of the Superior Court of Coffee County certifies that there exists a need for such marshals. The number of marshals to be appointed shall be specified by such judges in such certification. 
Sec. 2. - Certification. 
After certifying the need for marshals under Section 1 of this Act, the judges of the Superior Court of Coffee County by majority vote shall appoint such marshals who shall serve at the pleasure of such judges. The compensation of such marshals shall be set by the governing authority of Coffee County. 
Sec. 3. - Authority, powers, and duties. 
Marshals appointed in accordance with this Act shall have the same authority, powers, and duties as constables as described under Article 6 of Chapter 10 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 15-10-100] and shall be authorized to exercise the same powers otherwise exercisable by sheriffs of this State. 
Sec. 4. - Termination of position. 
When the need for such marshals no longer exists, the judges of the Superior Court of Coffee County shall certify that such need no longer exists and the positions of such marshals shall terminate as of the date of such certification. 
Sec. 5. - Repealing clause. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE V. - COUNTY DEPOSITORY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1916 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 304), p. 392, as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Office abolished. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that the office of the county treasurer of Coffee County be and the same is hereby abolished. 
Sec. 2. - Delivery to county commissioners. 
Be it further enacted, that all books, papers, records and other property and business of the said office of county treasurer of Coffee County shall be delivered to and disposed of by the county commissioners of said Coffee County as soon as this law becomes effective. 
Sec. 3. - Bank to be depository; bond; premium payment; chosen annually; payments. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the county commissioners of Coffee County shall, on their first regular meeting in January of each and every year after this Act goes into effect, or as soon thereafter as practicable, select some chartered bank or trust company located in Coffee County to act as a county depository for the purpose of handling and paying out and otherwise disposing of all county funds and for the performance of the duties now performed by the county treasurer of Coffee County, as shall be required of them by said commissioners. Said bank or trust company shall be required to give bond in the sum of not less than $20,000.00, and not more than $30,000.00, for the faithful performance of their duty, and where bond is given in some regular bonding company the premium thereon shall be paid by the county commissioners out of any county funds available therefor, but no other compensation shall be allowed to said bank or trust company. Such county depository shall be chosen annually, as herein provided, or more often upon a failure or refusal to perform the duties of said position by any one so chosen. All county warrants and disbursements shall be drawn on and paid by such county depository, instead of the county treasurer, as is now done. 
Sec. 4. - Effective date. 
This Act shall not become effective and operative until on and after January 1, 1917. 
Sec. 5. - Repealing clause. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Approval Date: Approved August 2, 1916. 
ARTICLE VI. - SMALL CLAIMS COURT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1972 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1023), p. 2590, as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Any provisions regarding the notice to introduce legislation and the jurat have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Creation. 
There is hereby created and established a Small Claims Court in and for Coffee County. Said court shall have civil jurisdiction in cases ex contractu in which the demand or value of the property involved does not exceed $2,500.00, said jurisdiction to be concurrent with the jurisdiction of any other court or courts now or hereafter established in said county. Said jurisdiction shall include the power to issue writs of garnishment and attachment and, in addition to the powers herein specifically granted, all the powers granted to justices of the peace by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 141) § 1, p. 2918) 
Sec. 2. - Judge; qualifications. 
[a]  Any person appointed as a judge of the Small Claims Court created by this Act must be a resident of Coffee County, at least twenty-two years of age, have completed a high school education, and must be a person of outstanding character and integrity. 
[b]  All other officers, now or hereafter provided, appointed to, or employed by, said court must be at least twenty-one years of age and must be residents of the county. 
Sec. 3. - Judge unable to serve. 
Whenever the judge of the Small Claims Court shall be unable, from absence, sickness, or other cause, to discharge any duty whatever appertaining to his office, the judge of the Superior Court of Coffee County or any judge of a State Court located in said county, on application of said judge of the Small Claims Court who is unable to act, shall perform such duties, and hear and determine all such matters as may be submitted to him, and shall be substituted in all respects in the place and stead, and in the matter aforesaid, of the judge unable to act. 
Sec. 4. - Clerk. 
Any duties herein prescribed to be performed by the clerk may be performed by the judge, although the judge may appoint a person to act as clerk. Said clerk shall be compensated, if at all, from the fees herein authorized. 
Sec. 5. - Fees as remuneration. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a claim, the plaintiff shall deposit with the court the sum of $22.00 for claims of $1,000.00 or less and the sum of $25.00 for claims in excess of $1,000.00, which shall cover all cost of the proceeding including the cost of service of the notice. The deposit of cost in cases of attachment, garnishment, or trover shall be $20.00. If a party shall fail to pay any accrued cost, the judge shall have the power to deny said party the right to file any new case while such cost remains unpaid and likewise shall have the power to deny such litigant the right to proceed further in any pending case. The award of court cost, as between the parties, shall be in the discretion of the judge; and such cost shall be taxed in the cause at the judge's discretion. 
(b)  Whenever a claim affidavit and bond is filed by a third party claiming personal property that has been attached or levied upon under an attachment or executions issued from the small claims court, the levying officer shall forthwith return the same to said court; and the issues raised by such claim affidavit shall be heard and determined by the judge of said small claims court. The judge shall be entitled to a fee of $20.00 for every such claim case. The same rules of practice and procedure shall apply as in cases of affidavits of illegality. All attachment proceedings shall be tried by the judge and without a jury. 
(c)  Fees collected by the judge, as herein authorized, shall be retained by him as his sole remuneration. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 141) § 3, p. 2918; 1980 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1354) § 1, p. 4384) 
Sec. 6. - Pleadings; summons. 
Actions shall be commenced by the filing of a statement of claim, including the last known address of the defendant, in concise form and free from technicalities. The plaintiff or his agent shall verify the statement of claim by oath or affirmation in the form herein provided, or its equivalent, and shall affix his signature thereto. At the request of any individual, the judge or clerk may prepare the statement of claim and other papers required to be filed in an action. 
(a)  A copy of the verified statement of claim, together with a notice of hearing in the form hereinafter prescribed, shall be served on the defendant, and such service shall be sufficient to give the court jurisdiction in the premises. Summons to affect such service shall be issued by the court in no event later than 30 days after the filing of the claim. Service of said notice shall be made only within the county. Said service shall be made by any official or person authorized by law to serve process in the superior court, by a duly qualified bailiff of the Small Claims Court, by registered or certified mail with receipt, or by any person not a party to, or otherwise interested in, the suit, who is specially appointed by the judge of said court for that purpose. 
(b)  When notice is to be served by registered or certified mail, the clerk or the judge shall enclose a copy of the statement of claim, the verification and the notice in an envelope addressed to the defendant at his last known address, prepay the postage from monies collected for that purpose, and mail the same forthwith, noting the date and hour of mailing on the record. When a receipt therefor is returned, or if the sealed envelope in which said notice was mailed to the defendant by registered or certified mail is returned to the sender by United States postal authorities marked "refused," giving the date of refusal, and such notation of refusal is signed or initialed by a United States postal employee or United States mail carrier to whom refusal was made, then the clerk or judge shall attach the same to the original statement and notice of claim, or otherwise file it as a part of the record in the case, and it shall be prima facie evidence of service upon the defendant. 
(c)  When served by a private individual, as provided above, such individual shall make proof of service by affidavit, showing the time and place of such service on the defendant. 
(d)  When served as provided, the actual cost of service shall be taxable as costs, but shall not exceed $5.00. The cost of service shall be advanced by the party demanding same, in addition to the filing fee hereinafter provided, and shall be taxed as other costs. 
(e)  The plaintiff shall be entitled to judgment by default, without further proof, upon the failure of the defendant to appear, when the claim of the plaintiff is for a liquidated amount. 
(f)  Said notice shall include the date, hour and location of the hearing, which date shall not be less than ten nor more than thirty days from the date of the service of said notice; provided, however, that where service is made by registered or certified mail, the date of mailing shall be the date of service. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 141) § 2, p. 2918; 1980 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1354) § 2, p. 4384) 
Editor's note— 1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 141) § 2, p. 2918 amended subsection 6(a) of the original Act. 1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1354) § 2, p. 4384 amended subsection 6(d) of the original Act. 
Sec. 7. - Docket. 
A docket shall be maintained in which every proceeding and ruling had in each case shall be indicated. 
Sec. 8. - Costs. 
(a)  The plaintiff, when he files his claim, shall deposit the sum of $7.50 with the court. The deposit of cost in cases of attachment, garnishment or trover shall be $7.50. If a party shall fail to pay any accrued cost, the judge shall have the power to deny said party the right to file any new case while such costs remain unpaid and, likewise, shall have the power to deny such litigant the right to proceed further in any pending case. The award of court costs shall be mandatory and such costs shall be taxed to the nonprevailing party. 
(b)  Whenever a claim affidavit and bond is filed by a third party claiming personal property that has been attached or levied upon under an attachment or execution issued from the Small Claims Court, the levying officer shall forthwith return the same to said court, and the issues raised by such claim affidavit shall be heard and determined by the judge of said Small Claims Court. A deposit of $7.50 for every such claim case shall be made to the court. The same rules of practice and procedure shall apply as in cases of affidavits of illegality. All attachment proceedings shall be tried by the judge and without a jury. 
(c)  The remainder of the court fee due after payment of the deposit, as provided in this section, shall be paid within 30 days of the date the deposit is made. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 141) § 4, p. 2918; 1980 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1354) § 3, p. 4384) 
Sec. 9. - Trials. 
(a)  The trial shall be conducted on the day set for the hearing, or at such later time as the judge may set. Immediately prior to the trial of any case, the judge shall make an earnest effort to settle the controversy by conciliation. If the judge fails to induce the parties to settle their differences without a trial, he shall proceed with the hearing on its merits. 
(b)  The judge shall conduct the trial in such manner as to do substantial justice between the parties according to the rules of substantive law. All rules and regulations relating to pleading, practice, and procedure shall be liberally construed so as to administer justice. 
(c)  If the plaintiff fails to appear the suit may be dismissed for want of prosecution, the defendant may proceed to a trial on the merits, or the case may be continued as the judge may direct. If both parties fail to appear the judge may continue the case, order the same dismissed for want of prosecution, or make any other just and proper disposition thereof, as justice may require. 
Sec. 10. - Setoff. 
If any defendant has any claim against the plaintiff, the judge may require a statement of setoff to be filed, or same may be waived. If the plaintiff requires time to prepare his defense against such claim, the judge may continue the case for such purpose. If any defendant has any claim against the plaintiff which exceeds the jurisdiction of the court, he may use a part thereof to offset the claim of the plaintiff. 
Sec. 11. - Judgment; financial inquiry. 
When the judgment is to be rendered and the party against whom it is to be entered requests it, the judge shall inquire fully into the earnings and financial status of such party and shall have full discretionary power to stay the entry of judgment, to stay execution, and to order partial payments in such amounts, over such periods, and upon such terms as shall seem just under the circumstances and as will assure a definite and steady reduction of the judgment until it is finally and completely satisfied. 
Sec. 12. - Collection of judgments. 
The judge of said small claims court shall not be obligated to collect such deferred partial payments on judgments so rendered but, if the plaintiff so requests, the judge may do so at the expense of the plaintiff for clerical and accounting costs incurred thereby. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 141) § 5, p. 2918; 1980 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1354) § 4, p. 4384) 
Sec. 13. - Rules. 
The judge of the Superior Court of Coffee County may, from time to time, make rules for a simple, inexpensive and speedy procedure to effectuate the purposes of this Act and shall have power to prescribe, modify and improve the forms to be used therein to ensure the proper administration of justice and to accomplish the purposes hereof. 
Sec. 14. - Bailiffs. 
The judge of said Small Claims Court shall have the power to appoint one or more bailiffs of and for said Small Claims Court, to act within and throughout the limits of the county. Such bailiffs shall serve at the pleasure of the judge and under his direction. Any person so appointed shall be known and designated as "Small Claims Court Bailiff" and shall have the powers and authority, and shall be subject to the penalties, of lawful constables of the State of Georgia, including the power to serve any and all summons and writs issued from or by said Small Claims Court. Said bailiffs shall also have the power to make levies, conduct judicial sales, and account therefor, in the manner of lawful constables. Within five days following their appointment, all such bailiffs shall take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed in Code section 24-804 and give the bond prescribed in Code section 24-811. Such bailiffs shall be subject to removal from office for failure of duty or malfeasance in office, as are other lawful constables of this State. The sheriff of said county and his deputies shall also have the power and authority to serve summons, make levies and sales, and serve as ex officio bailiffs of said court. 
Editor's note— References to "Code section 24-804" and "Code section 24-811" in the above section are to the 1933 Code of Georgia. These 1933 Code sections were repealed in their entirety by 1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 429) § 4-2, p. 884, and not replaced by any subsequent statute. 
Sec. 15. - Judgments as a lien. 
A judgment of said Small Claims Court shall become a lien on both the real and personal property of a defendant, regardless of where such property is situated within the State. Said judgment shall become a lien at the time an execution based upon such judgment is filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court for said county and the entry thereof is made by the clerk in the general execution docket for said county. 
Sec. 16. - Appeals. 
Appeals may be had from judgments returned in the Small Claims Court to the superior court, and the same provisions now provided for by general law for appeals, contained in Code Chapter 6-1 [O.C.G.A. § 15-6-1 et seq.] to the superior court, shall be applicable to appeals from the Small Claims Court to the superior court, the same to be a de novo appeal. 
Sec. 17. - Forms. 
Until otherwise provided by the rules of the court, the statement of claim, verification, and notice shall be in the following form, or equivalent from, and shall be in lieu of any forms now employed and of any form of summons now provided by law: 
[a]  "Small Claims Court of Coffee County." 
[b]  "Statement of Claim." 
[c]  "Notice." 
Editor's note— Section 17 of the original Act, 1972 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1023), p. 2590, contained images of three court forms: Small Claims Court of Coffee County from; Statement of Claim form; and Notice form. These forms were not reprinted in this publication, at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 18. - Appointment of judge. 
(a)  Each judge of the said court shall be a duly qualified person and shall be appointed by the Governor for a term of 4 years and until the appointment and qualification of his successor. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(b)  The first judge appointed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be appointed for a term beginning on June 1, 1980. 
(c)  The judge in office on the effective date of this Act shall remain in office until the appointment and qualification of his successor by the Governor as provided in this section. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 141) § 6, p. 2918) 
Sec. 19. - Office space, facilities, and supplies. 
All office space, courtroom facilities, forms, docket books, file jackets, filing cabinets, materials, equipment and supplies required by this Act, or necessary for the efficient operation of said court, shall be furnished by the Board of County Commissioners. They shall also provide a suitable room in the courthouse for the holding of said court. 
Sec. 20. - Law library. 
The State Librarian is hereby authorized and directed to furnish all available volumes of Georgia Laws to the Small Claims Court, without cost to the court or the county. 
Sec. 21. - No terms. 
Said Small Claims Court shall have no designated terms at stated periods. The judge thereof shall, in each instance, set dates for all hearings and trials in each type of case. He shall also designate the time or times for the return of attachments and executions, and he shall also designate the time when each answer to a summons of garnishment shall be filed. No garnishee may be required to file his answer sooner than ten days after he is served with summons, however. Whenever a garnishee shall fail to answer at the time so stated in the summons served upon him, unless the court, in its discretion, extends the time for filing, the judge may immediately render judgment and issue an execution against the garnishee in favor of the plaintiff for the amount previously adjudged to be due the plaintiff by the original defendant, and also for costs in the garnishment proceeding, but no judgment shall be rendered against a garnishee before a final judgment shall have first been rendered against the defendant. 
Sec. 22. - Garnishment. 
A summons of garnishment may be served by the sheriff or his deputies, by a lawful constable, by a Small Claims Court bailiff, or by the judge of the Small Claims Court, or it may be served by registered or certified mail, provided such service by mail is evidenced by a properly signed return receipt, which receipt shall be attached to the original garnishment affidavit or to the writ of attachment. It shall be prima facie evidence of service on the garnishee if the sealed envelope in which said summons was mailed to the garnishee by registered or certified mail is returned to the sender by the United States postal authorities marked "refused," giving the date of refusal, and signed or initialed by a United States Postal Service employee or United States mail carrier to whom refusal was made. Whenever service is made in person by a court officer, as aforesaid, such officer shall enter his return of service either on the back of the original garnishment affidavit or the attachment writ, or on the back of a conformed copy of the original summons of garnishment which was given to the garnishee, or such entry of service may be made on a separate paper and attached to the said garnishment affidavit or the writ of attachment, as the case may be. 
Sec. 23. - Contempt; fines. 
The judge of said court shall have the power to impose fines of not more than $100.00 on, or to imprison for not longer than twenty-four hours, any person guilty of contempt of court. Such fines shall be paid into the county treasury or depository to be used for county purposes. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 141) § 7, p. 2918) 
Sec. 24. - Fees of bailiff and sheriff. 
The fees of the bailiff or sheriff for the execution of a fi. fa. shall be $5.00, plus a reasonable amount for drayage, to be determined by the judge of the Small Claims Court. The rate of commission on all judicial sales shall be ten percent (10%) of the first $250.00 and five percent (5%) on all sums over that amount, with a minimum of five dollars. 
Sec. 25. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 26. - Repealing clause. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
Approval Date: Approved March 27, 1972. 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1970 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 934), p. 2441, as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Any provisions regarding the notice to introduce legislation and the jurat have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Created. 
Pursuant to subsection (b) of Code section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40], there is created the Board of Elections and Registration of Coffee County, hereinafter referred to as "the board." The board shall have the powers and duties of the former superintendent of elections of Coffee County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code," relating to the conduct of primaries and elections and the former board of registrars of Coffee County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," relating to the registration of electors and absentee voting. 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
The terms "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," and "public office" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code," unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act, and the term "commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of Coffee County and "county" means Coffee County. 
Sec. 3. - Composition; appointments. 
(a)  The board shall be composed of five members, each of whom shall be an elector and resident of the county and who shall be appointed as provided in this section. 
(b)  Each member of the Board of Commissioners of Coffee County shall nominate one member to the board. Each nominee shall be approved by a majority vote of the Board of Commissioners of Coffee County. 
(c)  All appointments to the board shall be promptly submitted to the chief judge of the Superior Court of the Waycross Judicial Circuit for confirmation by a majority vote of the judges of the superior court of the Waycross Judicial Circuit who shall certify them to the clerk of the Superior Court of Coffee County. 
(d)  In making the initial appointments to the board, the members shall be selected by not later than June 1, 2005. Each person appointed to the board shall serve a term of office that is concurrent with the term of the member of the Board of Commissioners of Coffee County that appointed such person. 
(e)  At their first meeting in each odd-numbered year, the board shall elect from its members a chairperson. 
Sec. 4. - Qualifications. 
(a)  No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member of the board during the term of such elective office, and the position of any member of the board shall be deemed vacant upon such members qualifying as a candidate for elective public office. 
(b)  Members of the board must be residents of Coffee County and must have been a registered voter in Coffee County for a period of at least one year prior to the date of their appointment to the board. 
(c)  No member of the board shall be related by blood or marriage closer than first cousins to any elected official in Coffee County nor shall any member of the board be employed by or work directly for any agency of state government or Coffee County. 
(d)  No member of the board shall have been convicted of any felony involving moral turpitude or election fraud or have been found by any civil or administrative court or tribunal to have committed election fraud. Upon indictment of any felony involving election fraud or moral turpitude, a member shall stand immediately terminated as a matter of law. 
Sec. 5. - Certification. 
The appointing authorities shall certify the appointment of each member of the board by filing an affidavit with the chief judge of the Superior Court of the Waycross Judicial Circuit no later than 15 days preceding the date upon which such members are to take office, stating the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifying such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. Upon confirmation by the chief judge, the clerk of the superior court shall record each of such certifications on the minutes of the superior court and shall certify the name of each such appointed member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members within the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for registrars. 
Sec. 6. - Terms. 
Each member of the board shall be eligible to serve successive terms, shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of such resignation to the appointing body and to the clerk of the superior court, and shall be subject to removal from the board at any time, for cause, after notice and hearing, by the board or by the chief judge of the Superior Court of the Waycross Judicial Circuit. 
Sec. 7. - Vacancy. 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any board member before the expiration of his or her term, by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, and there is more than one year remaining in the member's term of office, the nominating member of the board of commissioners shall nominate a successor within ten business days after the occurrence of the vacancy to serve the remainder of the unexpired term as provided for in section 3 of this Act. Otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the chief judge of the Superior Court of the Waycross Judicial Circuit within ten business days after the occurrence of the vacancy. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, if the vacancy occurs within 45 days of a primary election or is brought on by the return of an indictment against a member, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the chief judge of the Superior Court of the Waycross Judicial Circuit within ten business days following the occurrence of such vacancy; provided, however, that if the vacancy occurs within 45 days of an election in which the chief judge of the Superior Court of the Waycross Judicial Circuit is on the ballot for election, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the judge of the Superior Court of the Waycross Judicial Circuit who is most senior in time of service and who is not on the ballot for election. The clerk of the superior court shall be notified of such interim appointments and record and certify such appointments in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. 
Sec. 8. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the member's duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
Sec. 9. - Procedures; bylaws. 
(a)  The board shall be authorized to organize itself, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate to the management of the affairs committed to its supervision; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with state law. Action and decision by the board shall be by a majority of the members of the board. The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in primaries and elections and such workers shall be appointed, insofar as practicable, from lists provided to the board by the county executive committee of each political party. 
(b)  The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall hold regular meetings on the first Tuesday of each month and more often if needed in the opinion of the members. The time of such meetings shall be set by the board. Any specially called meeting shall be called by the chairperson or any three members of the board. The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions amended to include additions or deletions. Such written records shall be made available for the public to review. 
(c)  Members of the board shall receive not less than $100.00 per month compensation for service on the board. The chairperson shall receive not less than $200.00 per month compensation. On primary and election days and during the period of advance voting pursuant to subsection (b) of Code section 21-2-380 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-380(b)], the chairperson and members of the board shall be compensated at the rate of $10.00 per hour. The hours of service shall be certified to the commissioners by the chairperson of the board. 
Sec. 10. - Ability to contract. 
The board shall have the authority to contract with any municipality located within Coffee County for the holding by the board of any primary or election to be conducted within such municipality. 
Sec. 11. - Elections supervisor. 
(a)  The board shall, with the approval of the commissioners, appoint an elections supervisor who shall generally supervise, direct, and control the administration of the affairs of the board pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board. The election supervisor shall not be a member of the board. The election supervisor shall be considered an employee of Coffee County and shall be entitled to the same benefits as other employees of Coffee County. The election supervisor shall be subject to all personnel and policy procedures of Coffee County. The election supervisor shall maintain regular office hours as directed by the governing authority of Coffee County. 
(b)  The supervisor of elections shall not be an active member of any political party or body. 
(c)  Upon indictment of any felony involving election fraud or moral turpitude, the election supervisor shall be terminated from the position as a matter of law. Such vacancy shall be filled by appointment of the board within ten business days following the occurrence of such vacancy. 
(d)  The board is authorized, with the approval of the commissioners, to employ additional clerical assistants as needed to carry out the duties and functions of the board. All such clerical assistants shall be considered to be employees of Coffee County and shall be entitled to the same benefits as other employees of Coffee County. Any clerical assistants shall be subject to all personnel and policy procedures of Coffee County. Upon indictment of any felony involving election fraud or moral turpitude, a clerical assistant shall resign or be terminated from his or her position. 
Sec. 12. - Compensation. 
Compensation for the members of the board, election superintendent, clerical assistants, and other employees shall be fixed by the board of commissioners in accordance with the provisions of this Act. Such compensation shall be paid wholly from county funds. 
Sec. 13. - Offices, supplies, and equipment. 
(a)  The Board of Commissioners of Coffee County shall provide the board with such proper and suitable offices, equipment, materials, and supplies and with such clerical assistance and other employees as the Board of Commissioners of Coffee County deems appropriate. 
(b)  The commissioners shall also cause periodic audits to be made of the board and its offices. 
Sec. 14. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval for purposes of making initial appointments to the board only. This Act shall become fully effective on July 1, 2005. Upon this Act becoming fully effective, the superintendent of elections of Coffee County and the board of registrars of Coffee County shall be relieved of all powers and duties to which the board succeeds by the provisions of this Act and shall deliver to the board all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities pertaining to such powers and duties. 
Sec. 15. - Repealing clause. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BOARD OF EDUCATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1970 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 934), p. 2441, as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Any provisions regarding the notice to introduce legislation and the jurat have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Created. 
The Board of Education of Coffee County which existed on December 31, 2001, is continued in existence but on and after January 1, 2002, shall be constituted as provided in this Act. The Board of Education of Coffee County so continued and constituted, sometimes referred to in this Act as the 'board,' shall continue to have the powers, duties, rights, obligations, and liabilities of that board as existed immediately prior to January 1, 2002. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1356) § 1, p. 6856; 1994 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 657) § 1, p. 3672; 2001 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 2EX29) § 1, p. 755) 
Sec. 2. - Qualifications; terms. 
(a)  Those members of the Board of Education of Coffee County who are serving as such on December 31, 2001, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. On and after January 1, 2002, the Board of Education of Coffee County shall consist of five members all of whom shall be elected from education districts described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  For purposes of electing members of the board of education, the Coffee County School District is divided into five education districts. One member of the board shall be elected from each such district. The five education districts shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan Name: coffeewk3 Plan Type: LOCAL User: Buck Administrator: CNTY-COFFEE. 
(c)  When used in such attachment, the terms "Tract" and "BG" (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a BG heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the Coffee County School District which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the Coffee County School District which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any education district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1356) § 1, p. 6856; 1994 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 657) § 1, p. 3672; 2001 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 2EX29) § 1, p. 755) 
Editor's note— The attachment referred to as "Plan Name: coffeewk3 Plan Type: LOCAL User: Buck Administrator: CNTY-COFFEE," has been omitted from this printing at the discretion of the editor. It may be found at 2001 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 2EX28), p. 755, 757—762. 
Sec. 2A. - [Eligibility.] 
(a)  No person shall be a member of the board if that person is ineligible for such office pursuant to Code sections 45-2-1 [O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1] and 20-2-51 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 20-2-51] or any other general law applicable to that office. 
(b)  In order to be elected as a member of the board from an education district, a person must receive the number of votes cast as required by general law for that office in that district only. Only electors who are residents of that education district may vote for a member of the board for that district. At the time of qualifying for election as a member of the board from an education district, each candidate for such office shall specify the education district for which that person is a candidate. A person elected or appointed as a member of the board from an education district must continue to reside in that district during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
(2001 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 2EX29) § 1, p. 755) 
Sec. 2B. - [Initial terms and designations.] 
(a)  The first members of the reconstituted Board of Education of Coffee County shall be elected at the general election on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2002. Those members of the board elected thereto from Education Districts 1, 2, and 4 in November, 2002, shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 2006, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those members of the board elected thereto from Education Districts 3 and 5 in November, 2004, shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 2008, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those and all future successors to members of the board whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the time of the state-wide general election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and shall serve for terms of office of four years each. Members of the board shall serve for the terms of office specified therefor in this subsection and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  Education Districts 1 through 5, as they exist on December 31, 2001, shall continue to be designated as Education Districts 1 through 5, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and on and after January 1, 2002, such members of the board serving from those former education districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this section. 
(c)  All members of the board who are elected thereto shall be nominated and elected in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the Georgia Election Code. 
(2001 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 2EX29) § 1, p. 755) 
Sec. 3. - Vacancies. 
(a)  In the event a vacancy occurs on the board for any reason other than the expiration of the term of office, the remaining members of said board shall elect a person who shall serve for the unexpired term. 
(b)  At the board's first regularly scheduled meeting in January, the members of the board shall elect, by majority vote, one of their number to serve as chairperson for one year and until the subsequent election of a chairperson in the same manner as provided above and one of their number to serve as vice-chairperson for one year and until the subsequent election of a vice-chairperson in the same manner as provided above. A member shall be eligible to succeed himself or herself as a member of the board and also as chairperson and vice-chairperson of the board. 
(2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 675) § 1, p. 3949) 
Editor's note— 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 675) § 1, p. 3949 only amended subsection 3(b) of the original Act. 
Sec. 4. - Compensation. 
Beginning on the effective date of this section, the members of the Board of Education, including the chairman, shall each receive $500.00 per month as compensation for their services; and, as a cost-of-living adjustment, the amount of the monthly compensation received by such members shall increase in each year by a percentage equal to any cost-of-living adjustment provided to teachers under the jurisdiction of the board of education. 
(1984 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1015) § 1, p. 4483; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 174) § 1, p. 3954; 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 817) § 1, p. 5804) 
Sec. 5. - Present board. 
The board of education of Coffee County existing on the effective date of this Act shall continue in existence through December 31, 1970, but the terms of all members of such board shall expire at that time and such board shall stand abolished. The board created herein shall be the successor to such abolished board and shall be subject to all provisions of law relative to county boards of education except those provisions of law which are in conflict with the provisions of this Act. 
Sec. 6. - Superintendent. 
(a)  The board of education created herein shall appoint, by a majority vote of its members, the county school superintendent who shall serve at the pleasure of the board. The first superintendent appointed by said board shall be appointed at the first meeting of the board held in 1971. Such superintendent shall take office immediately after his appointment. The county school superintendent holding office on the effective date of this Act shall continue to serve the term of office for which he was elected and until his successor is appointed by the board as provided herein. In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of county school superintendent prior to the expiration of the present term of office, such vacancy shall be filled as provided herein. No election for county school superintendent by the people shall be held in 1972. 
(b)  The county school superintendent appointed by the board shall receive such compensation as the board shall provide by a majority vote of its members. The compensation of the superintendent shall be fixed by the board, and the amount of such compensation shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the board. The county school superintendent appointed by the board shall be subject to all provisions of law relative to county school superintendents except those provisions of law which are in conflict with the provisions of this Act. 
Sec. 7. - Referendum. 
Not more than 45 days after the date of the approval of this Act by the Governor, or after it otherwise becomes law, it shall be the duty of the ordinary [Probate Court Judge] of Coffee County to issue the call for an election for the purpose of submitting this Act to the voters of Coffee County for approval or rejection. The ordinary [Probate Court Judge] shall set the date of such election for a day not less than 30 nor more than 45 days after the date of the issuance of the call. The ordinary [Probate Court Judge] shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof, in the official organ of Coffee County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"For approval of the Act providing for a new board of education of Coffee County, the membership of said board, the election of the members of said board, the filling of vacancies on said board, the election of a chairman of said board, the appointment of a county school superintendent by said board to serve at the pleasure of said board, the compensation of said superintendent, and all matters relative to the foregoing." 
"Against approval of the Act providing for a new board of education of Coffee County, the membership of said board, the election of the members of said board, the filling of vacancies on said board, the election of a chairman of said board, the appointment of a county school superintendent by said board to serve at the pleasure of said board, the compensation of said superintendent, and all matters relative to the foregoing." 
All persons desiring to vote in favor of the Act shall vote for approval, and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote against approval. If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, it shall become of full force and effect, otherwise it shall be void and of no force and effect. The expense of such election shall be borne by Coffee County. It shall be the duty of the ordinary [Probate Court Judge] to hold and conduct such election. He shall hold such election under the same laws and rules and regulations as govern special elections, except as otherwise provided herein. It shall be the duty of the ordinary [Probate Court Judge] to canvass the returns and declare and certify the result of the election. It shall be his further duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
Editor's note— The county follows the procedures which were approved by referendum as described in § 7 of the original Act regarding membership of the board of education, the election of the members of the board of education, the filling of vacancies on the board of education, the election of a chairman of the board of education, the appointment of a county school superintendent by the board of education to serve at the pleasure of said board, the compensation of said superintendent, and all matters relative thereto. 
Sec. 8. - Repealing clause. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE IX. - DOUGLAS-COFFEE COUNTY INDUSTRIAL AUTHORITY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1959 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 273), p. 2801, as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Any provisions regarding the notice to introduce legislation and the jurat have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Title. 
This Act may be cited as the Douglas-Coffee County Industrial Authority. 
Sec. 2. - Created. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Douglas-Coffee County Industrial Authority" which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and by that name, style and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The Authority shall consist of seven members, as follows: Three members shall be appointed by the city commissioners of the City of Douglas and three members shall be appointed by the county commissioners of Coffee County. The seventh (7th) member shall be appointed by joint action of the commissioners of both the city and county upon the recommendation of the Coffee County Chamber of Commerce. In the event that [there be] no such chamber of commerce, the seventh (7th) member shall be appointed by joint action of the commissioners of the city and of the county. The terms of office of the members appointed by the city commissioners shall be the same as and run currently with the terms of office of such commissioners. The terms of office of the members appointed by the county commissioners shall be the same as and run currently with the office of such commissioners. The seventh (7th) member shall be the same as and run currently with the president of the aforesaid chamber of commerce. In the event that there be no such president, the term of the office of the seventh (7th) member shall be prescribed by joint action of the city and county commissioners. In the event any vacancy occurs in the county group, the county commissioners shall fill by appointment, such vacancy for the unexpired term. In the event a vacancy occurs in the city group, the city commissioners shall fill by appointment such vacancy for the unexpired term. In the event a vacancy occurs in the aforesaid seventh (7th) member the commissioners of both the city and county shall fill by appointment such vacancy for the unexpired term. The city and county commissioners may, in their discretion, request the chamber of commerce to submit additional names before making the appointment or any subsequent appointment to the membership to the Authority. If no recommendation is made within ten days after such request, the appointment be made without any recommendation. The members of the Authority shall elect among themselves a president, a vice-president and a secretary-treasurer, except that by a majority vote of the entire membership, they may elect a person as secretary-treasurer who is not a member of the authority. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(a)  The word "Authority" shall mean the 'Douglas-Coffee County Industrial Authority' created by this Act and by and under Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition of lands, properties and improvements for development, expansion and promotion of industry, commerce, agriculture, natural resources and vocational training; the construction of buildings and plants for the purpose of selling, leasing or renting such structures to private persons, firms or corporations. 
(c)  The term "cost of project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, easements, rights and franchises acquired, the cost of machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural and legal expenses, and plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and placing the same in operation. 
Sec. 4. - Contracts. 
The County of Coffee and the City of Douglas are expressly authorized to enter into contracts with the Authority as a public corporation. 
Sec. 5. - Quorum. 
Any five members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the ordinary business of the Authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the Authority must be approved by not less than five affirmative votes. 
Sec. 6. - Powers. 
The Authority shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same purpose. 
(b)  To acquire, hold and dispose of personal property; including the stock of other corporations, for its corporate purposes. 
(c)  To enter into contracts with the County of Coffee and the City of Douglas. 
(d)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions, and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or liens or easements therein or franchise necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of same in any manner the Authority deems to its best advantage. If the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall then be in the County of Coffee or the City of Douglas, the governing authorities of Coffee County and the City of Douglas are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, to the Authority. 
(e)  To appoint and select officers, agents, and employees including engineers, architects, builders, and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
(f)  To make contracts, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases and rentals and sale of projects, or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it erects or acquires. The County of Coffee and the City of Douglas are hereby expressly authorized and empowered to enter into agreements with the Authority for use by the Authority of funds collected by special tax levies by the county and city for development purposes. 
(g)  To construct, erect, acquire, own repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, self-liquidating or otherwise, located on property owned or leased by the Authority, and to pay the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue bond of the Authority or from any grant from the County of Coffee or City of Douglas, or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms or corporations, all of which the Authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(h)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds and such other instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing. 
(i)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public or private corporations, performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. 
(j)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this Act. 
(k)  To adopt, alter or repeal its own by-laws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the power granted it may be enjoyed, as the Authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(l)  To issue revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the Authority, and validate under and in accordance with the applicable provisions. 
(m)  To issue general obligation bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the Authority, such obligation bonds shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, 1897, (Ga. L. 1897, pp., 82-85), as amended. 
(n)  To acquire property through eminent domain for rights-of-way for roads, easements and utilities. 
(1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1024) § 1, p. 2602) 
Editor's note— 1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1024) § 1, p. 2602 added subsection 6(n) to the original Act. 
Sec. 7. - Bonds. 
All lands and improvements and personal property the title to which is vested in the Authority, and all debentures, notes, bonds and revenue bond issued by the Authority shall be exempt from State and local taxation. 
Sec. 8. - Debts. 
The Authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt against the State of Georgia, County of Coffee or the City of Douglas. 
Sec. 9. - Audits. 
The books and records of the Authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the Authority, by a competent auditor. The Authority shall furnish copies of said audit to the County of Coffee and the City of Douglas. 
Sec. 10. - Intent. 
This Act being for the purpose of developing and promoting the public good and the welfare of the County of Coffee and the City of Douglas and their inhabitants, shall be liberally constructed to effect the purposes hereof. 
Sec. 11. - Severability. 
The provisions of this Act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
Sec. 12. - Repealing clause. 
All laws or parts of laws in conflict with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed. 
Approval Date: Approved March 10, 1959. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Related Laws and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule power of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances, Coffee County, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Coffee County Code." 
(Code 2002, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following definitions and rules of construction shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners: 
Board of commissioners, board of county commissioners, commissioner or board. The term "board of commissioners," "board of county commissioners," "commissioner," or "board" means the board of county commissioners of Coffee County, Georgia. 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed to the bond, they shall be bound by the bond. 
Code. The term "Code" means this Code of Ordinances, Coffee County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. Whenever the term "county," "the county" or "this county" is used, it refers to Coffee County, Georgia. 
County administrator. The term "county administrator" means the county administrator of Coffee County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the county, whether it shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the county to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Magistrate court. The term "magistrate court" means the magistrate court of Coffee County, Georgia. 
Month, year. The terms "month" and "year" mean calendar month and calendar year, unless otherwise provided. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the term "of Coffee County" were added to such name or title. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in the trade or with reference to the subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and," and the word "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the county, which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the board of commissioners, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the county clerk, where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription includes the mark of all illiterate or infirmed persons. 
State. Whenever the term "state," "the state" or "this state" is used, it refers to the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" includes streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the county, unless otherwise provided. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory of this Code, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense includes the future. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 2002, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations of this Code and not as new enactments. 
(Code 2002, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections, history notes and editor's notes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 2002, § 1-4) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal takes effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 2002, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 2002, § 1-6) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary or benefits of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)  Any rezoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
(16)  Any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes. 
(17)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or creating a hospital authority. 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or imposing any municipal rates, charges or fees for the county, that are not otherwise enumerated in this Code. 
(19)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or modifying rules or regulations pertaining to planning, zoning, subdivisions, and/or land use development not otherwise included or covered by the provisions of this Code. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this Code; and all such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 2002, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected by the repeal. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Coffee County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That The Code of Ordinances, Coffee County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 2002, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared whenever authorized or directed by the county. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; 
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 2002, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2002, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Liability for violations by corporations or other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by the corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where the violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
(Code 2002, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The clerk of the superior court and state court of the county shall impose and collect, in addition to the fine set by the sentencing court, if any, an additional amount equal to ten percent of the fine as set by the court; and by the tenth day of the month following the month in which any fine is collected, the clerk shall pay over to the board of commissioners a sum equal to ten percent of such collected fines, which sum shall be deposited by the board of commissioners into an account to be known as the county jail fund. 
(d)  All persons receiving bonds in traffic and criminal cases within the county, including those officers who are authorized to receive bond by any municipality within the county which has contracted with the county for the use of the county jail as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-21-92, shall take bond with security in an amount equal to the bond originally set plus ten percent and shall, by the tenth day of the month after the month in which any such bond posted, pay over to the board of commissioners an amount equal to ten percent of the amount collected as a result of such bond forfeitures, which sum shall be deposited by the board of commissioners into an account to be known as the county jail fund. 
(e)  The board of commissioners shall seek the cooperation of the various municipalities located within the county in maximizing the revenues which may be generated from the imposition of such additional fines and bonds. 
(f)  The board of commissioners shall seek the cooperation of the county probation division of the state department of corrections in maximizing the amounts of such fines which are actually collected. 
(Code 2002, § 1-12; Res. of 1-2-1990) 
State Law reference— Additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum sentences and fines which may be imposed for violation of municipal ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I; county officers, election, term, compensation, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; county government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; matters over which governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— By agreements effective July 1, 1998, the board of commissioners and the cities of Ambrose, Nicholls, Broxton, and Douglas have implemented a service delivery strategy dispute resolution process for resolving land use disputes over annexation. Official copies of the agreement are on file in the office of the county clerk. 

Sec. 2-19. - Meetings. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Monday at 9:30 a.m., unless otherwise ordered by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Meetings shall be held in the board of commissioners' meeting room, Coffee County Courthouse, Douglas, Georgia. 
(Code 2002, § 2-31) 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-20. - Parliamentary procedure. 
The proceedings at the meetings of the board of commissioners shall be generally governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, so far as applicable and not inconsistent with the special rules of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2002, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-21. - Agenda. 
There shall be a written agenda prepared prior to each board of commissioners meeting. Persons who desire to address the board of commissioners at a meeting shall be required to notify the county clerk and indicate the subject they intend to address by noon on the Thursday preceding the next meeting. Each person who desires to address the board of commissioners shall be limited in his remarks to five minutes duration. The presiding officer retains discretion to recognize any person attending a meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2002, § 2-33) 
Secs. 2-22—2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14); civil service system for county employees authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21; expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11.1; county manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; Georgia municipal employees benefit system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-46. - Restricting the number of family members employed by county. 
The number of persons from the immediate family of any person, or spouse of a person, who is already employed by any department of the county, shall be limited to one. 
(Res. of 1-18-1982) 
Sec. 2-47. - Establishment of civil service system; manual. 
(a)  A civil service system as authorized and contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21 is established for the employees of the county. The system shall cover all employees of the county except: 
(1)  Elected officials; 
(2)  Persons temporarily employed in a professional or scientific capacity or appointed for a specified term; 
(3)  Employees of any board, commission, or authority of the county; and 
(4)  Such other employees as may be excluded from coverage under the merit system as provided by appropriate amendment to this section. 
(b)  The civil service system shall be governed by a manual of personnel policies as adopted by the board of commissioners; and the policies shall be administered by the county administrator, as the chief executive officer of the county, with the cooperation of the participating boards, commissions and constitutional officers. 
(c)  The manual of personnel policies is adopted for the covered employees of the county. The participating independent appointing authorities have admitted their cooperation and covered position by signature on the manual. The personnel policies are subject to amendment, as the need arises, by the board of commissioners with the participation of the participating boards and constitutional officers. 
(Code 2002, § 2-71; Res. of 9-6-1994, §§ 1—3) 
Editor's note— An official copy of the manual of personnel policies is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Sec. 2-48. - Pension plan for county employees. 
(a)  The county is desirous of providing an amended pension plan for its employees, by participating in the Association County Commissioners of Georgia (ACCG) Restated Pension Plan. 
(b)  The ACCG provides pension plan services. 
(c)  The board of commissioners has concluded it is in the best interest of the county in open session that the county executes an adoption agreement which will cover the county's participation in the master ACCG Pension Trust, effective January 1, 1995. 
(Code 2002, § 2-72; Res. of 2-6-1995) 
Editor's note— Official copies of the referenced pension plan are on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Sec. 2-49. - Exclusion of certain election officials from retirement plan. 
(a)  Officials of the county entered into a plan and agreement with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia for extending to its employees the insurance system established by title II of the Social Security Act. 
(b)  The original agreement included the services of election officials and election workers. 
(c)  It is at this time the desire of the board of commissioners to exclude the services performed by election officials or election workers for each calendar year prior to the year 2000 in which the remuneration paid for such services is less than $1,000.00, and for each year after 1999 in which the remuneration paid is less than the adjusted amount, as described below, beginning with services performed in the year this modification was mailed or delivered by other means to the commissioner. The $1,000.00 limit on the excludable amount of remuneration paid in a calendar year for the services specified in this modification will be subject to adjustment for calendar years after 1999 to reflect changes in wages in the economy without any further modification of the agreement, with respect to such services performed during such calendar years, in accordance with section 218(c)(8)(B) of the Social Security Act. 
(d)  The contract approved and accepted by the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia is amended to exclude the services referred to in this section, effective January 1, 1996. 
(Code 2002, § 2-73; Ord. of 3-18-1996) 
Editor's note— Official copies of the referenced plan and agreement are on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Sec. 2-50. - Deferred compensation plan. 
The board of commissioners adopts the National Association of Counties Deferred Compensation Program and establishes the County of Coffee Deferred Compensation Plan for the voluntary participation of all eligible county employees, elected officials and independent contractors. 
(Code 2002, § 2-74; Res. of 7-20-1992) 
Editor's note— An official copy of the deferred compensation plan is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Sec. 2-51. - Workers' compensation coverage. 
The board of commissioners, sheriff, probate judge, clerk of court, tax commissioner, and volunteer firemen of the county shall be covered under the Association County Commissioners of Georgia-Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their elected duties the board of commissioners, sheriff, probate judge, clerk of court, tax commissioner, and volunteer firemen of the county shall be covered under the workers' compensation laws of the state as stated in O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1. 
(Code 2002, § 2-75; Res. of 3-2-1998, § I) 
Secs. 2-52—2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-76. - Position created. 
The position of county administrator is created and established. 
(Code 2002, § 2-101; Res. of 4-6-1992) 
Sec. 2-77. - Appointment; restrictions. 
The county administrator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. No member of the board of commissioners shall be appointed county administrator or acting county administrator during the term of office for which he was elected or for a period of one year thereafter. 
(Code 2002, § 2-102; Res. of 4-6-1992) 
Sec. 2-78. - Qualifications. 
(a)  The county administrator shall be chosen by the board of commissioners solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of his office as set forth in this division. 
(b)  The minimum qualifications for the county administrator shall be a baccalaureate degree from a creditable college or university in a course of study related to the occupational field and experience sufficient to thoroughly understand the diverse objects and functions of the subunits in the division/department in order to direct and coordinate work within the division/department, usually, but not definitely, interpreted to require three to five years of related experience. 
(Code 2002, § 2-103; Res. of 4-6-1992; Res. No. 2007-03, 5-11-2007) 
Sec. 2-79. - Term; suspension and removal; public hearing. 
(a)  The county administrator shall be appointed for a term of not less than one year. The board of commissioners may in their discretion enter into an employment contract with any prospective or current county administrator in order to secure his employment. The terms and duration of that contract shall be in the sole discretion of the board of commissioners but shall not exceed a period of four years. In the event that a county administrator has been an employee for a period of four years, no matter what the terms of the contract, it shall be incumbent on the board of commissioners to re-evaluate the term of any existing agreement and then re-negotiate and re-execute the terms of the contract if continued employment of the county administrator is desired by the board. 
(b)  During an appointed term, the county administrator shall be subject to suspension or removal from office at any time by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. Upon receiving a notice of suspension or removal, the county administrator shall be given a written statement of the reasons for such action. He may within five days from receipt of the notice request a public hearing before the board of commissioners, and such request shall be filed with the board. Upon receipt of such request, a hearing shall be set not earlier than ten days, nor later than 15 days, from the date of such request. Pending such hearing, and until final action has been taken, the county administrator may be suspended from office and all of his duties performed by some other person designated by the board of commissioners to perform such duties. Following the appeal hearing, the action of the board of commissioners to suspend or remove the county administrator shall be by majority vote and shall be final. 
(Code 2002, § 2-104; Res. of 4-6-1992; Res. No. 2007-03, 5-11-2007) 
Sec. 2-80. - Compensation as fixed. 
The county administrator shall be paid an annual salary to be fixed by the board of commissioners, and there shall be no reduction of salary during his term of office. The county may provide the county administrator access to and participation in those benefits it deems in its sole discretion necessary to secure the employment of a qualified county administrator. The county administrator shall not otherwise be afforded be due process rights under the county's personnel policy and shall have only those rights provided by ordinance. 
(Code 2002, § 2-105; Res. of 4-6-1992; Res. No. 2007-03, 5-11-2007) 
Sec. 2-81. - Duties. 
The county administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the county and head of the administrative branch of county government. He shall be responsible to the board of commissioners for the proper administration of all affairs of the county, except as otherwise provided by law; and it shall be his duty to: 
(1)  Appoint, and when in his discretion the welfare of the county requires it, suspend, discharge, transfer or remove all employees for whom the board is responsible, except the county attorney, the county auditor, and the chief of the county police, if any, who shall be appointed directly by the board; 
(2)  See that all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the board and all laws of the state subject to enforcement by him or by officers or department heads subject to his direction and supervision are faithfully executed; 
(3)  Exercise control over all departments or divisions of the county which the board previously exercised, or that may be created, and to direct and supervise the administration of all county offices and specifically the construction, maintenance and operation of all county roads, bridges, drains, buildings and other public works, and the care and maintenance of all real and personal property owned by the county; 
(4)  Attend all meetings of the board, with the right to take part in the discussions; but having no vote. The county administrator shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings; 
(5)  Prepare and submit to the board the annual budget and capital program and to execute the budget and capital program adopted by the board, approving all disbursements and expenditures as budgeted and/or authorized by the board; 
(6)  Examine regularly at periods fixed by the board the accounts, records and operations of every county board, commission, department, office and agency which received appropriations from the board: 
a.  Make regular monthly reports to the board on county fiscal and other affairs; 
b.  Keep the board fully advised on the financial conditions and future needs of the county; and 
c.  Make such recommendations on county affairs as he deems necessary for the efficient operation of the county; 
(7)  Submit to the board at the end of each fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the county for the preceding year; 
(8)  Confer and advise with all other elected or appointed officials of the county who are not under the immediate control of the board, but who receive financial report from the board; 
(9)  Fix the salaries of all officers and employees of the county whom he has the right to appoint, subject, however, to the supervision, control, approval or disapproval by the board; 
(10)  Devote his entire time to the affairs of his office; and 
(11)  Perform such other duties as may be required of him by the board. 
(Code 2002, § 2-106; Res. of 4-6-1992) 
Sec. 2-82. - Designation as purchasing agent; limitations. 
The county administrator shall be the chief purchasing agent for the county, and may delegate purchasing authority to department heads subject to limitations approved by the county board of commissioners. 
(Code 2002, § 2-107; Res. of 4-6-1992; Res. No. 2007-03, 5-11-2007) 
Sec. 2-83. - Political activity. 
The county administrator shall not engage in or be concerned with any local partisan politics or any local political campaign. 
(Res. of 4-6-1992; Res. No. 2007-03, 5-11-2007) 
Secs. 2-84—2-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE POLICY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-110. - Policy statement. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the board of commissioners that its workplace shall be drug-free in compliance with the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (PL 100-690, title V, subtitle D). This publication provides details of this policy, a statement on dangers of drugs in the workplace, sources of information and assistance, and is the basis of a form each employee is required to sign assuring compliance. 
(b)  It is the policy of the board of commissioners that no employee shall engage in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or the use of a controlled substance in the workplace of county government. Controlled substances are those described in schedules I through V, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-25—16-13-29. 
(c)  The purpose of this division is to avoid the dangers of drugs in the workplace as described further in this division. Another purpose is to advise employees of available sources of counseling, rehabilitation and employee assistance. 
(d)  Each employee is instructed that he shall notify the county administrator within five days of any criminal drug statute conviction for a violation in the workplace. Within 30 days, the county administrator must take action as appropriate. 
(e)  Any employee violating the terms of this division is subject to disciplinary action as prescribed in the county personnel policy. Employees found to be abusing drugs, but not convicted of any drug statute violation, will be subject to progressive discipline and required to satisfactorily participate in a rehabilitation program approved for such purpose at the employee's expense. 
(Code 2002, § 2-131) 
Sec. 2-111. - Rationale. 
(a)  Drug abuse has an effect on many things, including absenteeism, productivity, number of health and accident claims, morale of other workers, and employee turnover. The cost of drug abuse has been currently estimated at more than $10,000,000,000.00 per year. Problem drinking costs the country about $33,000,000,000.00 per year. 
(b)  Beneath the statistics (lost time, money, and productivity) is a great deal of human suffering. People who abuse chemicals tend to be very erratic in their behavior toward others. They'll be warm and pleasant one moment, vicious and cruel the next. Their empathy becomes increasingly impaired the more preoccupied they become by their drug of choice. This is intensely painful to family members and particularly destructive to children in their formative years. 
(c)  Problem drinkers and drug abusers also tend to lose interest in things they once loved and enjoyed. Self-hatred builds because, at some level, these people realize they are failing themselves and their families. They act contrary to their own moral beliefs, and this increases their pain. 
(d)  Financial and legal troubles are common in families with alcohol and drug abusers. Abusers earn less money because of lost hours at work, and their overall earning power is adversely affected. What money is left is frequently spent unwisely, much of it going to buy drinks or drugs. 
(Code 2002, § 2-132) 
Sec. 2-112. - Drugs with potential for abuse. 
(a)  Barbiturates (Nembutal, Seconal, Amytal, Tuinal, etc.), are central nervous system depressants that are highly addictive both mentally and physically; they have a high potential for causing overdose reactions and severe and dangerous withdrawal complications. 
(b)  Minor tranquilizers (Librium, Valium, etc.), have an effect similar to barbiturates and alcohol but are less powerful in their effect and less likely to produce physical and psychological dependency, although psychological dependency is still very common among users. 
(c)  Narcotics (opium, morphine, heroin) act upon the central nervous system and parasympathetic nervous system to reduce pain, induce sleep, and give a general calming effect. They are very physically and psychologically addicting; and because of the haphazard manner in which they are manufactured and sold, they frequently are used in excess. 
(d)  Stimulants (amphetamines, cocaine) are drugs that affect the central nervous system, causing increased alertness and activity and bringing on a feeling of confidence and well-being. They cause psychological dependency, but their ability to cause actual physical dependency is not clear. They can have negative psychological effects when overused. 
(e)  Hallucinogens (LSD, mescaline, psilocybine, PCP, etc.), act upon the central nervous system and produce changes in perception with accompanying excitement to the user. They are not likely to cause psychological or physical dependency. They are somewhat unreliable in their effect and may cause extreme anxiety reactions or panic states in some users. 
(f)  Marijuana's active ingredient is THC, which is sometimes classified as an hallucinogen. The actual amount of this chemical in marijuana is quite low, however, and hallucinations are rare. It generally has an intoxicating effect and may heighten sensory perception, especially auditory perception. There are almost no observable physical effects due to marijuana use. It can produce a psychological dependence somewhat similar to caffeine and has no potential for physical dependence. 
(g)  Volatile substances (gasoline, paint thinner, lighter fluid, airplane glues, etc.), act on the central nervous system and produce an intoxicating effect. They can be extremely dangerous, causing either brain damage or death from overdose. 
(h)  Caffeine and nicotine can also be described as drugs. Their physical effects are well documented and they are both psychologically addicting. Nicotine can be physically addicting to some people. This viewpoint is such a radical departure from popular opinion, however, that it would probably be more distracting than helpful to include it in discussions of employee assistance programs. 
(i)  If an employee has a drug problem, the county mental health in Douglas, Georgia, can help through personal counseling and family counseling. Assistance is available through the Waycross Community Mental Health Center in Waycross, Georgia, and other private treatment centers that may be available in the community. 
(Code 2002, § 2-133) 
Sec. 2-113. - Notification of policy. 
All employees shall be notified in writing of the policy outlined in this article and as a condition of employment agree to abide by the drug-free workplace policy. Any violation of this division by an employee will result in disciplinary action as prescribed in the manual of personnel policies. 
(Code 2002, § 2-134) 
Secs. 2-114—2-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-140—2-162. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JOINT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-163. - Need declared. 
It is determined and declared to be a need for a joint development authority to function in both Atkinson County and Coffee County. 
(Code 2002, § 2-211; Res. of 7-18-1994) 
Sec. 2-164. - Created. 
There is created and activated in Atkinson County and Coffee County a public body corporate and politic known as the "Atkinson County-Coffee County Joint Development Authority" as provided in the development authority's law. 
(Code 2002, § 2-212; Res. of 7-18-1994) 
Sec. 2-165. - Board of directors. 
The number of members of the joint development authority, which members will comprise the board of directors of the authority, shall be eight, four of whom shall be appointed by the Atkinson County Commission and four of whom shall be appointed by the Coffee County Commission. 
(Code 2002, § 2-213; Res. of 7-18-1994) 
Sec. 2-166. - Residency requirements. 
The residency requirements of the members of the joint development authority shall be that each must be a resident of the county of the commission that appointed such members. 
(Code 2002, § 2-214; Res. of 7-18-1994) 
Sec. 2-167. - Terms of office. 
(a)  The terms of office of the members of the joint development authority shall be four years. 
(b)  If the number of members of the authority is ever increased as provided by law, the term of any such additional members shall be four years. 
(c)  If at the end of any term of office of any member a successor has not been elected, such member whose term has expired shall continue to hold office until his successor is so elected. 
(d)  Terms of office shall be deemed to have commenced as of January 1, 1994. 
(Code 2002, § 2-215; Res. of 7-18-1994) 
Sec. 2-168. - Powers, duties. 
The members of the board of directors elected in this division representing Coffee County and those representing Atkinson County shall organize as a board of directors, and such board of directors shall carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the development authority's law. 
(Code 2002, § 2-216; Res. of 7-18-1994) 
Sec. 2-169. - Affect of actions. 
The actions taken by the Coffee County Commission as specified in this division is not intended in any way to affect and shall not affect any public corporation, industrial development or payroll authority previously created by legislative act or constitutional amendment, including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organization, powers or functions. 
(Code 2002, § 2-217; Res. of 7-18-1994) 
Secs. 2-170—2-191. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II; county finance generally and local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-192. - Fiscal year. 
The county's fiscal year shall commence on January 1 and conclude on December 31. 
Secs. 2-193—2-222. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COUNTY PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-223. - Affixing decals or identification markers on county vehicles; applicable exemptions. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-80-20, the following motor vehicles owned or leased by Coffee County shall not be marked with a decal or identification marker: 
(1)  Any vehicle used for law enforcement purposes; 
(2)  Any vehicle used for prosecution purposes; 
(3)  Any vehicle under procured under lease purchase; 
(4)  Any vehicle used for administrative purposes by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 6-18-2001) 
Chapter 6 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Governing authority has power to enact legislation to restrict operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses may be curtailed. It is recognized that such regulation cannot in a de facto manner approach prohibition; otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. This chapter represents a balancing of competing interest as to adult entertainment establishments: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and the patrons thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § I) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floorspace, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishments means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishments includes, but is not limited to, adult dancing establishments, adult entertainment food establishments, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater, adult video store, erotic dance establishment, escort bureau or introduction services, and other business or establishment offering or advertising such services. 
Adult entertainment food establishments means a business establishment or restaurant offering the preparation of food, the serving of food, or the selling of food by personnel displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. The term "adult entertainment food establishments" includes any such business or establishment publically advertising as preparing food, serving food, or selling food by such personnel. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent of its total floorspace, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Bathhouse and massage parlor means an establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and in which services offered include some forms of physical contact between employee and patron or between patrons in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater, restaurant or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go-dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means a person who has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The county may also take into account such other facts as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified anatomical areas includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely, opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately about the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anal intercourse, buggery, rimming, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism, or zooerasty. 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation. 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain. 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § II) 
Secs. 6-3—6-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 6-23. - Specific requirements. 
(a)  License. No person shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment or any other adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Gross receipts report. No later than January 1 of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  List of all employees. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed. 
(d)  Dancers or entertainers. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer or entertainer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed as such pursuant to this article. 
(e)  Patrons. No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted in an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  Hours. An erotic dance establishment or any other adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on Christmas day. 
(g)  Intoxicating liquor or controlled substances. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall service, sell, distribute or permit the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  Display of license and permit. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses and permits required by this article. 
(i)  Dancing platform. In erotic dance establishment all dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(j)  Proximity of dancers to patrons. No dancing shall occur closer than five feet to any patron in an erotic dance establishment. 
(k)  Touching of employees by patrons or patron by employees. No erotic dancer or any employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall be permitted to fondle, caress, or touch any dancer. 
(l)  Gratuities to dancers or entertainers. No patron shall directly or through a third party pay or give any gratuity, money or otherwise, to any erotic dancer or any person employed as an adult entertainer. 
(m)  Soliciting by dancers or entertainers prohibited. No erotic dancer or any person employed as an adult entertainer shall solicit in any manner any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  Lighting of establishment. All areas of any establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. The term "full lighting" shall mean illumination equal to, or exceeding 3 5/10 footcandles per square foot. 
(o)  Invalidity of certain portions of section. If any portion or subsection of this section or its applications to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § III) 
Sec. 6-24. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. Neither shall any person employed in an adult entertainment establishment engage in the specified sexual activities as defined in section 6-2. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § IV) 
Sec. 6-25. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the county any of the adult entertainment establishment activities defined in this article without a permit to do so. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § V) 
Sec. 6-26. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, bathhouse, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license, or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § VI) 
Sec. 6-27. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § VII) 
Sec. 6-28. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer to sell, or to sell, barter or give to any minor, or anyone knowingly representing a minor, any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § VIII) 
Sec. 6-29. - Location. 
Adult entertainment establishments or any business offering such services shall be allowed only within areas zoned as B-HC, Business, highway commercial district (or comparative district) of the most recent zoning ordinances. No adult entertainment establishments or any business offering such services hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned for or used for residential uses or purposes. 
(2)  Within 2,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building or service, library, civic center, public park or playground is located. 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment, any business offering such services, or any establishment offering regulated services. 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary; designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § IX) 
Sec. 6-30. - Employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony, or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee, shall not thereafter work in any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. It is not the intent of the county to usurp the power and right of the establishment's employer to hire and fire employees. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the licensing officer of his intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and shall receive approval of such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the licensing officer may require, including a set of fingerprints, on regular county or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the licensing officer for a hearing. The decision of the licensing officer after hearing may be appealed to the county commission which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the county, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the county shall subject an employee to suspension, the revocation of license of the establishment, and the owner to arrest or a fine. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § X) 
Secs. 6-31—6-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - APPLICATION AND PERMITTING 

Sec. 6-49. - Application for permit. 
Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the county commission or its designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the county commission, shall be paid to the county clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The county clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the county commission or its designated representative administrator at the time such application is submitted. The application for permit does not authorize the engagement in, operation of, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment prior to full approval. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XI) 
Sec. 6-50. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name of the applicant and proof that the applicant is a resident of the county. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(5)  A copy of the applicant's driving license. 
(6)  A recent (within the last six months) photograph of the applicant. 
(7)  A five-year business, occupation or employment history of the applicant beginning immediately preceding the date of application including business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
(8)  Business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, county, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit suspended or revoked. 
(9)  Any, and all, convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and address of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified, as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partner, of all officers, of all stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, or directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(14)  If the applicant, any partner or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, has ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(15)  The county shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant. 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or to individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a violation of this Code involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copy of those documents giving such legal right. 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated. 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual. 
b.  If by a partnership, the manager or general partner. 
c.  If a corporation, the president of the corporation. 
d.  If any other organization or association, the chief administrative officer. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XII) 
Sec. 6-51. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the county commission and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the county commission, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XIII) 
Sec. 6-52. - Application investigation. 
The county shall have 30 days, or longer if needed, to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the county commission may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the abovementioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this county or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)  The applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined in section 6-2 openly occur. 
(10)  On the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person to act as a manager on the premises at all times in which the business is open. 
(11)  The proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder. 
(12)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, county, state or the United States. 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the county to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XIV) 
Sec. 6-53. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who is not a citizen of the county. 
(2)  An applicant who has not paid all the required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(3)  Any person who is not of good moral character as defined by any prior arrests or convictions. 
(4)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein is not of good moral character. 
(6)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. 
(7)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the county. 
(b)  Should there be, in the opinion of the county commission, a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the county, no new licenses shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XV) 
Sec. 6-54. - Permit information. 
(a)  Denial, appeal. If the county, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the county clerk of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the county clerk. The county clerk shall then, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the county commission. 
(b)  Renewal. Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittee continues to meet the requirements set out in this article. The yearly renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the county commission. 
(c)  Nontransferable. No permit for an adult entertainment establishment may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the county, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XVI) 
Sec. 6-55. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the county commission, has been deposited with the county and approval has been obtained from the county commission or its designated representative and the Douglas-Coffee County Zoning Department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business, as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XVII) 
Sec. 6-56. - Appeal information. 
(a)  Procedure for appeal. The procedure for appeal of an adverse determination is as follows: 
(1)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the county clerk. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the county commission and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the commission and the name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting to occur not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for commission action. 
(b)  Choice of actions by commission; publication of notice by clerk. When an appeal is placed on the commission agenda, the commission may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the county clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. 
The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XVIII) 
Sec. 6-57. - County commission hearing. 
(a)  Commission actions. Whenever the county clerk has scheduled an appeal before the county commission, at the time and date set therefor, the commission shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from any interested parties and from county staff. The county commission may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the county commission shall be final. 
(b)  Powers of hearing officer. The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(c)  Rules of evidence. The county commission and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(d)  Report of the hearing officer. 
(1)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the commission. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the county clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the county clerk, with additional copies furnished the county commission and the county sheriff. 
(2)  The county clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(e)  Hearing, action by commission. The commission may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the commission does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XIX) 
Secs. 6-58—6-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 6-88. - Violations. 
(a)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-12. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(b)  Unlawful operation declared nuisance. Any adult entertainment establishment originated, operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to, or in lieu of, prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief, will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment, contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XX) 
Secs. 6-89—6-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PREMISES 

Sec. 6-109. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This action shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XXI) 
Sec. 6-110. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a week and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Such premises shall be subject to inspection by an agent of the county commission at any time without prior notification. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XXI) 
Sec. 6-111. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
(a)  A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his finding of a violation of this chapter resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(b)  A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a public health or public safety nuisance by the county health department or the sheriff's office. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1999, § XXII) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-4, Arts. I—IX, adopted Nov. 3, 2014, amended Ch. 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 10, §§ 10-1, 10-2, 10-23—10-32, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Res. of 9-18-1967, §§ I—IX; Ord. of 3-16-1987; Res. of 12-21-1992. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; county governing authority given power to regulate alcoholic beverages permitting and licensing, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 et seq., and 3-5-80 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of wine, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-40 et seq., and 3-6-60 et seq.; local government may authorize issuance of license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises where sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Coffee County Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. I, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol shall mean alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage shall mean all consumable alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Adult shall mean any individual 21 years of age or older. 
Board of commissioners or board shall mean the Board of Commissioners of Coffee County, Georgia. 
Bona fide nonprofit civic organization shall mean an entity which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of subsections (c), (d), or (e) of U.S.C. Section 501. 
Brownbagging shall mean bringing onto and/or consuming upon any premises alcoholic beverages not lawfully purchased upon such premises. 
Brownbagging establishment shall mean any business, commercial establishment, or other facility or location upon which the owner, lessee, operator, or their respective employees, agents, or representatives thereof allow, facilitate, permit, or participate in brownbagging upon its premises. 
County shall mean Coffee County, Georgia. 
County administrator shall mean the County Administrator of Coffee County, Georgia. 
Department of revenue or department shall mean the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
Distilled spirits shall mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Establishment shall mean any physical location involving the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages in unincorporated Coffee County. 
Fortified wine shall mean any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
His, her, he, she, it, they, them, and their shall, as the context may require, include any other gender and the singular or the plural, for a proper reading. 
License shall mean a license granted under this chapter to a licensee for the operation of an establishment in unincorporated Coffee County 
Licensee shall mean the person to whom a particular valid license has been granted under this chapter. 
Licensor shall mean the board of commissioners. 
Malt beverage shall mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Minor shall mean any individual under 21 years of age. 
O.C.G.A. shall mean the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
Premises shall mean and include without limitation all or any portion of all buildings, structures, porches, decks, patios, and other improvements, together with all grounds, lawns, gardens, sidewalks, parking lots, and other outdoor areas, of or upon a property or location. 
Private club means a nonprofit organization which is organized under state law which meets each of the following requirements: 
(1)  Has either a tax exempt status under section 501 of the United States Internal Revenue Code or operates pursuant to a charter from a state or national parent organization which has such tax exempt status; 
(2)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for an alcoholic beverage license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(3)  Has at least 50 members paying dues on a regular periodic basis; 
(4)  Is organized and operated exclusively for the pleasure and recreation of its members and their guests or for other nonprofit purposes; 
(5)  Has facilities which are available for use only by the membership thereof and their guests and not by the general public; 
(6)  Owns, rents or leases a building or space within a building for facilities for the use of its members and their guests; 
(7)  Maintains kitchen and dining room space, equipment and items necessary to appropriately provide food service of full course meals for its members and their guests; 
(8)  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for the preparation and service of meals for its members and their guests; 
(9)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits, beyond a fixed salary, from the sale of alcoholic beverages to the club or to its members or their guests; and 
(10)  Has such licenses as are required for the operation thereof. 
Private event shall mean a specific social, business, fraternal, or recreational event for which an entire building, room, hall or area, indoors or out of doors, is leased, rented, reserved, or otherwise obtained in advance by a person, entity, club, or other group, and at which attendance is limited to persons who are in advance specifically designated. A private event does not include an event to which the general public is invited or at which members of the general public are allowed to attend, whether or not an admission fee, cover charge, or minimum purchase is charged. 
Restaurant means a business kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served for a period of at least five hours per day on at least three days per week with the exception of (i) holidays, (ii) vacations not exceeding two weeks duration, and (iii) periods of redecorating not exceeding 30 calendar days duration except to the extent extended by the board of commissioners in its discretion upon request therefor; and which meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Meets all health and sanitation requirements for food service establishments required under applicable federal, state and local laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations; 
(2)  Maintains upon the premises thereof in operative condition cooking and kitchen facilities and equipment appropriate to accommodate the preparation of meals for 50 food service customers at one time; 
(3)  Maintains upon the premises thereof seating facilities, at booths or tables designed for food service, sufficient for at least 50 food service customers at one time, not including seating provided by counters and stools, with booths and tables for purposes hereof being large enough to adequately accommodate at least two place settings of cutlery and dishes; 
(4)  Maintains at all times such additional facilities, equipment and items as well as employees as shall be necessary for the cooking, preparation and service of meals for consumption at tables or booths located upon the premises for at least 50 food service customers at one time; 
(5)  Is at all times during the hours of operation thereof prepared to serve full course meals with substantial entrees from a substantial variety of culinary choices, or substantial substitutes therefor, chosen by food service customers from a printed menu available to all food service customers at prices which are competitive with other restaurants in the community whether or not such other restaurants engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages; and 
(6)  Derives at least 50 percent of its total gross food and beverage sales from the sale of full course meals prepared, served and consumed upon the premises thereof. 
Retail consumption dealer shall mean any person who sells any alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises where sold at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retailer or retail dealer shall mean any person who sells any alcoholic beverage in unbroken packages for consumption off of the premises where sold at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Social host party, gathering, or event shall mean a group or gathering of three or more individuals at least two of whom are minors who have assembled or are assembling for any party, social occasion, or social activity. 
State shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer shall mean any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine shall mean any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. III, § 3-1, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-3. - Penalties. 
In addition to the other provisions of this chapter, violations of this chapter may be cited to the Coffee County Magistrate Court which may impose penalties for such violations in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. Article 4, Chapter 10, Title 15 governing violations of county ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. IX, 11-3-2014) 
Secs. 10-4—10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALE OR DISTRIBUTION IN UNINCORPORATED AREA OF COUNTY; LICENSE A PRIVILEGE; STATE LICENSE REQUIRED 

Sec. 10-21. - License required. 
No malt beverage, wine, distilled spirits, or any other alcoholic beverage(s) shall be sold or distributed at wholesale or at retail for consumption either on or off the premises where sold in the unincorporated area of the county except under an appropriate license granted by the board of commissioners upon the terms and conditions provided in this chapter and then only for the particular alcoholic beverage and manner of distribution and/or sale specified in such license and only at the establishment specified in such license. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. II, § 2-1, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-22. - License a privilege; license nontransferable. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be a mere grant of a privilege to carry on the licensed activity during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this and other applicable county ordinances or resolutions and by state law, rules and regulations. No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable to any other person; any such other person desiring a license under this chapter for the same or different activity or establishment shall be required to make separate application therefore under the provisions of the chapter. Provided, however, that in the case of death of any natural person holding a license pursuant to this chapter such license may be transferred to the deceased licensee's personal representative, if the personal representative otherwise meets the licensing requirements of this chapter, upon such personal representative's application to the county for such transfer, without any additional license fee during the remaining term of such license. If a licensed establishment moves its business and operations to a different location within the unincorporated area of the county then such new location shall be required to apply for and obtain a separate license for such new location. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. II, § 2-2, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-23. - State license required. 
Any holder of a license pursuant to this chapter is required, before conducting, engaging in or carrying out the licensed activity to apply for and obtain any and all applicable licenses from the state as required by O.C.G.A., Title 3. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. II, § 2-3, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-24. - Conflicts. 
Should there be a conflict in the requirements and provisions of this chapter and other county ordinances or resolutions, then this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. II, § 2-4, 11-3-2014) 
Secs. 10-25—10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSING 

Sec. 10-41. - Licenses which may be issued under this chapter. 
(a)  Retail Dealer—Off Premises Consumption (Distilled Spirits). 
(b)  Retail Dealer—Off Premises Consumption (Malt Beverages). 
(c)  Retail Dealer—Off Premises Consumption (Wine). 
(d)  Retail Consumption Dealer—Consumption on Premises (Distilled Spirits). 
(e)  Retail Consumption Dealer—Consumption on Premises (Malt Beverages). 
(f)  Retail Consumption Dealer—Consumption on Premises (Wine). 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. IV, § 4-1, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-42. - Annual license and other fees. 
The fees for the respective licenses and administrative fee, as provided in this chapter shall be as set out in Appendix A of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. IV, § 4-2, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-43. - Disqualification from licensure. 
(a)  No license shall be granted under this chapter to any person for the operation of, and no person shall otherwise operate, an establishment involving the distribution, sale, or consumption of alcoholic beverages in any area prohibited by law or by zoning ordinance. 
(b)  No license shall be granted under this chapter to any person for the operation of, and no person shall otherwise operate an establishment involving the distribution, sale, or consumption of alcoholic beverages which establishment is within 100 yards of the premises of any church building. No license shall be granted under this chapter to any person for the operation of, and no person shall otherwise operate, an establishment involving the distribution, sale, or consumption of wine or malt beverages within 100 yards, or of distilled spirits within 200 yards, of the premises of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. For purposes of measuring said distances, said distance shall be measured from the closest point of the premises of the site for which an alcoholic beverage is applied for to the closest point of the premises of the church building, school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus, as the case may be. 
(c)  No license shall be granted under this chapter to any person for the operation of an establishment involving the distribution, sale, or consumption of alcoholic beverages who has been convicted of a felony. 
(d)  No license shall be granted under this chapter: (i) to any person for the operation of an establishment involving the distribution, sale, or consumption of alcoholic beverages who has been convicted within the last five years of a misdemeanor or other violation involving any of the following: gambling, the Georgia Controlled Substances Act (or similar laws of another jurisdiction), prostitution, sex offenses, adult entertainment laws, rules or regulations, alcohol control laws, rules or regulations, or offenses involving moral turpitude. 
(e)  No license shall be issued under this chapter to any person who is not lawfully present in the United States or, if such person is not an individual, where the individual making the application on behalf of such person is not himself lawfully present in the United States. 
(f)  No license shall be issued under this chapter to any person who is not registered to use and is using the Federal Work Authorization Program, where required of such person by O.C.G.A § 36-60-6. 
(g)  No license application shall be considered by the board of commissioners for the issuance of a license for the operation of an establishment involving the distribution, sale, or consumption of alcoholic beverages where a similar application involving said license applicant or said establishment has been denied by the board within the preceding 12 months or where a license held by the said license applicant (whether for this or another establishment) or a license (whether held by said license applicant or by another licensee) for the said establishment has been revoked by the board within the preceding 12 months. 
(h)  No license shall be issued under this chapter for the retail sale at an establishment of any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold where such establishment is licensed for retail sale of any alcoholic beverages for off premises consumption. Likewise, no license shall be issued under this chapter for the retail sale at an establishment of any alcoholic beverages for off premises consumption where such establishment is licensed for retail sale of any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. IV, § 4-3, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-44. - License application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a license from the county pursuant to this chapter shall submit an application therefor which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The specific license being applied for. 
(2)  Full name of the applicant, including any aliases, trade names, or other names under which the applicant has been known or conducted business during the past three years, and, in the case of a partnership, limited liability company, firm, association, corporation, or other non-natural person, the name of the individual or agent who shall be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or firm, the names and addresses of all owners of the partnership, joint venture or firm shall be furnished. In the event the applicant is an association or corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers, directors, and the three stockholders owning the largest amounts of stock in the applicant entity shall be furnished. In the event the applicant is a limited liability company, the names and addresses of the three members owning the largest amounts of ownership interest and of, if any, its managers and principal officers shall be furnished. In the event the applicant is any other type of entity or non-natural person, the names and addresses of all the members of its governing body, officers and others having management, control, or dominion over such applicant shall be furnished. 
(3)  The complete mailing and location addresses of the applicant and the location address of the establishment at which the activity for which a license hereunder is being sought will be conducted. The applicant shall also submit with the application a copy of a valid deed showing that the applicant owns the property on which the establishment to be licensed is located or a copy of a valid lease showing that the applicant has a leasehold interest sufficient for the applicant to operate a business or enterprise at the property on which the establishment is to be located involving the sale, distribution and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages of the type and in the manner for which licensure is sought. 
(4)  The type of establishment to be operated and the category of alcoholic beverage related functions and activities to be conducted at such establishment. 
(5)  The name and location address of each of the nearest church building, school building, educational building, school grounds, and college campus, in each case to the property on which the establishment to be licensed is located. 
(6)  Whether or not the applicant, any person listed under subparagraph (2) above, or any employee in the applicant's establishment for which licensure is being sought has previously been refused a license (or a similar license from another jurisdiction). If the answer is in the affirmative, state the month and year of such refusal, the jurisdiction refusing the license, and the circumstances surrounding such refusal. 
(7)  Whether or not the applicant or any person named in subparagraph (2) above, having previously obtained a license (or a similar license from another jurisdiction), has had the same suspended or revoked. If the answer is in the affirmative, state the month and year of such suspension or revocation, the jurisdiction suspending or revoking the license, and the circumstances surrounding such suspension or revocation. 
(8)  Whether or not the applicant, or any person identified in subparagraph (2) above has been convicted of a felony. 
(9)  Whether or not the applicant, or any person identified in subparagraph (2) above has been convicted within the last five years of a misdemeanor or other violations involving any of the following: gambling, the Georgia Controlled Substances Act (or similar laws of another jurisdiction), prostitution, sex offenses, adult entertainment laws, rules or regulations, alcohol control laws, rules or regulations, or offenses involving moral turpitude. 
(10)  A consent statement executed by the applicant that all necessary investigation reports on the applicant, any person identified in subparagraph (2) above, or any employees in the applicant's establishment for which licensure is being sought including, but not limited to, credit reports and reports from law enforcement agencies, may be obtained; that any information in such reports may be furnished to the licensor; and that applicant will be responsible for the cost thereof. If so requested by Licensor, applicant shall also obtain such consent forms therefore, as the case may be, from each person identified in subparagraph (2) above. Licensor may, at its option, require fingerprinting and/or photographs of applicant, each person identified in subparagraph (2) above for the purposes of conducting its investigation with respect to application for an initial license or a license renewal. 
(11)  Prior to issuance or renewal of any license the applicant therefore shall provide to the county with such application therefore: (i) in order to verify the applicant's (or the individual making the application on behalf of the applicant) lawful presence in the United States, the applicant shall submit the signed and sworn Affidavit required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1(e)(2) and at least one "secure and verifiable document" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-36-2(b)(3), and (ii) in order to verify the applicant's registration with and utilization of the Federal Work Authorization Program as defined in and required by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6 that the applicant is authorized to use such Federal Work Authorization Program (or evidence that it is not required by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6 to use such Program), the applicant shall submit the signed and sworn Affidavit required by O.C.G.A § 36-60-6. 
(12)  The accuracy and completeness of the information, documents and statements contained in said application or submitted as a part thereof or supplementary thereto shall be sworn to by or on behalf of the applicant before a notary public or other person authorized to administer oaths. 
(13)  The applicant shall attach, with the application, funds in the amount of the annual license fee in the amounts set forth in Appendix A for the license for which application is being made. 
(14)  The applicant shall submit such further information as the county shall request having a reasonable relationship to the consideration of the desirability of the issuance to applicant of the license sought. 
(b)  In addition to the other qualifications set forth herein, an applicant for a retail dealer-consumption on the premises license must meet all of the requirements of either the following subsection (1) restaurant or subsection (2) private club. 
(1)  Restaurant. No license will be issued unless the license applicant likewise operates a restaurant upon the proposed licensed premises and such restaurant: 
a.  Sells food prepared, served and consumed on the premises and such food sales constitute at least 50 percent of the gross income of all food and beverage sales on the premises. The term "gross income" shall not include tips or gratuities which may be added to the base food bill; and 
b.  Has permanent seating capacity at tables and booths, not counting bar stools, for at least 50 persons; and 
c.  Meets all of the definitional requirements of "restaurant" set forth in section 10-2 of this chapter. 
(2)  Private club. No license will be issued unless the license applicant likewise operates a food service facility upon the proposed licensed premises which is a private club and such private club: 
a.  Sells food prepared, served and consumed on the premises and such food sales constitute at least 50 percent of the gross income of all food and beverage sales on the premises. The term "gross income" shall not include tips or gratuities which may be added to the base food bill; and 
b.  Meets all the definitional requirements of "private club" set forth in section 10-2 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. IV, § 4-4, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-45. - Submission of application; payment of fee with application. 
Applications for the license and accompanying annual license fee shall be submitted to the county administrator (or his or her designee). If an application is denied by the board of commissioners, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. IV, § 4-5, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-46. - Publication of notice. 
(a)  Upon the filing of the application for a license for retail sale of distilled spirits for consumption off of the premises where sold or upon the filing of the application for a license for retail sale of any alcoholic beverage by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold, the applicant shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county once a week for two weeks, setting forth that such application has been filed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. IV, § 4-6, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-47. - Considerations for license grant. 
In determining the question of the granting or refusal of the license applied for hereunder, the board shall consider: the location of the establishment for which licensure is being sought; the uses of the property surrounding the property at which the establishment will be operated for which licensure is being sought; the current zoning of the property at which the establishment will be operated for which licensure is being sought; the integrity of the applicant; the criminal convictions, if any, of the applicant for the violation of any criminal statutes; the number of times in the past three years licenses under this chapter have been issued for the establishment for which licensure is being sought; the violation(s), if any, of this chapter (or any similar predecessor ordinance or resolution of the county regarding alcoholic beverages) or the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code occurring at the establishment for which licensure is being sought during the past three years; whether the applicant (or the individual making the application on behalf of the applicant) is lawfully present in the United States; whether the applicant is registered to use and is using the Federal Work Authorization Program; the bona fides and arm's length nature of the acquisition of the establishment for which licensure is being sought by applicant from the existing or prior owner and/or licensee of such establishment; and, the accuracy and completeness of the application and the information, documents and statements submitted as a part thereof or supplementary thereto, for the license applied for. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. IV, § 4-7, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-48. - Grant or denial of application. 
(a)  Following receipt by the board of commissioners of an application for an alcoholic beverage license the board of commissioners shall either: 
(1)  Grant such application and direct issuance of a license in connection therewith subject to compliance with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(2)  Table action on such application until a date and time certain as determined by the commission. If such application is tabled by the board, the county administrator shall cause a written notice to be issued to the applicant advising him that: 
a.  The commission has tabled action on his application until a date and time certain as determined by the commission; 
b.  The applicant may, if he so desires, appear at the meeting at the date and time certain as determined by the commission to be heard as to why his application should be approved. 
(b)  At such public meeting, as provided for above, the applicant shall have the opportunity to show cause why the application should be granted and should not be denied and shall be entitled to the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence against granting of the application, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceedings transcribed or recorded at the applicant's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time by the board of commissioners relative thereto. 
(c)  Following the conclusion of such public meeting the board of commissioners shall, within 30 days of the date of such public meeting, render its decision regarding the grant or denial of such application. 
(d)  Upon the denial of such application, the county administrator shall cause the applicant to be notified in writing within ten days of such decision and the reasons therefore. 
(e)  Upon the grant of such application the county administrator shall promptly notify the applicant thereof and the Coffee County Clerk shall promptly proceed to cause the license applied for to be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. IV, § 4-8, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-49. - License duration; license fee proration; when fee is due. 
Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year of its issuance, but may be renewed on an annual basis for each subsequent calendar year by making application for renewal to the county and paying the annual license fee. There shall be no proration of the annual license fee paid for the renewal of a license. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. IV, § 4-9, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-50. - Duties of licensee. 
As a condition subsequent to the granting of a license pursuant to this chapter and the possession and use thereof, compliance with the following provisions shall be mandatory: 
(1)  Licenses granted hereunder shall be prominently displayed in the licensee's establishment to which such license relates, and shall be, together with said establishment, subject to inspection at any time by the county or any law enforcement agency having jurisdiction of the location and activities of licensee's establishment. 
(2)  The sale, distribution, and on premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, as the case may be, at said establishment shall each be in compliance with the laws of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Act, as amended, O.C.G.A., Title 3, and the applicable rules and regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(3)  The licensed establishment and its operation shall at all times comply with all applicable county ordinances and resolutions (including without limitation this chapter), together with all applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(4)  Upon issuance or renewal of any license during the term thereof the licensee shall utilize the Federal Work Authorization Program as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. 
(5)  Licensee shall pay the annual license fee for renewal of such license for the immediately succeeding year before January 1 of such succeeding calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. IV, § 4-9, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-51. - Revocation. 
(a)  Failure of licensee to comply with any of the following provisions of this section 10-51(a) shall be grounds for revocation of the license granted to licensee under this chapter. 
(1)  Conviction of licensee, or of any owner, officer or director of the licensee, of a felony. 
(2)  Conviction within the last five years of licensee, or of any owner, officer or director of the licensee, of a misdemeanor or other violation involving any of the following: gambling, the Georgia Controlled Substance Act (or similar statutes of another jurisdiction), prostitution, sex offenses, adult entertainment laws, rules and regulations, alcohol control laws, rules or regulations, or offenses involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  Failure of the licensee to be lawfully present in the United States. 
(4)  Failure of the licensee or the licensed establishment to comply at all times with each of the requirements of section 10-50. 
(5)  A material misstatement or omission in the licensee's application or in the information and statements submitted as a part thereof or supplementary thereto. 
(b)  Upon information to the county concerning violation of any of the provisions outlined in section 10-51(a), the board shall serve notice upon licensee, by registered or certified mail addressed to licensee's establishment, requiring him to appear before the board and show cause why his license should not be revoked. Such hearing shall not be held sooner than 30 business days from the giving of such notice, and shall set forth with particularly the date, time and place of the hearing on said matter; such notice shall also state the alleged noncompliance which could, if sustained, result in revocation of licensee's license. 
(c)  Within five business days of the hearing on such matter, the board shall render a decision on the matter, notifying licensee in writing of its decision by registered or certified mail addressed to the licensee's establishment or by personally delivering the same to licensee. In the event of a revocation, no rebate shall be made of any portion of any license fee paid. 
(d)  After revocation of any license granted hereunder, no person formerly holding such license, shall operate an establishment for which a license is required by this chapter without again having obtained a valid license. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. IV, § 4-10, 11-3-2014) 
Secs. 10-52—10-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MALT BEVERAGE AND WINE 
DIVISION 1. - RETAIL SALE—OFF PREMISES CONSUMPTION (MALT BEVERAGES; WINE) 

Sec. 10-71. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall operate an establishment within the unincorporated areas of the county involving the retail sale of malt beverages for consumption off of the premises where sold without having first obtained a license pursuant to this chapter for such sales. 
(b)  No person shall operate an establishment within the unincorporated areas of the county involving the retail sale of wine for consumption off of the premises where sold without having first obtained a license pursuant to this chapter for such sales. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. V, § 5-1, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-72. - Unbroken packages to be sold. 
A license issued pursuant to this chapter for the retail sale of beer or wine for consumption off of the premises where sold shall authorize the licensee to sell such beer and wine only in the original and unbroken package or packages. Such license shall not permit the breaking of the package or packages on the premises where sold and shall not permit the consumption of the contents of the package or packages on the premises where sold. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. V, § 5-2, 11-3-2014) 
Secs. 10-73—10-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETAIL SALE—CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES (MALT BEVERAGES; WINE) 

Sec. 10-76. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall operate an establishment within the unincorporated areas of the county involving the retail sale of malt beverages for consumption on the premises where sold without having first obtained a license pursuant to this chapter for such sales. Such license shall only authorize and permit the retail sale of malt beverages for consumption only by the drink and only on the premises where sold. 
(b)  No person shall operate an establishment within the unincorporated areas of the County involving the retail sale of wine for consumption on the premises where sold without having first obtained a license pursuant to this chapter for such sales. Such license shall only authorize and permit the retail sale of wine for consumption only by the drink and only on the premises where sold. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. V, § 5-3, 11-3-2014) 
Secs. 10-77—10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISTILLED SPIRITS 
DIVISION 1. - RETAIL SALE—OFF PREMISES CONSUMPTION (DISTILLED SPIRITS) 

Sec. 10-91. - License required. 
No person shall operate an establishment within the unincorporated areas of the county involving the retail sale of distilled spirits for consumption off of the premises where sold without having first obtained a license pursuant to this chapter for such sales. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. VI, § 6-1, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-92. - Unbroken packages to be sold. 
A license issued pursuant to this chapter for the retail sale of distilled spirits for consumption off of the premises where sold shall authorize the licensee to sell such distilled spirits only in the original and unbroken package or packages. Such license shall not permit the breaking of the package or packages on the premises where sold and shall not permit the consumption of the contents of the package or packages on the premises where sold. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. VI, § 6-2, 11-3-2014) 
Secs. 10-93—10-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETAIL SALE—CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES (DISTILLED SPIRITS) 

Sec. 10-96. - License required. 
No person shall operate an establishment within the unincorporated areas of the county involving the retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold without having first obtained a license pursuant to this chapter. Such license shall only authorize and shall only permit the retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink and then only for the consumption thereof on the premises where sold. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. VI, § 6-3, 11-3-2014) 
Secs. 10-97—10-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BROWNBAGGING 

Sec. 10-111. - Brownbagging prohibited. 
Brownbagging and allowing, facilitating, permitting, or participating in brownbagging is unlawful and prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. VII, § 7-1, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-112. - Operation of a brownbagging establishment prohibited. 
Operating or allowing, facilitating, permitting, or participating in the operation of a brownbagging establishment is unlawful and prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. VII, § 7-2, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-113. - Private residences. 
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, brownbagging and allowing, facilitating, permitting, or participating in brownbagging shall not be unlawful or prohibited at private residences. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. VII, § 7-3, 11-3-2014) 
Secs. 10-114—10-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DAYS AND HOURS OF SALES; ESTABLISHMENT'S AREAS OF SALE 

Sec. 10-131. - Hours of sale by retailers and retail consumption dealers. 
(a)  The retail sale of alcoholic beverages in unbroken containers or packages for consumption off of the premises where sold, at an establishment otherwise licensed for such sales, is authorized from 6:00 a.m. to 11:59 p.m., except on Sundays and Christmas Day. 
(b)  The retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold, at an establishment otherwise licensed for such sales, is authorized from 10:00 a.m. until 11:30 p.m., except on Sundays and Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. VIII, § 8-1, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-132. - Sales during elections. 
Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to the board of commissioners by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b)(2)(B), the wholesale or retail sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages pursuant to a license issued pursuant to this chapter and otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election. However, no person shall sell alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days during such time as the polls are open. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. VIII, § 8-2, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 10-133. - Establishment's areas of sale. 
(a)  Retail consumption dealers licensed for on premises consumption of any alcoholic beverages shall not knowingly allow or permit patrons of the licensed establishment to remain inside the licensed establishment where such alcoholic beverages are sold during times that the licensed establishment is not authorized or permitted to operate the licensed activity or during times that the licensed establishment is not otherwise open for business. 
(b)  Retail consumption dealers licensed for on premises consumption of any alcoholic beverages shall not knowingly allow or permit patrons of the licensed establishment or other persons to remain on the outside portions of the licensed establishment (including its parking lots(s) and other outdoor areas) where such alcoholic beverages are sold where such patron or other person is then currently possessing, selling, distributing, or consuming any alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Retail dealers shall only sell and distribute, and retail consumption dealers shall only sell, distribute, and permit consumption of, alcoholic beverages at the licensed establishment in public areas of the establishment generally open and available to all patrons of such establishment. Provided, however, that private events (as defined in this chapter) shall be permitted in entire buildings, rooms, halls or areas, indoors or out of doors, in each case generally available for private events at the establishment of a retail consumption dealer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, Art. VIII, § 8-4, 11-3-2014) 
APPENDIX A. FEES 
1.  Alcoholic beverage license fees shall be as follows: 

 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, §§ II, III(a)(3); dogs and dangerous dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; dog fighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; governing authorities of counties are authorized and required in the control of rabies to require regulation or licensing of animals, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 14-19. - Running at large. 
Any person having custody of a dog within the unincorporated limits of the county shall be required to confine the dog on the premises of the owner of the dog or on the premises of someone authorized by the owner. The person having custody of a dog shall at all times provide the dog with necessary sustenance and shelter, and the failure to so do shall constitute a violation of this section and punishable pursuant to and in conformity with state law. Dogs shall not be permitted to run at large on any streets, alleys or any other place of the county off the premises of the custodian of the dog except on a leash not more than six feet long and in the care of a competent person. 
(Code 2002, § 14-31; Ord. of 9-15-1980, § 1; Ord. of 10-5-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 14-20. - Impounding dogs. 
Any and all dogs found running at large in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be impounded by the county or its duly authorized officers and agents. 
(Code 2002, § 14-32; Ord. of 9-15-1980, § 2; Ord. of 10-5-1994, § 2) 
Sec. 14-21. - Redemption; rabies certification. 
Any dog seized and impounded under any provisions of this article shall be detained for a period of seven days and if not claimed or redeemed by the owner or the person harboring the dog within such period shall be disposed of in such a manner as the officers or agents having custody of the impounded dog may designate. However, whenever the name of any person or identifying number appears on the collar of the dog so seized, such person shall be notified of such seizure by a postcard, addressed to him and deposited in the United States mail. The cost of redemption of any dog impounded hereunder shall be the sum, set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and maintained in the office of the county clerk, per day while impounded. Prior to the redemption of any dog by the owner or custodian, he must show evidence that the dog has a current rabies inoculation. In the absence of such evidence, the owner or custodian must pay additional fees, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and maintained in the office of the county clerk, to the county, including, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-19-7, a $0.50 fee for each dog inoculated to offset the cost of the salary for the county rabies control officer; and a receipt will be issued by the animal shelter which, when presented to a veterinarian, the necessary inoculation will be given without further charge to the owner and custodian. The dog owner and custodian will bring evidence of inoculation immediately to the animal shelter for confirmation of the redemption requirement. The animal shelter will then reimburse the veterinarian with the inoculation fee so collected. 
(Code 2002, § 14-33; Ord. of 9-15-1980, § 3; Ord. of 10-5-1994, § 3; Res. No. 02-07, § 14-33, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 14-22. - Penalties. 
Any person having possession or control of any dog who shall violate any terms of this article shall be guilty of an offense against the county and upon conviction thereof in the magistrate court shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2002, § 14-34; Ord. of 9-15-1980, § 4; Ord. of 10-5-1994, § 4) 
Sec. 14-23. - Rabies. 
It is the dog owner's or custodian's responsibility to immediately deliver any dog which has bitten a person to a veterinarian for observation and determination if the dog has rabies. Such dog will be impounded at the owner's expense in a veterinarian's facility or other facility approved by the veterinarian for a minimum of ten days or for such time as the veterinarian may determine necessary. Dog owners or custodians who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense against the county; and upon conviction in the magistrate or state court, such persons will be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2002, § 14-35; Ord. of 9-15-1980, § 5; Ord. of 10-5-1994, § 5) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 18-31. - Adoption by reference. 
The following technical building and construction codes are adopted by reference and may be amended for later editions as required by the Georgia Uniform Codes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2006 edition (ICC); 
(2)  National Electrical Code, 2006 edition (NFPA); 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition (ICC); 
(4)  International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition (ICC); 
(5)  International Plumbing Code, 2006 edition (ICC); 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2006 edition (ICC); 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition (ICC); 
(8)  International Fire Code, 2006 edition (ICC); 
(9)  International Existing Building Code, 2006 edition (ICC); and 
(10)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition (ICC). 
(Code 2002, § 18-31; Ord. of 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 18-32. - Self-inspection exemption. 
The board of commissioners, pursuant to 1996 Ga. Laws, page 1632, exempts the county from the alternative inspection procedure as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). 
(Code 2002, § 18-32; Res. of 5-20-1996) 
Sec. 18-33. - Adoption of health regulations for minimum design, construction and operational requirements for public swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks. 
The county board of commissioners authorizes the county board of health and assigned staff to administer and implement the Rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources, chapter 290-5-57, as amended. 
(Res. No. 02-22, 6-17-2002) 
Secs. 18-34—18-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING NUMBERING 

Sec. 18-71. - Display required. 
It shall be the duty of all owners, lessees and/or occupants of buildings, including businesses and/or homes within the unincorporated areas of the county, to display the address number of the location on the structure. 
(Code 2002, § 18-71; Ord. of 7-7-1997, § 1) 
Sec. 18-72. - Application; assigning. 
It shall be the duty of all owners, lessees and/or occupants of buildings in the county to make application to the director of E 911 for the county for building numbers, including all houses and/or all other structures, for all structures not having a current designated number, giving the director the name of the street, road and location of such structure; and it shall be the duty of the director to assign correct numbers to the applicant for such premises. 
(Code 2002, § 18-72; Ord. of 7-7-1997, § 2) 
Sec. 18-73. - Display. 
It shall be the duty of all owners, lessees and/or occupants of buildings in the county to display the numbers, which shall be at least four inches high and at least one-half inch in width. The numbers shall be placed on the front of such dwelling or business structure by the owners, lessees and/or occupants at the expense of the owners, lessees and/or occupants. 
(Code 2002, § 18-73; Ord. of 7-7-1997, § 3) 
Sec. 18-74. - Unlawful actions. 
It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee and/or occupant of structures located within the unincorporated areas of the county to fail or refuse to make application, or fail or refuse to place the numbers designated for such structures, as provided in this article, on such structures. 
(Code 2002, § 18-74; Ord. of 7-7-1997, § 4) 
Sec. 18-75. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any violation of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted in the magistrate court of the county, with punishment as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2002, § 18-75; Ord. of 7-7-1997, § 5) 
Secs. 18-76—18-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTION ON PLUMBING FIXTURES 

Sec. 18-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Code 2002, § 18-111; Ord. of 9-16-1991, § 1) 
Sec. 18-112. - Restricted residential construction. 
No construction may be initiated within the unincorporated areas of the county for any residential building of any type which employs a: 
(1)  Gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  Showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Code 2002, § 18-112; Ord. of 9-16-1991, § 2) 
Sec. 18-113. - Restricted commercial construction. 
There shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the unincorporated areas of the county for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of sections 18-112. 
(Code 2002, § 18-113; Ord. of 9-16-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 18-114. - Application of restrictions. 
The requirements of section 18-112 shall apply to any residential construction and to any commercial construction which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Code 2002, § 18-114; Ord. of 9-16-1991, § 4) 
Sec. 18-115. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 18-112, 18-113 and 18-114 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped. 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution. 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the county building official. A fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and maintained in the office of the county clerk, shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Code 2002, § 18-115; Ord. of 9-16-1991, § 5) 
Sec. 18-116. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the building official of the county. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building official of the county. 
(b)  Any person violating this article shall be tried before the chief magistrate of the county. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2002, § 18-116; Ord. of 9-16-1991, § 6) 
Secs. 18-117—18-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COUNTY BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-133—18-148. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SMOKING PROHIBITED 

Sec. 18-149. - Smoking of tobacco prohibited. 
Pursuant to provisions in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2, the smoking of tobacco products shall be prohibited in all buildings and structures owned or operated, in whole or in part, by the county board of commissioners, including offices, elevators, garages, storages areas, restrooms, corridors, break rooms and stairwells, without exception. 
(Ord. of 1-21-1992, § 1; Ord. No. 02-02, § 131, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 18-150. - Designated smoking areas; littering prohibited. 
Outdoor smoking areas shall be designated for each aforementioned building and structure. All persons shall use available ashtrays and other conduits for disposal of collection waste, and also observe anti-litter laws of the city and county. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 132, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 18-151. - Enforcement; penalty. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the division, or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. This article may be enforced either by law enforcement officers and code enforcement officers of the county and the prevailing jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 1-21-1992, § 2; Ord. No. 02-02, § 133, 3-4-2002) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General powers of counties as to taxation and licenses, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV; certain persons prohibited from investigating business for issuance of county license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9; business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 22-19. - Business license required. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the unincorporated areas of the county shall pay a regulatory fee and shall be issued a business license for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which license and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, thereby preventing conspicuous display of the same, such business registration shall be shown to the licensing official or representatives thereof, or to any law enforcement officer of the county upon request. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-1) 
Sec. 22-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business. Wherever the term "business" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean a business, trade, profession or occupation or practitioner thereof unless otherwise indicated. This business license shall apply only to businesses operating in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Business license means a license issued following a registration with and fee paid to the county prior to conducting or transacting business within the unincorporated areas of the county. For the purpose of this article, the term "business license" shall be a type of regulatory fees. 
Clerk means the clerk of the board of commissioners of the county. 
Licensing official means the county administrator or a designee of the chairman of the county board of commissioners. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes, among other things. 
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is the one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation, but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays a regulatory fee. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.C. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-2) 
Sec. 22-21. - Regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A regulatory fee may be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on applicable businesses, trades, professions, and occupations. 
(b)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in businesses, trades, professions, and occupations as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 or other provisions of state law shall be adopted by the county board of commissioners and shall be amended from time to time as determined by the county board of commissioners. The regulatory fee is set out as follows: 
(1)  Each business required to comply with this article shall pay $50.00 per business location in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(2)  No business with multiple locations within the county will be required to pay a sum exceeding $200.00 for their business license, irrespective of the number of locations they own within the county. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-3) 
Sec. 22-22. - Purpose and scope of fee. 
(a)  This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-8 and 48-13-9 and is for regulatory purposes only. This article is not adopted as an occupational tax. 
(b)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one regulatory fee for each of its locations. 
(c)  No business license or regulatory fee shall be required for those businesses and practitioners of professions or occupations which the county is not authorized to subject to regulatory fees pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c). 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-4) 
Sec. 22-23. - Paying regulatory fee of business with no location in the county. 
A business license shall also be required on those businesses, trades and practitioners of professions or occupations which operate and conduct business within the county, even if said business, trade, profession or occupation does not have a location within the county. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-5) 
Sec. 22-24. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
As part of the application process of obtaining a business license, each business operated within the unincorporated areas of the county shall register said business with the county. The business registration of each business operated within the unincorporated areas of the county shall identify the line of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the county and that line of business being noted by the county upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-6) 
Sec. 22-25. - Each fixed location or place considered separate business. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of this article. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-7) 
Sec. 22-26. - Imposition of fee. 
The regulatory fee imposed herein is for regulatory purposes only. The fee shall be paid before commencing a business, trade or the practice of a profession or occupation as a condition precedent for transacting business or practicing a profession. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-8) 
Sec. 22-27. - When fee due and payable; effect of transacting business when fee delinquent. 
(a)  Each such regulatory fee shall be for the current calendar year and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and fee shall be payable before commencing business and thereafter on January 1 of each year once the business has commenced and has received its initial license, and be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. In addition to said penalties, should any regulatory fee imposed by this article remain due and unpaid for 60 days from the due date of the fee, unless otherwise exempted by state law or local ordinance, the person liable for the fee shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the fee due. In addition, interest on the regulatory fees due and payable after the due date shall be at the rate of 1.5 percent per month. 
(b)  The regulatory fee herein provided for shall be issued by the licensing official and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a business license shall, after said fee becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any trade or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration and license, such offender shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Payment of such fine may be enforced by the contempt powers of the court having competent jurisdiction. This remedy is in addition to any other remedies available for the collection of regulatory fees due to the county from persons subject to the fee who fail or refuse to pay the fee. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-9) 
Sec. 22-28. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business license is imposed by this article shall be exempt from said license requirement on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless said business is registered as a nonprofit organization pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. In such case, said business shall only be required to register with the county and the fee shall be waived. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-10) 
Sec. 22-29. - Evidence of state registration required, displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq.) shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-11) 
Sec. 22-30. - Evidence of regulatory matter required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business license, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-12) 
Sec. 22-31. - Due date for license and registration; failure to obtain. 
Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the business license and registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any business, trade, profession, or occupation required to be registered without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties and fines provided for herein as well as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-13) 
Sec. 22-32. - When registration and fee due and payable; effect of transacting business when fee delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all fees as provided herein before January 31 of each year, and on January 31 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties and fines provided for herein. The penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties herein provided or otherwise permitted by law. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the licensing official, and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said fee becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the fines and penalties provided therefor. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-14) 
Sec. 22-33. - Penalty for article violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-12, and may be subject to any and all additional remedies available by law for the collection of regulatory fees. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-15) 
Sec. 22-34. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
(a)  The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article. The following businesses may be assessed a regulatory fee, registration fee, or other type of regulation pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law. Likewise, the following shall be required to comply with subsection (c) of this section by obtaining a certification of exemption: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of O.C.G.A. title 46 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-3-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(b)  The following persons of businesses are exempted from the regulatory fee imposed by this article: 
(1)  Nonprofit social, charitable, religious or fraternal organizations for the purpose of operating fairs, circuses or carnivals for periods of time not to exceed one week. 
(2)  Individual farmers who raise, grow or cultivate edible food from the soil of the state; provided, however, that farm, milk or other farmer cooperatives are not exempted when they engage in selling goods and/or services to the public in competition with persons taxed by virtue of this article. 
(3)  Established churches, religious, charitable and fraternal organizations chartered or operated for nonprofit purposes. 
(4)  Persons or businesses involved in or renting lots for mobile homes, residential homes, or mobile home rentals. However, this class of persons should still be required to comply with subsection (c) of this section by obtaining a certificate of exemption. 
(5)  Persons exempted from taxation by virtue of the constitution or any statute of the United States or state. 
(c)  Exempted persons shall possess and display at their places of business a certificate of exemption that may be obtained from the licensing official by application of a form provided by the same. The applicant for exemption shall clearly state the provision of this article or other provision of law under which the applicant claims exemption. The certificate shall contain sufficient facts for the licensing official to determine whether the applicant is entitled to the exemption. The certificate of exemption shall remain valid and the business need not reapply for an annual certificate of exemption so long as the conditions entitling the business to the exemption remain the same. The application for the certificate of exemption shall be made under oath. The certificate of exemption shall not exempt any business from complying with the duty to register. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-16) 
Sec. 22-35. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time. Said amendment may increase or lower the fee rates, and amendments to the fee schedule shall be posted as provided in section 22-21. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-17) 
Sec. 22-36. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the licensing official to see that the provisions of this article relating to business licenses are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court of competent jurisdiction, via citation. It is hereby made the further duty of the licensing official to inspect all registrations issued by the county, as often, as in his judgment, he may deem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-19) 
Sec. 22-37. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the county board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-20) 
Sec. 22-38. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-21) 
Sec. 22-39. - Conditions of issuance. 
The licensing official shall issue the certificate of license only: 
(1)  When satisfied that the business, etc., does not, and will not violate the requirements of the zoning ordinance of the county; 
(2)  Upon the fulfillment of the registration requirements of this article; 
(3)  Upon the payment of the regulatory fee imposed by this article; 
(4)  Upon payment of any outstanding solid waste fees due at the time an application for license is sought. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-22) 
Sec. 22-40. - Term of license; transfer. 
Licenses will be issued for a one-year period, except as otherwise herein specified. A license issued by the licensing official under the authority of this article, may be transferred or assigned, except as otherwise noted in this article, provided the owner conducts the business for which the license was issued at the same place, executes a new registration form and pays the county a transfer fee of $10.00. If the business is moved to a different location, with the same owner and operators, the license may also be transferred to the new location, by notifying the licensing official and payment of the transfer fee. In the event that the proper authorities are not notified, an additional ten percent fee shall be charged for the transfer. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-23) 
Sec. 22-41. - Misrepresentation to obtain license or certificate deemed violation. 
No person shall use any deceitful means or misrepresentation in obtaining the license or certificate to do business in the county from the county. 
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 1-24) 
Secs. 22-42—22-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT TRADERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Power of county governing authority to regulate peddling and fix the cost of licensing peddlers, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22(a)(9); peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; exception from local peddler or itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6. 

Sec. 22-71. - License required. 
(a)  In accordance with the laws of the state, each and every peddler and itinerant trader who are nonresidents of the county, including street or roadside peddlers, by sample or otherwise, shall apply for a license to the judge of the probate court of each county where he may desire to trade, which license shall be granted to him on the following qualifications and oath: 
(1)  Every peddler shall furnish the Judge of the Probate Court with evidence of his good character and shall take and subscribe before him this oath: "I swear that I will use this license in no county other than the one for which it is granted, that I will not suffer any person to use it in my name, and that I am a citizen of this State. So help me God." 
(2)  Such oath and license shall be entered in the book kept for that purpose. The license shall contain a physical description of the peddler and/or itinerant trader. 
(b)  There shall be a separate license for every vehicle used in vending such goods, wares or merchandise, which license shall be shown to any peace officer demanding it. On failure or refusal to exhibit the license, the peddler shall forfeit $500.00, to be recovered through an action of the informer. One-half of such sum shall go to the informer, the other to the educational fund of the county. 
(c)  The judge of the probate court of the county is hereby authorized to impose the following license fees which shall be used for county purposes: 
(1)  In dry goods, notions, furniture, medicine, jewelry, magazine salesman, meat dealers, each, per day: $200.00; 
(2)  Peddlers not otherwise provided for, each, per day: $200.00; 
(3)  In dry goods, notions, furniture, medicine, jewelry, magazine salesman, meat dealers, each, per year: $500.00; 
(4)  Peddlers not otherwise provided for, each, per year: $500.00. 
(d)  Any peddler or itinerant trader who sells any goods, wares, or merchandise, except such as are excepted by law, without a license from the proper authority shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided for by the laws of this state. 
(Ord. of 3-16-1987) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-05-1, §§ I—VI, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 26-19—26-27, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 2002, §§ 26-31—26-36; Res. of 10-19-1981, §§ I—VI; Res. of 10-2-2000, § I; Res. No. 05-11, adopted Sept. 6, 2005; Res. No. 07-11, adopted Sept. 4, 2007; Ord. of 4-21-2008, §§ I—VI. 

Sec. 26-19. - Definition. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services; police services [public safety]; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; [nuclear power] plant protection; temporary restoration of public service utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-1, § I, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-20. - Local organization for emergency management. 
In cases where a county has an organization for emergency management, such organization shall include participation by each city within the county unless the governing authority of any particular city elects to implement its own organization for emergency management. Any two or more of the above-mentioned political subdivisions may, with the approval of the director, contract with each other so as to form one emergency management organization for the entire area included in the bounds of the contracting political subdivisions. The executive officer or governing body of the political subdivision is authorized to nominate a local director to the director of emergency management who shall have the authority to make the appointment. Upon appointment, the local emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the executive officer or governing body and shall serve at the pleasure of such executive officer or governing body. The local director shall: 
• Maintain an emergency management office in a building owned or leased by the political subdivision and the director or designee shall be available or on call at all times beyond working hours 
• Develop, in conjunction with public and private agencies/organizations that have responsibility for designated emergency support functions, plans for responding to and recovering from disasters [and/or emergencies] 
• Respond to emergency scenes, command posts, and operation centers 
• Coordinate emergency response of public and private agencies and organizations 
• Attend training and meetings convened by the appointing authority or the (state emergency management) director 
• Develop or cause to be developed, in collaboration with other public and private agencies within the state, mutual aid arrangements, consistent with state plans and programs, for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in case of emergency or disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted 
• Enter into mutual aid agreements, subject to approval of the governor, with emergency management agencies or organizations in other states for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in case of emergency or disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-1, § II, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-21. - Local emergency management powers. 
Each political subdivision shall have the emergency management power and authority to: appropriate and expend funds; execute contracts; obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies; provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to victims; direct and coordinate development of local emergency management plans and programs in accordance with federal and state policies and plans; appoint, employ, remove or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts; and acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease or otherwise [identify] sites required for installation of temporary housing units and prepare or equip such sites. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-1, § III, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-22. - Local emergency management financial assistance. 
A county or municipality shall be entitled to receive [federal disaster] funds if the local emergency management organization has met all state and federal requirements to receive such funds. Qualifications include: legal establishment of an emergency management organization by local ordinance; a legally appointed local director who has been endorsed and appointed by the Georgia Emergency Management Director; an approved emergency and disaster plan with all applicable annexes [Emergency Support Functions]; and an approved fiscal year program and other necessary compliance documents. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-1, § IV, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-23. - Immunity of state and political subdivisions. 
Neither the state nor any political subdivision of the state, nor the agents or representatives of the state or any political subdivision thereof, shall be liable for personal injury or property damage sustained by any person appointed or acting as a volunteer emergency management worker or member of any agency engaged in emergency management activity. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-1, § V, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-24. - Local emergency management agency plan. 
The Coffee County Emergency Management Agency has developed, in partnership with local government and community agencies/organizations which have primary responsibility for emergency support functions, an approved emergency management plan. A copy of this plan and/or major revisions are being submitted to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency by the local emergency management agency director, in coordination with local government officials or legally appointed successors. It is understood that the Georgia Emergency Management Agency will review this plan for compliance with all federal and state requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-1, § VI, 9-4-2012) 
Secs. 26-25—26-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY COST REIMBURSEMENT 

Sec. 26-58. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is: 
(1)  To recognize that the number of vehicular accidents and structure fires for which emergency responses are required by the county fire department and the emergency management agency (EMA) increase each year. 
(2)  To recognize that the cost of responding to vehicular accidents and structure fires also continues to increase each year. 
(3)  To recognize that many such incidents are often caused by neglect for which liability insurance provides a source of recovery to pay the cost associated with responding to such incidents by the county fire department and EMA. 
(4)  To recognize that many homeowner insurance policies provide coverage to pay for part or all of the cost associated with the emergency response/service described herein. 
(5)  To authorize and establish a program whereby a cost reimbursement fee (hereinafter referred to as CRF) is assessed for the delivery of emergency fire and EMA services to motor vehicle accidents, and all structure fires in the county. 
(6)  To implement a fair and equitable procedure by which to collect CRFs from responsible individuals, business, or insurance companies and to authorize the administration of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § I, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 26-59. - Motor vehicle accident. 
(a)  When the county fire department or the emergency management agency (EMA) responds to a motor vehicle accident, and the accident is the result of fault or neglect on the part of one or more parties, the county may assess a CRF to all at-fault parties to cover the costs associated with the emergency response to the accident. 
(b)  The party that is at-fault shall be personally responsible for the CRF established herein. To the extent that there is liability insurance to cover the cost associated with said emergency response, the county is authorized to submit a claim against the at-fault party's insurance company. All claims asserted by the county against the at-fault party which is not resolved by that party or their insurance company may, at the county's discretion, be prosecuted civilly in any court with appropriate jurisdiction. Any such civil suit shall be prosecuted by the county attorney or any other attorney designated by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § II, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 26-60. - Structure fires. 
(a)  When the county fire department or EMA is called upon to respond to a structure fire, and the fire is the result of fault or neglect on the part of any individual, the county may assess a CRF to all at-fault parties to cover the costs associated with the emergency response to the fire. 
(b)  The party that is at-fault shall be personally responsible for the CRF established herein. To the extent that there is liability insurance to cover the cost associated with said emergency response, the county is authorized to submit a claim against the at-fault party's insurance company. All claims asserted by the county against the at-fault party which are not resolved by the individual or their insurance company may, at the county's discretion, be prosecuted civilly in any court with appropriate jurisdiction. Any such civil suit shall be prosecuted by the county attorney or any other attorney designated by the county. 
(c)  When a structure is consumed completely or in part by fire and the structure is also covered by a policy of insurance which provides for the payment of the costs of emergency services envisioned by this article, the county may charge the owner a CRF as described herein, and/or may also submit a claim for payment for emergency services directly to the owner's insurance company. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § III, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 26-61. - Oil, chemical and hazardous waste cleanup. 
(a)  When the county fire department or EMA is called upon to respond to a motor vehicle accident or a structure fire, and the accident or fire is the result of fault or neglect on the part of any individual, the county may assess a CRF to all at-fault parties to cover the costs associated with the emergency response to the incident, including all costs associated with oil, chemical, and hazardous waste cleanup (hereinafter referred to as cleanup). 
(b)  The party that is at-fault shall be personally responsible for the CRF established herein. To the extent that there is liability insurance to cover the cost associated with said emergency response, or cleanup, the county is authorized to submit a claim against the at-fault party insurance company. All claims asserted by the county against the at-fault party which are not resolved by the individual or their insurance company, may, at the county's discretion, be prosecuted civilly in any court with appropriate jurisdiction. Any such civil suit shall be prosecuted by the county attorney or any other attorney designated by the county. 
(c)  In the case of oil, chemical, and hazardous waste spills, the county may hold any individual or business responsible for the cleanup cost of the same irrespective of whether the individual or business is at fault or not. The fact that the spill and cleanup are necessitated by the incident itself, and the county incurs a cost associated with the clean up of the spill, is itself sufficient to warrant the assessment of a CRF as envisioned herein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § IV, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 26-62. - Administration and investigations. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the county administrator, with the assistance of the fire chief or EM director, to develop the administrative procedures necessary to carry out the intent and requirements of this article. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the county fire chief or EMA director, or any of their designees, to investigate said accident and determine if a CRF may be assessed. These officials may rely on the official investigation performed by any other governmental body charged with the responsibility of investigating the incident. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § V, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 26-63. - CRF calculation. 
The CRF described herein shall be based on the cost associated with responding to the emergency at issue. The affected agency shall consider the cost of personnel, supplies, equipment, fuel, and any other cost associated with the emergency response. The costs shall be assessed based on a reasonable calculation of the actual cost incurred to respond to the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § VI, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 26-64. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cleanup means those steps or actions required to remove a spill from the county right-of-way, county property, or private property when necessity and safety require county services to be performed. 
Emergency means for purposes of this article, any event which results in the dispatch of any emergency agency covered by this article. 
Official investigation means any investigation of the incident performed by any governmental body or agency including but not limited to any: sheriff department, police department, fire department, state fire marshal, state bureau of investigation, Federal Bureau Investigation, federal EPA, state EPA/EPD, or any other local, state or federal agency charged with the investigation of the incident at issue. 
Spill means any discharge or release of oil, chemical or hazardous waste of any kind in any way from its normal and accepted containment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § VII, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 26-65. - 9-1-1 charge for VoIP connections. 
A 9-1-1 charge shall be imposed upon each Voice Over Internet Protocol telecommunications connection subscribed to by subscribers whose billing address is within the jurisdiction of the county at the rate of $1.50 per month per VoIP connection provided to each telephone subscriber. 
(Res. No. 09-03, 8-17-2009) 
Secs. 26-66—26-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STATE OF EMERGENCY REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-76—26-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-05-2, §§ 1—4, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as §§ 26-101—26-104. 

Sec. 26-101. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority or its designee; may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of Coffee County. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-2, § 1, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-102. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Curfew. A "curfew" is a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this division from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, "exempt individuals" include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to Coffee County Ordinance No. 2012-05-4 ("Ordinance to Require Registration and Licensing of Building and Repair Services During a State of Emergency"), performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-2, § 2, 9-4-2012) 
Cross reference— Registration of building and repair services, § 26-151 et seq. 
Sec. 26-103. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated Coffee County during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-2, § 3, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-104. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-2, § 4, 9-4-2012) 
Secs. 26-105—26-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS, MATERIALS, SERVICES AND HOUSING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-05-3, §§ 1—3, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as §§ 26-121—26-123. 

Sec. 26-121. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which Coffee County has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in Coffee County to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-3, § 1, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-122. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Overcharging. The term "overcharging" is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. 
The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Coffee County. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-3, § 2, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-123. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this division upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-3, § 3, 9-4-2012) 
Secs. 26-124—26-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-05-4, §§ 1—8, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as §§ 26-151—26-158. 

Sec. 26-151. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of Coffee County, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-4, § 1, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-152. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Building contractor. As used in this division the word or term "building contractor" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this division if: (a) he has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or (b) he performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-4, § 2, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-153. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of Coffee County during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-4, § 3, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-154. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this division at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-4, § 4, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-155. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this division to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this division. Violation of this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-4, § 5, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-156. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this division is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-4, § 6, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-157. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-4, § 7, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-158. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this division is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this division or any other county, state or federal law If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-4, § 8, 9-4-2012) 
Secs. 26-159—26-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SUSPENSION OF PORTIONS OF CODE AND OTHER FORMALITIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-05-5, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as §§ 26-176, 26-177. 

Sec. 26-176. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting Georgia or the United States, the affairs and business of Coffee County may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of Coffee County, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within Coffee County. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of Coffee County, or any portion thereof, where: (a) the emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; (b) such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and (c) such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the Coffee County Health Department and Coffee County Building and Inspections Department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-5, § 1, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 26-177. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six months the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Coffee County. 
Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05-5, § 2, 9-4-2012) 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Enforcement of county public health regulations. 
(a)  A violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation affecting public health which has been enacted or adopted by the Department of Public Health, the Coffee County Board of Health, or the Board of Commissioners of Coffee County, which have been duly adopted by the Coffee County Board of Health, shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be a misdemeanor offense. Any violator shall be subject to the imposition of a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(b)  Failure to pay an inspection fee within 60 days of first written notice by the Coffee County Board of Health, as provided for and adopted by said board, will result in suspension of any permits issued to said individual, business or entity until such time as said fee has been paid. 
(c)  The Magistrate's Court of Coffee County shall have jurisdiction over violations of this chapter, except as otherwise allowed or provided by state law. Nothing about this chapter prevents the Coffee County Board of Health from prosecuting cases or seeking injunctive relief in any other court as permitted by state law. A designated representative of the Coffee County Board of Health shall have the authority to issue citations for the crimes addressed herein, and shall have the right to prosecute said violations through the magistrate court, or any other court with appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, §§ I—III, 2-20-2006; Ord. No. 2017-5, §§ I—III, 5-1-2017) 
Secs. 30-2—30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-14; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; minimum standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; permits for land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-7, 12-7-9. 

Sec. 30-21. - Title. 
This article will be known as "Coffee County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 10-3, § I, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 2018-8, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 30-22. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Altamaha Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the State general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 30-24(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 30-23(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this section, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Altamaha Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 10-3, § II, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 2018-8, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 30-23. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 30-24(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 10-3, § III, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 2018-8, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 30-24. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 30-24(b)and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in sections 30-24(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in section 30-24(c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 30-24(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01 (r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 30-24(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither do not constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 10-3, § IV, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 2018-8, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 30-25. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Coffee County without first obtaining a permit from the Coffee County Code Enforcement Office to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Coffee County Code Enforcement Office and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 30-24 of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of sections 30-24(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 30-24(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 30-25(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 30-24(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 30-24(c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 30-25(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 10-3, § V, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 2018-8, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 30-26. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The Coffee County Code Enforcement Office will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The Coffee County Code Enforcement Office shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 10-3, § VI, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 2018-8, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 30-27. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 30-25(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 10-3, § VII, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 2018-8, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 30-28. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said section. 
(Ord. No. 10-3, § VIII, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 2018-8, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 30-29. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Coffee County Commission within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Coffee County. 
(Ord. No. 10-3, § IX, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 2018-8, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 30-30. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 7th day of May 2018. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 10-3, § X, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 2018-8, 5-7-2018) 
Secs. 30-31—30-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 30-47. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance." 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for Coffee County by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the County water system and by the designation and regulation of property users and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 30-48. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, imposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 2, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 30-49. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle, the center of which is the center of any county water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 100 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 3, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 30-50. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 4, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 30-51. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 30-24: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of building, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 30-24; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 5, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 30-52. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the county, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 6, 7-16-2007) 
Chapter 34 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.; construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Authorization. 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § II and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the county board of commissioners does ordain as follows in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 34-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Code 2002, § 34-31; Ord. of 4-6-1987, art. 1, § B; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 1, § B; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 34-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands;and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Code 2002, § 34-32; Ord. of 4-6-1987, art. 1, § C; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 1, § C; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 34-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 2002, § 34-33; Ord. of 4-6-1987, art. 1, § D; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 1, § D; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 34-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "New Construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Community Development Directors Design interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 34-7. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before August 2, 1990. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 21,1990. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) , as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after August 2, 1990, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after May 21, 1990, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after May 21, 1990. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD). The North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any chapter requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Code 2002, § 34-34; Ord. of 4-6-1987, art. 2; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 2; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 6) 
Sec. 34-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Code 2002, § 34-35; Ord. of 4-6-1987, art. 3, § A; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 3, § A; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 34-7. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 11, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 11, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for unincorporated Coffee County are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the Coffee County Courthouse, 101 S. Peterson Ave., Douglas. 
(Code 2002, § 34-36; Ord. of 4-6-1987, art. 3, § B; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 3, § B; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 34-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Code 2002, § 34-38; Ord. of 4-6-1987, art. 4, § A; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 3, § C; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 34-9. - Compliance with all regulations required. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 34-39; Ord. of 4-6-1987, art. 3, § C; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 3, § D; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 34-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 2002, § 34-40; Ord. of 4-6-1987, art. 3, § D; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 3, § E; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 34-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements; liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 2002, § 34-41; Ord. of 4-6-1987, art. 3, § E; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 3, § F; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 34-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 2002, § 34-42; Ord. of 4-6-1987, art. 3, § F; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 3, § G; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 34-13. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 2002, § 34-43; Ord. of 4-6-1987, art. 3, § G; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 3, § H; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 34-14—34-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 34-30. - Designation of administrator. 
The code enforcement director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 34-71; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 4, § A; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 34-31. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the code enforcement director on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 34-46(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.  The code enforcement director shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Code 2002, § 34-72; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 4, § B; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 34-32. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the code enforcement director shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 34-7, then the code enforcement director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 34-31(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 34-31(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the building inspector shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 34-31(1)c and section 34-46(2) or 34-48(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the code enforcement director shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the community development department and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 2002, § 34-73; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 4, § C; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 34-33—34-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 34-45. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Code 2002, § 34-101; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 5, § A; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 34-46. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 34-45(4). 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in Al-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 34-32(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on individual lots or parcels, in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See section 34-45(6).) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of this subsection 34-46(3). 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-7 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if section 34-46(4)a is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 34-102; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 5, § B; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 34-47. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-7, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 34-7, then the code enforcement director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the provisions of subsection (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A zone areas where a Limited Detail Study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 34-45(4). 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The code enforcement director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Code 2002, § 34-103; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 5, § C; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 34-48. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (AE zones) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-7, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (AE zones), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 34-46. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 34-49. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-7 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 34-45(4). The code enforcement director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 34-31(1)c and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Code 2002, § 34-105; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 5, § E; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 34-50. - Standards for subdivisions. 
The following standards shall apply to subdivisions: 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Code 2002, § 34-104; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 5, § D; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 34-51. - Standards for critical facilities. 
The following standards shall apply to critical facilities: 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, art. 4, § G) 
Secs. 34-52—34-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 34-70. - Duty of board of appeals; variance criteria and issuance. 
(a)  The board of appeals as established by the county shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the code enforcement director in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this chapter are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The code enforcement director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in this section and the purposes of this chapter, the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 34-74; Ord. of 5-21-1990, art. 4, § D; Ord. No. 09-02, art. 5) 
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The county has executed an agreement to provide legal services to indigent criminal defendants in the superior, state and juvenile courts of the county. Official copies of the agreement are on file in the office of the county clerk. 
State Law reference— Violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Vandalizing road signs. 
(a)  Violation. Any person vandalizing any road signs within the unincorporated limits of the county shall be in violation of this section. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an offense against the county and, upon conviction in the magistrate court, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2002, § 38-1; Ord. of 8-18-1997, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference— Damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Secs. 38-2—38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TURKEY SHOOTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; Georgia Firearms and Weapons Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq.; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; control of mass gatherings, O.C.G.A. § 31-27-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 

Sec. 38-21. - Legalization. 
In pursuance of the authority conferred by O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, property, and general welfare of the present and future citizens of the county, the provisions of this article are enacted into law. 
(Code 2002, § 38-31) 
Sec. 38-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official means the duly appointed and qualified building official of Coffee County, Georgia. 
Contestant means a person who competes in a turkey shoot. 
District means one of the five geographical divisions of the county, the inhabitants of which are represented on the board of commissioners of Coffee County, Georgia, by a single commissioner. 
Organizer means a person who desires to organize, conduct and supervise a turkey shoot and who, upon being granted a permit, does, in fact, conduct and supervise such turkey shoot. 
Permit means a document issued by the board of commissioners of Coffee County, Georgia, which authorizes an organizer to conduct a turkey shoot. 
Shotgun means a smoothbore shoulder weapon designed to fire shells containing numerous pellets. 
Site means the location at which a turkey shoot is conducted. 
Turkey shoot means an event at which contestants compete for prizes which are awarded according to their accuracy in hitting a paper or similarly composed target with projectiles fired from shotguns or similar devices. 
(Code 2002, § 38-33) 
Sec. 38-23. - Procedure. 
Any person who desires to organize a turkey shoot shall first consult with the building official. The building official shall personally examine the site at which the organizer proposes to conduct such turkey shoot and shall make a determination as to whether such turkey shoot, as proposed by the organizer, complies in all respects with this article. If the building official determines that the proposed turkey shoot does so comply with this article and that the holding of a turkey shoot at the site proposed by the organizer will not pose a significant threat to the safety of citizens living on adjoining properties and will not significantly annoy those citizens or disrupt their usual activities, he may recommend to the board that the organizer be granted a permit to conduct such turkey shoot. Both the building official and the organizer of the proposed turkey shoot shall appear at a regularly scheduled meeting of the board, at which time the building official shall make a recommendation either for or against the granting of a permit for such turkey shoot. The board shall then vote on the question of whether to issue to the organizer a permit to conduct such turkey shoot. If a majority of the members of the board vote in favor of allowing such turkey shoot, a permit shall be issued to the organizer by the clerk of the board. 
(Code 2002, § 38-34) 
Sec. 38-24. - Regulations. 
(a)  Compliance required. All turkey shoots conducted in the county shall comply with the regulations of this section. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages. No organizer of any turkey shoot conducted pursuant to this article shall furnish to any participant or permit any participant to consume on or near the site where such turkey shoot is conducted any alcoholic beverages of any kind. 
(c)  Barricades. Each and every target used in any turkey shoot conducted pursuant to this article shall be backed by some material (e.g., wood, baled hay) of sufficient size and density to ensure that no pellet fired at that target from any shotgun during that turkey shoot will travel beyond the plane in which that target is situated for a distance of more than one foot. 
(d)  Conduct. No organizer of any turkey shoot shall permit any of the participants in or observers of such turkey shoot to engage in any loud or boisterous conduct calculated or likely to disrupt either the turkey shoot or the peace and tranquility of the surrounding environment. 
(e)  Firearms. No organizer of any turkey shoot conducted pursuant to this article shall permit any participant to compete in such turkey shoot by the use of any firearm other than a shotgun. 
(f)  Hours. No turkey shoot conducted pursuant to this article shall commence prior to 6:00 p.m., and no turkey shoot conducted pursuant to this article shall extend beyond 11:00 p.m. of any given day. 
(g)  Permits. No person shall conduct any turkey shoot at any location within the unincorporated areas of the county unless he shall have executed an agreement which shall be in the form and contain the terms prescribed by the board and shall be countersigned by the clerk of the board. Such agreement shall serve as the organizer's permit to conduct such turkey shoot. No such permit shall permit the holding of such turkey shoot on any Sunday or any Christmas Day. Each organizer of each turkey shoot shall pay to the board a fee for each such permit as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and maintained in the office of the county clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 38-35) 
Sec. 38-25. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the sheriff of the county to enforce the provisions of this article other than those relating to the issuance of permits. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who knowingly violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2002, § 38-36) 
Secs. 38-26—38-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-03, §§ 1—6, adopted May 19, 2014, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as §§ 38-51—38-56. 

Sec. 38-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means any structure that encloses a space used for sheltering any occupancy. 
Debris , for the purpose of this article, shall include residue from the burning of wood, coal, or other combustible material, as well as paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, rubber, leather, fallen, broken or destroyed trees or tree limbs or other material or objects not a part of the land and constituting a heath or safety hazard. 
Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle as defined herein which is incapable of being moved under its own power without additional work or repairs being completed to the motor vehicle, or without any additional components being added to or placed upon said motor vehicle. 
Junked motor vehicle is any motor vehicle, as defined in this article, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate and a current license decal, or the condition of such motor vehicle is in a state of disrepair, wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. The absence of a current car tag or decal from any vehicle shall be presumptive evidence that such vehicle is a junked motor vehicle. 
Lot , for the purposes of this article, shall mean one or any one or more of several contiguous parcels of land making up a block, measured and set apart for use or occupancy. 
Motor vehicle is any vehicle which is or is intended to be self-propelled and designed to travel on the ground and shall include, but shall not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, four-wheelers, campers and trailers, as well as any part or parts thereof. 
Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Private property shall mean any real property within the county which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property shall mean any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly-maintained way and dedicated to the purposes of vehicular traffic, and shall also mean any other publicly-owned property or facility. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 38-52. - Specific nuisances. 
Nuisance means anything within the county or its police jurisdiction that works hurt, inconvenience or damage to others or is manifestly injurious to the public health or safety or tends to corrupt the manners or morals of the people. The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Vacant lots: Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  Nonconforming structures, machines, etc.: Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used within this county contrary to or in violation of county ordinance. 
(3)  Depositing trash, garbage, refuse, furniture, or other household goods, etc., on private or public property: The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, furniture, household goods, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish and trash which is a menace to public health and safety in the county. 
(4)  Accumulation of junk: The retention, storage or accumulation of any automobile, motor vehicle, mechanized equipment, machinery, appliance, scrap metal, or other scrap material on property for a period of ten days or longer in a condition that prevents its use for the purpose for which it was originally manufactured so as to affect the public health, safety and welfare of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 2, 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 38-53. - Inoperable or junked motor vehicles; prohibition; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot of land or premises in the county, or the owner of any lot of land or premises in the county, or any agent or representative of such owner or occupant, to permit or maintain on such lot any nuisance as enumerated herein, the accumulation of debris or the harborage of inoperable motor vehicles, as defined in this article, which distracts from the community aesthetics, and endangers the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  This article defines and establishes procedures for abating inoperable or junked motor vehicles. 
(1)  No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked motor vehicle of any kind upon any private property within any residential zoning district for a period of time in excess of 90 days. The presence of a junked motor vehicle or parts thereof on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Those vehicles which are exempted from the provisions of this article are as follows: 
a.  Any motor vehicles or parts thereof which are located on the premises of licensed automobile dealers; 
b.  Any motor vehicles or parts thereof which are located on the premises of any licensed junkyard operated in compliance with state and local laws relating to licensing, regulating and zoning of such junkyards; 
c.  Any motor vehicle enclosed within a building on private property which is not a hazard to public health; 
d.  Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways; and 
e.  Any motor vehicles in the process of being restored to an operable condition provided they are: 
1.  Limited to no more than two in number; 
2.  Located in the rear yard and behind the house of the owner of such vehicles; and 
3.  Not visible from any road. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 3, 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 38-54. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  When any objectionable condition as defined in sections 38-52 or 38-53 is being allowed to exist or is otherwise maintained on any lot of land or premises in the county, the director of code enforcement, as applicable, or his designee (the "official"), shall notify in writing the occupant of such lot, or the owner thereof or their agents or representatives, that the conditions existing upon the property constitute a nuisance, and setting forth the actions to be taken to eliminate the objectionable conditions within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days. If the violation is not remedied within the allotted 30 day time period, then the official shall notify in writing the occupant of such lot, or the owner thereof or their agents or representatives, that the conditions existing upon the property constitute a nuisance, and setting forth that legal action will be taken for failure to remedy. 
Failure of the owner or occupant to eliminate the conditions constituting a nuisance within the allotted time period shall constitute an offense of this Code. An official may grant a written extension upon a showing of reasonable cause. Upon the expiration of the allotted time for elimination of the nuisance, including extension, if any, the official shall issue a citation and summons so charging the party notified and requiring such party to appear in the Magistrate court for a hearing at a given time, place and date, if said nuisance is not resolved. 
(b)  Notices shall be in writing and delivered in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or first-class mail, to the occupant and/or owner or its agents or representatives. Refusal to accept certified mail shall be deemed prima facie evidence of notice. If the official, following due diligence, is unable to serve such notice, the official shall cause such notice to be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the news publication of general distribution, prior to taking any steps to abate said nuisance and prior to the running of the 5-day period for abatement of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 4, 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 38-55. - Citation, trial, order, failure to comply, etc. 
(a)  When it becomes necessary to issue a citation and summons to an owner or occupant of lands subject to the provisions of this article, said citation shall be in a form setting forth, particularly, the nature and location of the nuisance and the identity of the person complained against. If the court determines that the conditions do in fact constitute a nuisance, the court shall issue an order specifying the time within which such nuisance must be abated. In addition, the court may impose a fine not to exceed $500.00 for the offense of failure to abate the nuisance, if the court determines that the owner or occupant unreasonably failed to abate the nuisance prior to the court hearing. 
(b)  The failure of the owner or occupant to comply with the court's order to abate the nuisance within the specified time period shall constitute an offense separate and apart from that set forth in section 38-55(a) above, and shall subject the person to additional prosecution and penalties, including: 
(1)  Fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. 
(2)  Imprisonment, not to exceed six months. 
(c)  Upon the failure of the owner or occupant to comply with the court's order to abate the nuisance within the specified time period, the court may issue an order permitting abatement of the nuisance by the county. That order shall include, but not be limited to, the authority of the county and its officials and agents to enter the property, shall specifically state the authority and limitations of the county and its officials and agents to abate the nuisance, and shall release the county and its officials and agents from liability of any damage to the property during the court of, or as a result of, the nuisance abatement. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 5, 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 38-56. - Lien. 
In the event that the nuisance is abated by the county pursuant to the authority of the order of the court as set out in section 38-55(c) above, the county shall be authorized to assess the costs associated with said removal and charge all costs thereof to the owner or representative. Said costs shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for county taxes. Provided, however, that this shall not preclude other remedies available to the official for abating said nuisance or the county's use of other legal means of collecting the cost therefore. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 6, 5-19-2014) 
Chapter 42 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; Redevelopment Powers Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1 et seq.; the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 

Sec. 42-19. - Adopted. 
In compliance with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act of 1989 (O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.), the Coffee County/Ambrose/Broxton/Nicholls Comprehensive Plan 2012 is adopted. 
(Code 2002, § 42-31; Ord. of 4-20-1992; Res. No. 2007-04, 6-4-2007; Res. No. 2007-12, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 42-20. - Short-term work program updates adopted. 
The board of commissioners adopts the Coffee County Comprehensive Plan Short-Term Work Program Updates. 
(Code 2002, § 42-32; Res. of 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 42-21. - River corridor protection. 
The board of commissioners having officially adopted, on July 19, 1995, the proposed comprehensive plan amendment addressing river corridor protection in its entirety, and as approved by the state department of community affairs, the amendment is confirmed and ratified. 
(Code 2002, § 42-33; Res. of 6-19-1995) 
Secs. 42-22—42-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 42-46. - Established. 
The City of Douglas-Coffee County Planning Commission is established. 
(Code 2002, § 42-71) 
Sec. 42-47. - Membership. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of seven members. Four of the members shall be residents of the City of Douglas, appointed by the board of commissioners of the city; and three of the members shall be residents of Coffee County, appointed by the board of commissioners of the county. The terms of the members shall be for four years. 
(b)  Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the board of commissioners, which shall also have the authority to remove any county-appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 2002, § 42-72) 
Sec. 42-48. - Organization; rules; staff; finances. 
The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the city or the county. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning commission and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing authorities of the city and the county. 
(Code 2002, § 42-73) 
Sec. 42-49. - Powers and duties. 
From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers, and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, the planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
(Code 2002, § 42-74) 
Chapter 46 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Potholes. 
All accidents involving potholes or other pavement-related incidents shall not be at the fault of the county. Persons striking or hitting these obstructions shall have the right to pursue the matter in the state or superior courts. 
(Code 2002, § 46-1; Res. of 1-3-1995) 
Secs. 46-2—46-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ROAD NAME CHANGES 

Sec. 46-21. - Contents of request. 
(a)  A petition requesting an official name change of a highway or road must contain the: 
(1)  Name of the individual (not group) requesting the road name change or representing the group requesting the road name change. 
(2)  Name of the group or persons requesting the road name change, if more than one person is requesting it. 
(3)  Date of request. 
(4)  Present name of the road. 
(5)  Proposed name for the road. 
(6)  Clear description of the road, including: 
a.  Place of origin of the road (where the road starts). 
b.  Place of termination (where the road ends). 
c.  Length of road (total miles to the nearest one-tenth mile). 
d.  Type of road (dirt, gravel, paved, etc.). 
e.  General use of road (agriculture, residential, business, combined, etc.). 
f.  Total number of families or residents located on the road. 
g.  Total number of businesses located on or immediately off the road. 
h.  Total number of landowners whose property joins the road. 
(7)  Signatures of 100 percent of the adult residents of the road, including name, age, address and phone number. 
(8)  Signatures of 100 percent of the landowners of the road, including name, age, address and phone number. 
(9)  Signatures of 100 percent of the business owners of the road, including name of business, names of owners, addresses and phone numbers. 
(b)  The petition must be signed and notarized within 30 days prior to presentation to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2002, § 46-31; Mo. of 6-17-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 46-22. - Written statement of reasons. 
A printed or written statement must be presented to the board of commissioners and be no more than one page in length and clearly state the reasons why the person in section 46-21(a)(1) believes the name of the road should be changed. 
(Code 2002, § 46-32; Mo. of 6-17-1996, § 2) 
Sec. 46-23. - Presentation of letters. 
Signed letters must be presented to the board of commissioners from each person in section 46-21(a)(9), business owners, no more than one page in length, clearly stating that: 
(1)  They have no objection to the proposed name change. 
(2)  They agree not to hold the county, or its elected officials, legally accountable for any damage, real or otherwise, resulting from the proposed road name change. 
(Code 2002, § 46-33; Mo. of 6-17-1996, § 3) 
Sec. 46-24. - Contractual agreement. 
A signed contractual agreement shall be presented to the board of commissioners between the persons of section 46-21(a)(1) and (2), and the county in which the persons or groups of section 46-21(a)(1) and/or (2) agree to: 
(1)  Fully pay in advance for all cost involved in the road name change if the road name change is authorized. 
(2)  Pay in advance for all required legal public advertisement in the news media of the proposed name change. 
(3)  Pay in advance for all required public notification by mail of the proposed name change. 
(4)  Pay in advance for all required public notification (media and mail) of the actual voted upon name change. 
(5)  Pay for all needed sign replacement for one year. 
(6)  Make an honest effort to assist the county in picking up litter along the right-of-way. 
(Code 2002, § 46-34; Mo. of 6-17-1996, § 4) 
Sec. 46-25. - Requirements for proposals and petitions. 
All proposed road name change proposals and petitions must be: 
(1)  Fully open for public inspection. 
(2)  Legally advertised for two times within a five-week period prior to final consideration and vote. 
(Code 2002, § 46-35; Mo. of 6-17-1996, § 5) 
Sec. 46-26. - Objections; requirements. 
All objections to a proposed road name change shall be in writing, clearly stating the reasons for the objections and the persons objecting. 
(Code 2002, § 46-36; Mo. of 6-17-1996, § 6) 
Sec. 46-27. - Voting; timeframe for enacting. 
(a)  All board of commissioners voting on the proposed road name change will: 
(1)  Be at regularly scheduled board of commissioners' meetings. 
(2)  Take into consideration all of the proposals and objections. 
(b)  In order to ensure logical continuity of vital federal, state and county services, approved name changes will be enacted once every five years, at which time all road name changes which were approved within the previous five-year period will be done. A road name will not be reconsidered within a period of five years of the previous road name change. If all requirements are met, this does not ensure that the road name change will take place immediately. 
(Code 2002, § 46-37; Mo. of 6-17-1996, § 7) 
Secs. 46-28—46-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROAD MAINTENANCE POLICY 

Sec. 46-58. - Specific requirements. 
(a)  In the past, certain expenses incurred in meeting the needs and assistance of citizens of the county have been absorbed by the county. The county adopts a governing policy which will be adhered to, unless exceptions are made, on an individual case-by-case basis at a public meeting by a vote of a majority of the entire board of commissioners. 
(1)  The county's equipment and personnel will no longer be used in performing operations on private property, which includes property owned by individuals, partnerships, corporations and other legal entities which are not county-owned. 
(2)  For any and all means of ingress and egress to property other than property owned by the county, which will include any means to get in and out of property, the county's public policy shall be to only provide the pipe and dirt as follows: 
a.  With regards to residential property, the fee for providing ingress and egress shall be the cost of the pipe as paid by the county plus ten percent. This fee shall include up to three loads of dirt covering. For any loads of dirt in excess of three, there shall be a fee per load, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and maintained in the office of the county clerk, charged to the person requesting the work. All fees shall be paid to the county in advance of any work being performed by the county. 
b.  With regards to commercial property, the fee shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and maintained in the office of the county clerk, which shall include up to 30 feet in length of pipe. Any pipe which is placed which exceeds 30 feet shall be done at a cost per foot, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and maintained in the office of the county clerk, to the property owner. All fees shall be paid to the county in advance of any work being performed by the county. 
(b)  The county's policy with regard to relocating existing roads on private property shall be that no such roads shall be relocated unless the board of commissioners shall determine in advance at the time that any such relocation is commenced there is a direct and immediate benefit to the county as a whole in making the relocation. 
(c)  With regards to subdivisions of any kind, including trailer parks, the county's policy shall be to accept title to roads and rights-of-way only after the proposed roads have been graded and all necessary piping and culverting are put in place at the expense of the owner or developer. 
(Code 2002, § 46-71; Res. of 4-7-1986, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 46-59. - Surface cuts across county-maintained paved roads restricted. 
Surface cuts in paved, county-maintained public roads are only to be allowed subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Such cuts are to be made only between sun-up and sun-down; 
(2)  Adequate warning devices are to be placed alongside the roadway, where necessary, warning motorists of the surface cuts; 
(3)  A substantial showing that hardship will result to the individual if the surface cut is not made; 
(4)  The individual making the cut shall put up a bond insuring that he will repair the roadway after such cuts are made. 
(Res. of 2-15-1982) 
Secs. 46-60—46-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CLOSING AND/OR ABANDONMENT OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-001, arts. I—V, adopted Feb. 20, 2012, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as §§ 46-76—46-80. 

Sec. 46-76. - Application. 
Application for county road, right-of-way or easement closing or abandonment shall be made to the Coffee County Clerk on an application provided by Coffee County. This application may be obtained at the Coffee County Commissioner's Office located at 101 South Peterson Avenue, Douglas, Georgia, 31533. 
Along with said application, the applicant shall provide a plat that shows the right-of-way or easement for which the application is being filed. The plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered by the State of Georgia in accordance with the Georgia Plat Act, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, art. I, 2-20-2012) 
Sec. 46-77. - Procedure. 
The procedure for abandonment of a county road is as follows: 
(1)  Applicant submits application and plot to county clerk as outlined above. 
(2)  If the clerk, or his/her designee, finds that the application meets the criteria of this article, the clerk shall place the request on a future county commission official public hearing and meeting agenda, and so notify the applicant regarding same. 
(3)  County will then provide notice to all affected property owners in conformity with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-7-2 as follows: 
a.  Letters: Notice must be given individually to property owners whose property adjoins or will be affected by the closing of the right of way at issue, giving the nature of the request and description of the road, right-of-way, or easement at issue, the place, date, and time of hearing. [Form letter provided.] 
b.  Advertisement: Notice giving the nature of the request and description of the road, right-of-way, or easement at issue, the place, date, and time of hearing should be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements for the county are published once a week for a period of two weeks. [Form advertisement provided.] 
If proper notice as outlined above is not given prior to the scheduled hearing, the commission may choose to postpone the hearing until such notice is properly given 
(4)  A public hearing must be had by the board of commissioners to discuss whether the road serves a substantial public purpose and/or whether removal of the road from the county road system in otherwise in the best public interest. 
(5)  If it is determined by the board of commissioners that the road serves no substantial public purpose or it is otherwise in the best public interest to close/abandon the road, a certification must be recorded in the county minutes and must be accompanied by a plat or sketch of the section of road to be closed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, art. II, 2-20-2012) 
Sec. 46-78. - Closing/abandoning standard and factors. 
(a)  Standard. In order for a road to be closed, the board of commissioners shall determine that all or part of the road has ceased to be used by public so as to no longer serve any substantial useful purpose, or that the removal of the road from the county road system is otherwise in the best public interest. 
A road shall not be closed for the purpose of helping a private landowner. The closing must serve some public purpose such as relieving the public from the charge of maintaining a road or street, the street or road are no longer useful or convenient to the public, etc. 
(b)  Considered factors. There are several factors, which may be considered by the board of commissioners in deciding whether or not to close a road or street. These factors as follows: 
(1)  Source of title: Does Coffee County own fee simple title to the road/street or merely an easement for use by public for road purposes? 
(2)  Present use of road, street or alley: How is the road, street or alley currently being used: (a) general public; (b) limited use by a small group; (c) location of public utilities; or (d) unopened right-of-way. 
(3)  Past history: What use has been made of the road/street in the last 20 years? 
(4)  Potential need for road in the future: What is the potential for development along the proposed closing/abandoning: (a) to serve future growth area; (b) transportation plan projects future right-of-way needed; and (c) volume to capacity ratio shows need to retain street. 
(5)  Cost involved in closing/abandoning or opening road/street: (a) obstructions in or along right-of-way or at ends of road/street; (b) attorneys fees and court costs projected to exceed value of road/street; or (c) other. 
(6)  Availability of other means of travel to take place of vehicular traffic using roadway: (a) public transportation; (b) adjoining landowners' assistance; (c) neighborhood; (d) emergency vehicles; (e) garbage pick-up; or (f) other. 
(7)  Benefit to public in continuing public usage of roadway: (a) serves adjoining landowners; (b) serves neighborhood traffic needs; (c) provides access for emergency vehicles; (d) allows garbage pick-up and other services; and (e) other. 
(8)  Benefit to public in closing road: (a) eliminates road grading expense; (b) eliminates traffic movement hazards; (c) allows better land use plan for development of adjoining land; and (d) other. 
(9)  Adverse impact to public in closing road: (a) prevents landowner(s) from accessing public road; (b) interrupts comprehensive transportation plan project; (c) interrupts neighborhood to neighborhood transportation connection; and (d) other. 
Although these factors may be considered, the board of commissioner's ultimate standard for determination is whether the road serves no substantial public purpose and/or whether it is otherwise in the best public interest to close/abandon the road. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, art. III, 2-20-2012) 
Sec. 46-79. - Determination by the Coffee County Commission. 
(a)  If the board of commissioners approves the closing/abandonment, the county attorney shall determine if it is necessary to prepare a quitclaim deed, and file it for recording with the Superior Court. The submitted plat may require a revision if the board of commissioners placed conditions on the approved closing/abandonment. The applicant shall bear the cost of any required plat modification. The original deed (if any) shall be mailed to the applicant(s) by the clerk. 
(b)  The Coffee County Superior Court Clerk shall not file or record a plat of a road closing or abandoning which does not have the written approval of the Board of Commissioners of Coffee County thereon. 
(c)  No application for abandonment shall be made, or considered, if any portion of the property sought to be abandoned has been the subject of an abandonment application filed, or considered by the Coffee County Board of Commissioners, within the immediately preceding three years. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, art. IV, 2-20-2012) 
Sec. 46-80. - Fee. 
Any request submitted under the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by a $200.00 non-refundable application fee. The check shall be addressed to Coffee County and submitted at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, art. V, 2-20-2012) 
Chapter 50 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Solid waste management plan. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  Coffee County and the cities of Ambrose, Broxton, Douglas and Nicholls jointly participated in the development and submission of their solid waste management plan, as required by the Georgia Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 
(2)  The county solid waste management plan, in compliance with the minimum standards and procedures of the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act of 1989, has been reviewed by the Southeast Georgia Regional Development Center, forwarded to the state department of community affairs, and has been approved as being in compliance with the comprehensive planning act. 
(b)  Adopted. The board of commissioners authorizes the adoption of the county solid waste management plan as amended, submitted to, and approved by the state department of community affairs. 
(Code 2002, § 50-1; Res. of 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 50-2. - Regulation of landfills and solid waste collection and recycling centers. 
(a)  No landfill shall be operated in the county, other than a landfill designated by the county board of commissioners as the county landfill. No private municipal solid waste landfill shall be operated in the county, without a solid waste handling permit issued by the state environmental protection division. 
(b)  No person shall deposit solid waste of any kind outside the gate of a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(c)  No scavenging operation of any kind shall be allowed at a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(d)  No person shall move, remove, or cross any fence, gate, barrier, or sign at a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(e)  The price on solid waste brought to a center will be set to defray total cost of solid waste and recycling operations. 
(f)  The hours of operation of the centers will be set to maximize convenience to residents of that area. 
(g)  All recovered materials (recyclables) brought to collection centers will be accepted free of charge; provided it is separated under current market specifications and likewise uncontaminated. 
(h)  All collection centers will be manned during hours of operation to ensure compliance with this chapter and all applicable state and/or federal laws. 
(i)  The attendant on duty will have full authority of the center, consistent with this chapter. 
(j)  All rules listed in this section shall apply to all public and/or private property in the county, all waters and/or waterways of the county, and all county solid waste collection and recycling centers. 
(k)  Recovered materials and recovered materials processing facilities are subject to rules as defined in chapter 391-3-4 et seq., of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
(Code 2002, § 50-2; Ord. No. 03-01, § 50-2, 2-3-2003; Res. No. 2007-14, 10-15-2007) 
Secs. 50-3—50-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The county has entered into an agreement with the Solid Waste Management Authority of Crisp County to handle solid waste collection and disposal within the unincorporated area of the county. An official copy of the agreement is on file in the office of the county clerk. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-23. - Proper collection and disposal of refuse; inspection of refuse storage, containers, collection vehicles, and disposal facilities. 
(a)  All collection vehicles, hauling wet or moist waste, must be sufficiently watertight. 
(b)  All open-type vehicles must be covered when hauling refuse. 
(c)  The owner or occupant of any premises must be responsible for the sanitary handling of garbage and refuse on the premises occupied by him. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to dispose of garbage and other refuse in a manner which would create a nuisance. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to throw refuse on or litter any public or private property. 
(f)  Should the county provide a bulk containerized waste collection system, it is further resolved that: 
(1)  Containers will be serviced and emptied at least one time each week. 
(2)  Persons using the container shall deposit all garbage and other acceptable refuse into the container. 
(3)  No person shall set fire to the contents of any container. 
(4)  No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in any container. 
(5)  No dead animals shall be deposited in any container. 
(6)  No person shall deposit large noncompactable articles in containers such as stoves, refrigerators, bed springs, tires, large tree limbs or similar items. 
(7)  No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any container. 
(8)  No person shall willfully damage or alter the location of any container without the consent of the county commissioners. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful to disturb or scatter refuse in and around any refuse containers. 
(g)  Authority for refuse collection will be at the discretion of the governments of the county and the incorporated municipalities. 
(Res. of 9-16-1974; Res. of 11-17-1986) 
Sec. 50-24. - Purpose. 
It is the principal objective of this article to attain a clean and litter-free community through education and voluntary compliance. Enforcement procedures shall be utilized only where other means fail. 
(Code 2002, § 50-31; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 5.01) 
Sec. 50-25. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article shall be applicable in the unincorporated areas of the county. This article shall govern the accumulation, handling and disposal of all solid waste in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 2002, § 50-32; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 5.02) 
Sec. 50-26. - Administration and interpretations. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the chairman of the board of commissioners or his designee to administer the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The chairman or his designee, upon written request, shall provide interpretations concerning provisions of this article which are unclear or in dispute. 
(Code 2002, § 50-33; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 5.03) 
Sec. 50-27. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the board of commissioners to enforce this article. The nonpayment of fees provided for in this article shall constitute a lien against the real and personal property of the person responsible for the payment of the fees. Should any person liable for the payment of the fees fail to pay the fees within 90 days of having been billed, the chairman or his designee is authorized and may issue an execution against such person and deliver the execution to the sheriff for levy and sale as provided by law. The execution shall also be recorded in the general execution dockets in the clerk of superior court's office and a list of nonpays periodically advertised in the legal organ of the county. Further, the execution and/or fi. fa. may also be delivered to the magistrate court of the county for any lawful avenue of debt collection to be followed for collection of the outstanding bill, including the process of continuing garnishment. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor, with the exception of failure to pay the monthly garbage bill, which shall be handled through a civil action, and shall constitute an offense triable in the magistrate court of the county, and punishable as provided in section 1-12. In addition, appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violations of this article; to recover damages; or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties previously described in this subsection. 
(c)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, wagon, wheelbarrow or other conveyance in violation of this article or the rules and regulations promulgated by the chairman of the board of commissioners, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(d)  Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property, in violation of this article, is discovered to contain any articles, including but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings, which display the name of the person in such manner as to indicate that the article belongs to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(e)  Where any section of this article contains specific remedies or punishments, such specific remedies or punishments shall not be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other remedies and punishments provided in this chapter or otherwise provided by law for the violation of or noncompliance with this article. 
(f)  In addition to all punishments and penalties provided anywhere in this article, otherwise than by law, the magistrate's court may impose the following additional or alternative sentences, either as a direct sentence, or as a condition to probation: 
(1)  The court may direct the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way any and all litter deposited by anyone else prior to the date of the execution of the sentence; or 
(2)  The court may direct the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by any competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited by anyone prior to the date of the execution of the sentence. 
(Code 2002, § 50-34; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 5.04; Ord. No. 03-01, § 50-34(a), 2-3-2003; Ord. of 4-5-2004) 
Sec. 50-28. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
Bags means plastic sacks designed for refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top with no support beneath, securely tied at the top for collection, with a capacity not to exceed 30 gallons and a loaded weight not to exceed 35 pounds. 
Brown goods means bulky waste such as sofas, chairs, mattresses and the like. 
Building material means any material defined as but not limited to lumber, brick, block, stone, carpet, plumbing materials, plaster, concrete, roofing, floor tile, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of the construction of or repairs or additions to structures or accessory structures or the demolition of such. 
Bulky waste means a large appliance, piece of furniture or waste material from a residential source other than construction debris or hazardous waste, with a weight or volume greater than that allowed for containers. 
Commercial establishment means any establishment which operates a commercial business in the county. For the purposes of this article, such establishments are divided into the following classifications: 
(1)  Individual commercial establishment, which means a commercial establishment not part of a group commercial establishment. 
(2)  Group commercial establishment, which means a commercial building with more than one commercial establishment or spaces for more than one commercial establishment. 
Container means a receptacle (not including front-loading containers) made of plastic, metal or fiberglass with a capacity not to exceed 100 gallons, a loaded weight of not more than 75 pounds, a tightfitting lid, and handles of adequate strength for lifting. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes, but is not limited to, landfilling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Disposal site means a refuse depository for the processing or disposal of refuse, including but not limited to sanitary landfills, transfer stations, incinerators, and waste processing separation centers, licensed, permitted or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Dwelling unit means any structure suitable or commonly used for residential purposes by a single-family or family group, and includes all single-family residences, including modular homes and mobile homes, and includes each apartment, townhouse, condominium or cooperative unit of a multifamily structure. All residences are included whether or not occupied, except mobile homes held as inventory on a sale lot by a state-licensed mobile home dealer. 
Front-loading container means a metal receptacle that can be mechanically lifted into the county's or its designee's collection vehicles for disposal of the refuse contained in the container. 
Garbage means putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food, including food containers. 
Group residential development means a building or development with one or more individual rental dwellings, units or lots, attached or detached, on one parcel of land. Examples of group residential developments include apartments and manufactured home parks. 
Hazardous refuse means waste designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or appropriate state agency. 
Industrial establishment means any establishment involved in the production of any goods. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations. The term "industrial waste" includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food and related products and byproducts; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. The term "industrial waste" does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Inert waste means wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earthlike products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. The term "inert waste" excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed. 
Litter means all discarded materials, including but not limited to garbage, household trash, commercial trash, industrial waste, building materials, appliances or portions, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, debris, dead animals, or any other discarded or used substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home park shall be a lot or parcel of land under single ownership or control or design, and developed for the purpose of providing spaces for one or more manufactured homes intended to be used for temporary or permanent living facilities. 
Open dump means a disposal facility at which solid waste from one or more sources is left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. 
Owner means the person listed on each annual assessment roll, even though the roll may not be current as to record title. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
Recovered material means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. The term "recovered materials processing facility" shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste. 
Refuse means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "refuse" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Rental property means that property rented or leased by a property owner to another, with or without a written agreement, thereby creating a landlord/tenant relationship, irrespective of the actual payment of money or services to the owner for use of the property by the tenant. 
Residential unit means a dwelling or occupied living space. 
Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and noncombustible materials. 
Scavenge, scavenging means the unauthorized retrieval of discarded refuse items. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. The term "scrap tire generators" may include, but is not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments. 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the environmental protection division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material. 
Solid waste enforcement officer means the official designated by the board of commissioners as responsible for enforcing violations of this article. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste, or any combination of such activities. 
Travel trailer and recreational vehicle space means a lot or parcel designed or developed for the purpose of providing spaces for two or more recreational vehicle units to be used as temporary or permanent living facilities. 
White goods means bulky wastes such as refrigerators, freezers, washers, dryers and other large appliances. 
Yard waste means waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery cuttings or clippings, grass clippings, and all other similar wastes. 
(Code 2002, § 50-35; Ord. of 7-21-1997, §§ 1.01, 1.02; Ord. No. 03-01, § 50-35, 2-3-2003; Ord. of 4-18-2005, §§ (a)—(d)) 
Secs. 50-29—50-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 50-60. - Authority of board of commissioners. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners shall have charge of the administration of this article. The chairman is authorized, with the approval of the board of commissioners and under the supervision of the county attorney, to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations concerning solid waste collection, conveyance and disposal, and respecting the size, type and specifications, number and location of all containers for collection. Such rules and regulations shall have the force of law but shall not be contrary to anything in this article but supplementary to this article. 
(Code 2002, § 50-61; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 2.01) 
Sec. 50-61. - Ownership of refuse. 
(a)  All refuse shall be and shall remain the property of the owner or occupant until it has been placed in vehicles of the county or its designee or taken to a licensed landfill or otherwise deposed of in compliance with this article. The county has no responsibility or liability for any injuries or damage resulting from the refuse. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all litter, waste, scrap tires, and municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(Code 2002, § 50-62; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 2.02; Ord. No. 03-01, § 50-62, 2-3-2003) 
Sec. 50-62. - Collection, hauling and disposal services. 
(a)  All residential, commercial, industrial and institutional establishments in the unincorporated portions of the county shall utilize the solid waste collection service of the county for the disposition of refuse unless the establishment contracts with a private company for its solid waste collection. Refuse shall be neatly stored in containers approved by the county and shall be collected on a schedule set by the board of commissioners or its designee. 
(b)  Legal disposal of all other refuse not addressed in subsection (a) of this section shall be the responsibility of the establishment producing the refuse. 
(c)  In group residential developments, the owner of the development and their tenants shall be jointly and severally responsible for the solid waste collection bill. The schedule for such charges is as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and maintained in the office of the county clerk. 
(d)  All other residential units shall pay a sum, as set in the schedule of fees and charges, for collection of garbage and household trash by the county or its designee. 
(e)  In group commercial establishments, the owner of the building shall be responsible for the solid waste collection bill. The schedule for such charges is as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and maintained in the office of the county clerk. 
(f)  In individual commercial establishments, the owner of the individual business shall be responsible for the solid waste collection bill. The schedule for such charges is as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and maintained in the office of the county clerk. 
(g)  It shall be the responsibility of the person identified in this section as responsible for the solid waste collection bill to notify the board of commissioners or its designee when moving to discontinue service. At the time service is discontinued, payment in full of all outstanding balances is required. 
(h)  The county or its designee may decline to collect any: 
(1)  Container not properly placed; 
(2)  Container not approved by the board of commissioners; 
(3)  Containers that contain sharp objects or liquids; or 
(4)  Refuse not properly contained. 
Where the county or its designee has reason to leave solid waste uncollected, the county or its agents shall inform the customer within two days by written notice, mailing, or telephone as to why the solid waste was not collected. 
(i)  If a regularly scheduled collection is missed and a complaint is received by the board of commissioners, and where no fault can be found on the customer's part, a special collection of refuse will be required of the county or its designee within 48 hours. 
(j)  Notwithstanding any other provision set forth in this section, the owner of one or more rental units, properties or lots of any kind, and their tenants, shall be jointly and severally responsible for paying the solid waste collection fees for said rental units, irrespective to the location of the property, or the geographical relationship of one property with the other. 
(Code 2002, § 50-63; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 2.03; Ord. of 4-18-2005, § (e)) 
Sec. 50-63. - Late fees. 
The monthly fee levied by this division and collected by the county shall be due and payable on the first day of the month. If the fee is not paid by the tenth of each month, there is levied a late charge as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges and maintained in the office of the county clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 50-64; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 2.04; Ord. No. 1, § 2.04, 9-8-1998) 
Sec. 50-64. - Receptacles and containers required. 
(a)  Every occupied building or premises upon which refuse is accumulated or produced shall be required by this article to provide and keep in a suitable place, readily accessible to the solid waste collection crews of the county, or its designees, receptacles and containers provided or approved by the county as suitable for the storage of all such refuse which will normally accumulate between the established collection dates. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall determine the type, size, specifications, number and location of such receptacles and shall determine whether such receptacles and containers are in a serviceable condition. Every person in possession, charge of or control of any building or premises upon which refuse is accumulated or produced shall be initially provided a container by the county. 
(c)  Should any additional containers be needed, either upon the determination of the customer or the county, they may be obtained for an additional fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, from the county or its designee. 
(d)  Unless approved by the chairman of the board of commissioners or its designee, containers furnished by the county or its designees shall not be removed from the premises to which delivered. 
(e)  If the container furnished by the county is damaged, lost or destroyed through negligence of the person to whom the container was assigned, the person shall reimburse the county for the cost of a replacement container. 
(f)  Any spillage or overflow from the refuse container shall be cleaned up immediately by the customer. 
(g)  Those customers with curbside pickup shall have their refuse container placed curbside or as close as practicable to the collection vehicle routes by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day. Curbside refers to that portion of the right-of-way adjacent to and within ten feet of paved or traveled roadways, including alleys. 
(h)  Those customers with curbside pickup shall return their refuse container to the side or rear of their building no later than 7:00 p.m. on the designated garbage pickup day. Where the collection point is located more than 100 yards from a building, the container may be stored at another location approved by the county. 
(Code 2002, § 50-65; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 2.05) 
Sec. 50-65. - Receptacles and containers to be safe. 
(a)  All receptacles and containers shall be maintained in good service condition at all times. Any receptacle or container which does not conform to the requirements of this article or to the rules and regulations of the county, or which is likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents or the public generally, shall be replaced promptly by the user of the receptacle or container. 
(b)  If any such container, after request by the county or its designee, has not been replaced, this shall be considered a violation of this article and shall be treated accordingly. 
(Code 2002, § 50-66; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 2.06) 
Sec. 50-66. - Service for disabled. 
The county shall provide collection service for disabled persons who are in fact unable by reason, age or infirmity to place their containers at the roadside. Persons with disabilities certified to the chairman of the board of commissioners or its designee by a licensed physician will be exempt from placing their refuse roadside. The county or its designee agrees to collect waste of such disabled persons in any mutually convenient place on the premises of such disabled persons, except the county or its designee shall not be required to go into houses or other dwellings. 
(Code 2002, § 50-67; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 2.07) 
Secs. 50-67—50-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES 

Sec. 50-91. - Applicability. 
The practices and procedures outlined in this division shall be followed by persons in the unincorporated areas of the county in order to facilitate the collection of solid waste. 
(Code 2002, § 50-91; Ord. of 7-21-1997, art. III) 
Sec. 50-92. - Garbage. 
Garbage placed in containers for collection shall be enclosed in bags as defined in section 50-28. Household trash shall be combined with garbage. All solid waste or litter containers or receptacles and their surrounding area shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for solid waste and litter disposal. 
(Code 2002, § 50-92; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 3.01; Ord. No. 03-01, § 50-92, 2-3-2003) 
Sec. 50-93. - Injurious trash items. 
Waste material with potential for inflicting injury, such as needles, broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes and television tubes shall be securely packaged or wrapped in such a manner as will prevent injury to the collection crews or other persons. The provisions of this section shall not apply to material placed in mechanically handled containers. 
(Code 2002, § 50-93; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 3.02) 
Sec. 50-94. - Hazardous refuse. 
Hazardous refuse will not be collected by the county or its designee. No person shall place any items of hazardous refuse in any refuse receptacle or other container for collection by the county. Federal and state hazardous waste laws shall be observed by all persons, and any violations will be reported to the appropriate authorities. 
(Code 2002, § 50-94; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 3.03) 
Sec. 50-95. - Building materials. 
(a)  Building materials will not be collected by the county or its designee. The owner of the premises or the contractor, builder or person doing the repairs, remodeling, construction or demolition shall be required to legally dispose of all such debris. Such debris may be disposed of at the county landfill or transfer station. 
(b)  Building materials or any other refuse, garbage or trash items which may accumulate during the construction of a development or structure shall be contained in a trash bin, drop-off trailer, or similar container approved by the county. It shall be a violation of this article for any developer, builder, contractor or landowner to allow building materials or other debris to accumulate other than in a container from which such items cannot escape, except by human force, and from which such items may be easily gathered for disposal. The violations will be handled as described in division 1 of this article. Any person cited for violating this section shall have his building permit revoked until the violation is corrected to the satisfaction of the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2002, § 50-95; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 3.04) 
Sec. 50-96. - Tree, shrubbery, and lawn trimmings. 
(a)  In all residential, commercial and industrial zoning districts, trees and other yard debris cut by the owner or occupant shall be promptly taken by the owner or occupant to an approved landfill. When a tree or other yard debris is cut from private property by anyone other than the owner, such person shall remove and legally dispose of all such material. The owner, tenant or other persons in possession of the property shall be responsible to see that such contractor complies with this provision. Such material may be disposed of at the county landfill or transfer station. 
(b)  In an agricultural zoning district (AF), yard debris may be burned on site in accordance with the state forestry department's rules and permitting process. 
(c)  Wood may be collected and stored in all zoning districts for use in fireplaces and the like. Wood so collected and stored shall be located in the rear yard, not the front or side yards. 
(d)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any solid waste disposal facility having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion within the county. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. Any yard trimmings to be collected by any entity other than the property owner shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(Code 2002, § 50-96; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 3.05; Ord. No. 03-01, § 50-96, 2-3-2003) 
Sec. 50-97. - Ashes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to deposit hot ashes in garbage containers. Ashes shall not be placed or deposited upon streets, sidewalks or other publicly owned land. 
(b)  No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacle. 
(Code 2002, § 50-97; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 3.06; Ord. No. 03-01, § 50-97, 2-3-2003) 
Sec. 50-98. - Pet litter. 
Pet litter shall be placed in securely tied plastic bags and placed in the refuse container for collection by the county or its designee. 
(Code 2002, § 50-98; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 3.07) 
Sec. 50-99. - Household furniture, furnishings and brown goods. 
Household furniture, furnishings and brown goods shall be placed on the shoulder of the road adjacent to the trash container or taken to the transfer station. 
(Code 2002, § 50-99; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 3.08) 
Sec. 50-100. - Appliances, white goods. 
Appliances and other white goods shall be placed on the shoulder of the road adjacent to the trash container or taken to the transfer station. 
(Code 2002, § 50-100; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 3.09) 
Sec. 50-101. - Disposable diapers. 
Disposable diapers shall be placed and tied securely in plastic bags and placed in the refuse container for collection by the county or its designee. No other type of human waste shall be placed in any refuse receptacle for collection by the county or its designee. 
(Code 2002, § 50-101; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 3.10) 
Sec. 50-102. - Tires. 
(a)  Tires must be taken by the owner to the county landfill or transfer station for disposal. 
(b)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in chapter 391-3-4 et seq., of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, chapter 391-3-4 et seq., applicable to solid waste. 
(c)  No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any container or receptacle unless authorized by the owner of the receptacle or the county board of commissioners or their designee. 
(Code 2002, § 50-102; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 3.11; Ord. No. 03-01, § 50-102, 2-3-2003) 
Sec. 50-103. - Recycling encouraged. 
The county board of commissioners hereby finds that it is in the best interest of citizens of the county, in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county, to recycle as many waste materials as possible in order to reduce the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste materials which must be properly disposed of; therefore, it is the policy of the county board of commissioners to encourage recycling whenever practicable. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 50-103, 2-3-2003) 
Secs. 50-104—50-134. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 50-135. - Activities declared unlawful. 
The activities outlined in this division are declared to be unlawful and in violation of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 50-131; Ord. of 7-21-1997, art. IV) 
Sec. 50-136. - Public and private property. 
No person shall place any litter, refuse, garbage or trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any other public property, nor upon any private property, except with the written consent of the owner or occupant, and then only in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 50-132; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 4.01) 
Sec. 50-137. - Drainageways. 
No person shall impede or cause to be impeded any drainageway, public or private, by placing any litter, refuse, trash, trees, yard waste, or any other item in, on or over such public or private drainageways. 
(Code 2002, § 50-133; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 4.02) 
Sec. 50-138. - Appliances. 
No person shall leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing the door from the appliance. This section shall not apply to any appliance, refrigerator or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and which has been crated, strapped or locked so it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment of the appliance. 
(Code 2002, § 50-134; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 4.03) 
Sec. 50-139. - Vacant units, undeveloped lots and rental units. 
The county or its designee will not remove garbage, trash, building material, household trash or tree, shrubbery or lawn trimmings or any other debris that is accumulated on or in vacant units, undeveloped lots and rental units. 
(Code 2002, § 50-135; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 4.04) 
Sec. 50-140. - Scavenging. 
No person other than the owner shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, or remove any contents, or remove such container from its location. 
(Code 2002, § 50-136; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 4.05) 
Sec. 50-141. - Transportation of debris. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any of the roads of the county to transport such loose materials without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle in such a manner as to prevent the loose materials from being deposited on the streets or adjoining public and/or private lands. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a business or private person engaged in waste hauling or transportation for hire from businesses or private residences to dispose of materials as solid waste that have been intentionally sorted as recyclables by the business or private residence to a lawfully permitted disposal facility rather than placing the materials in the location designated by the county or appropriate authority for said recyclables. 
(Code 2002, § 50-137; Ord. of 7-21-1997, § 4.06; Ord. No. 03-01, § 50-137, 2-3-2003) 
Sec. 50-142. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or cause to be dumped any garbage, refuse, litter, junk, appliances, equipment, cans, bottles, lumber, trees, tree limbs, brush or parts of brush, dead animals or any parts of dead animals, debris, rubbish, waste material, or other discarded materials (collectively referred to in this section as litter) anywhere in the unincorporated areas of the county unless: 
(1)  The property is specifically designated by the county for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a specific litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any refuse or other material other than household garbage into a dumpster or other litter receptacle placed in and about the county by the board of commissioners. As used in this section, the term "household garbage" means kitchen, animal, vegetable, and fruit refuse matter and other refuse matter ordinarily generated as byproducts of a household or restaurant, such as tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics, and wrapping or packaging materials. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any containers provided by the county for the dumping of trash or garbage. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump the carcass of a dead animal or any part of a dead animal, including the skeleton, the hide, the hooves, the scales, the intestinal organs, bones, etc., into a dumpster or at a dumpster site. 
(Code 2002, § 50-241; Res. of 8-5-1996, §§ (a)—(d)) 
Secs. 50-143—50-167. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REFUSE HANDLING WITHIN MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

Sec. 50-168. - Garbage can per housing unit required. 
Refuse (solid waste, garbage) within a manufactured home park shall be handled in the manner prescribed in this article in that each housing unit within the park shall be provided with a garbage can. 
(Code 2002, § 50-161; Ord. of 2-16-1998, § A) 
Chapter 54 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

Article IV. - Energy Excise Tax 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Judicial in rem tax foreclosures. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq., the commissioners of the county do hereby adopt the procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq., and following, for judicial in rem tax foreclosures. 
(b)  The county attorney is authorized by this chapter to proceed with judicial in rem tax foreclosures, as set forth in the above-referenced code sections. 
(Ord. of 5-3-1999) 
Secs. 54-2—54-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 54-21. - Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of the depository financial institutions. The term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The term "depository financial institutions" shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Code 2002, § 58-31; Res. of 1-1-1984, § 1) 
Sec. 54-22. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution, pursuant to section 54-21, shall be $1,000.00. 
(Code 2002, § 58-32; Res. of 1-1-1984, § 2) 
Sec. 54-23. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. This return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Code 2002, § 58-33; Res. of 1-1-1984, § 3) 
Sec. 54-24. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 54-23, unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2002, § 58-34; Res. of 1-1-1984, § 4) 
Secs. 54-25—54-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Voters approved the Freeport exemption in a referendum held November 11, 1978. 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 

Sec. 54-52. - Adopted. 
(a)  Eligible property. The county adopts, grants, ratifies and confirms 100 percent exemption of the value of the following tangible personal property as set forth as follows from ad valorem taxation as set forth in Ga. Const. art. VII, § II, ¶ III: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production, which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall apply only to tangible personal property that is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing or production operations in this state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the state from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. Such period shall be determined based on application of a first-in, first-out method of accounting for the inventory. The official books and records shall contain a full, true and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the property, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such property for which a Freeport exemption has been claimed, shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of this state and of any political subdivision of this state. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Destined for shipment to a final destination outside this state includes that portion or percentage of an inventory of finished goods the taxpayer can establish, through an historical sales or shipment analysis, either of which utilizes information from the preceding calendar year, or other reasonable, documented method, is reasonably anticipated to be shipped to a final destination outside this state. Such other reasonable, documented method may only be utilized in the case of a new business, in the case of a substantial change in scope of an existing business, or in other unusual situations where an historical sales or shipment analysis does not adequately reflect future anticipated shipments to a final destination outside this state. It is not necessary that the actual final destination be known as of January 1 in order to qualify for the exemption. 
Finished goods means goods, wares and merchandise of every character and kind, but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted or unsevered natural resources, or raw materials, or goods in the process of manufacture or production, or the stock in trade of a retailer. 
Raw materials means any material, whether crude or processed, that can be converted by manufacture, processing or combination into a new and useful product, but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted or unsevered natural resources. 
Stock in trade of a retailer means finished goods held by one in the business of making sales of such goods at retail in this state, within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2, when such goods are held or stored at a business location from which such retail sales are regularly made. Goods stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, including a warehouse or distribution center which is part of or adjoins a place of business from which retail sales are regularly made, shall not be considered stock in trade of a retailer to the extent that the taxpayer can establish, through an historical sales or shipment analysis, either of which utilizes information from the preceding calendar year, or other reasonable, documented method, the portion or percentage of such goods that is reasonably anticipated to be shipped outside this state for resale purposes. 
(Code 2002, § 58-71; Res. of 8-6-1984; Res. of 11-19-1984) 
Secs. 54-53—54-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-06, §§ 1—8, adopted Dec. 3, 2012, effective Jan. 1, 2013, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as §§ 54-71—54-78. 

Sec. 54-71. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms: "dealer;" "energy;" "local sales and use tax;" and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 12-3-2012, eff. 1-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-72. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2.3. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 2, 12-3-2012, eff. 1-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-73. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)  Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of Coffee County pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
(1)  For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 25 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 50 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 75 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 100 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2(c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (b) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016, limitation in that paragraph (4). 
(d)  (1)  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of Coffee County shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two percent. 
(2)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two percent to one percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one percent to two percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 3, 12-3-2012, eff. 1-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-74. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
(1)  Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as other provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(3)  A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(4)  Remitted to the governing authority of Coffee County by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(5)  A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 4, 12-3-2012, eff. 1-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-75. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)  The governing authority of Coffee County, or the collecting officer appointed under section 54-78 of this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. An energy provider shall not be liable for failing to collect and remit the excise tax imposed pursuant to this article if the purchaser has failed to submit such uniform exemption certificate to the energy provider. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 5, 12-3-2012, eff. 1-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-76. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on January 1, 2013, and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of Coffee County monthly on or before the 20 th day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 6, 12-3-2012, eff. 1-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-77. - Allocation, distribution, and expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b), the excise tax proceeds shall be allocated and distributed by the governing authority of Coffee County at the end of each calendar month. An amount equal to one percent of such proceeds collected by Coffee County shall be paid into the general fund of Coffee County to defray the costs of collection and administration. 
(b)  The remainder shall be distributed in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement as required under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b) and (c). Within 30 days following the end of each calendar month, the remainder shall be distributed to the general fund of Coffee County and the general fund of each participating municipality in accordance with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(c). 
(1)  If two local sales and use taxes are in effect in the special district, an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds shall be distributed to the general fund of Coffee County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the first local sales and use tax and an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Coffee County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in such county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the second local sales and use tax; or 
(2)  If only one such local sales and use tax is in effect in the special district, then the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Coffee County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the second local sales and use tax. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, proceeds of the excise tax deposited in the general fund of Coffee County may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the governing authority of Coffee County. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 7, 12-3-2012, eff. 1-1-2013) 
Sec. 54-78. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)  The governing authority of Coffee County shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this article. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 8, 12-3-2012, eff. 1-1-2013) 
Chapter 58 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - E-911 Wireless phone charge subscriber fee. 
A wireless enhanced 911 charge shall be imposed upon each wireless telecommunications connection subscribed to by subscribers whose billing address is within the jurisdiction of the county, at the rate of $1.50 per month per wireless connection provided to each telephone subscriber. 
(Res. No. 02-08, 4-1-2002; Res. of 8-1-2003; Res. No. 2007-02, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 58-2. - Prepaid wireless service 9-1-1 charges. 
(a)  9-1-1 Charge on prepaid wireless transactions. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(b)  Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the Commissioner of the Department of Revenue at the times and in the manner provided by Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(c)  Administrative provisions. The clerk of the county is hereby directed to file with the State Revenue Commissioner a certified copy of this ordinance and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten days of enactment of this ordinance. 
(d)  Depositing of funds; use of funds. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this ordinance shall be deposited in the Emergency Telephone System Fund maintained by this county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purpose authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(e). 
(Ord. No. 11-3, §§ 1—4, 6-20-2011, eff. 1-1-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-3, §§ 1—4, adopted June 20, 2011, effective Jan. 1, 2012, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as § 58-2. 
Secs. 58-3—58-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems by counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq.; municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

Sec. 58-21. - Short title. 
This legislation shall be known as the "Coffee County Cable Television Franchise Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 12-18-1989, art. I) 
Sec. 58-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board means the board of commissioners. 
Cable television system means a nonbroadcast facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated generation, reception, transmission and control equipment, under common ownership and control, that distributes or is designed to distribute to subscribers the signals of one or more television broadcast stations and programs received in satellite, microwave, videotape or video disks, or produced by a franchised cable system. 
Franchise means an agreement between a person desiring to operate a cable television system within the unincorporated areas of the county and the board which provides for the respective rights and obligations of the franchisee and the board with respect to the operation of such cable television system and the franchise fee to be paid to the county as compensation for the privilege of operating such cable television system. 
Franchise fee means a fee, to be naturally agreed upon by the board and the franchisee, which the franchisee shall pay into the general revenues of the county, at least monthly, as compensation for the privilege of operating a cable television system within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Franchisee means a person who has been granted a franchise to operate a cable television system within the unincorporated areas of the county by the board. 
(Code 2002, § 62-31; Ord. of 12-18-1989, § 302) 
Sec. 58-23. - Operation unlawful without franchise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a cable television system within the unincorporated areas of the county, without first having obtained a franchise for such cable television system as provided in this article. 
(Code 2002, § 62-32; Ord. of 12-18-1989, art. IV) 
Sec. 58-24. - Application for franchise. 
Any person desiring to operate any cable television system within the unincorporated areas of the county shall first make application for a franchise to operate such cable television system on a form to be provided by the board, and shall furnish such information as may be required by the board. 
(Code 2002, § 62-33; Ord. of 12-18-1989, § 501) 
Sec. 58-25. - Appearance before board. 
Each applicant for a cable television franchise shall cause a representative to appear before the board at a regularly scheduled meeting to be designated by the board and shall furnish to the board such additional information it may request. Following such meeting the board shall either grant or deny the franchise. 
(Code 2002, § 62-34; Ord. of 12-18-1989, § 502) 
Sec. 58-26. - Franchise fees. 
Any person who is granted a franchise to operate a cable television system as provided in this article shall pay to the general treasury of the county, at least monthly, a fee which shall be at a rate to be mutually agreed upon by the board and the franchisee. 
(Code 2002, § 62-35; Ord. of 12-18-1989, § 503) 
Sec. 58-27. - Duration of franchise. 
Each franchise granted pursuant to this article shall continue in force and effect until it is either abandoned by the franchisee or canceled by the board pursuant to terms and conditions specified in the franchise. 
(Code 2002, § 62-36; Ord. of 12-18-1989, § 601) 
Sec. 58-28. - Easements. 
Each franchisee shall have the sole responsibility for obtaining from electrical utility companies and/or telephone companies operating within the unincorporated areas of the county such easements for the installation and maintenance of its cables and lines as it may deem appropriate. Each franchisee shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the county from any and all claims which may be asserted against it by any entity as a result of the use of or damage to any property of such entity by the franchisee. 
(Code 2002, § 62-37; Ord. of 12-18-1989, § 602) 
Sec. 58-29. - Transferability. 
Each franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be deemed and considered to be a privilege granted exclusively to the original franchisee. No such franchise shall be transferable by such franchisee to any other person without the prior written approval of the board. 
(Code 2002, § 62-38; Ord. of 12-18-1989, § 603) 
Chapter 62 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Uniform Rules of the Road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. tit. 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.), known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, including the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Code 2002, § 66-31) 
Secs. 62-2—62-20. - Reserved. 
Chapter 66 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 

Sec. 66-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is: 
(1)  To ensure that water supply wells, private water supply systems and the public water supply system are located, engineered and installed in a manner that protects the general health and safety of the citizens of the county. 
(2)  To establish standards for developers, entities or individuals who desire to establish and/or develop private water systems. 
(3)  To designate and create the county public water system and to provide a more comprehensive public water use ordinance for the county. 
(4)  To repeal any previous public water use ordinances, except as provided in section 66-25. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09, § I, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 66-21. - Public water system. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  The public water systems subject to this article are the Oak Park Water System, the Cherokee Hills Water System, any other water system owned, bought, or obtained by the county currently or in the future. All water systems now owned or later acquired by the county will collectively be designated and described as the "Coffee County Public Water System," hereinafter referred to in this article as the county system. This article recognizes that the Cherokee Hills Water System is funded under the same grant as the Oak Park Water System. The renaming of these systems shall do nothing to affect the funding of the same by the USDA under their previous names. 
(2)  A consumer shall make application for water service, in person, at the county utilities department in Douglas, Georgia. At that time, the consumer shall make a cash security deposit for water service. The fee for the security deposit shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(3)  Each consumer seeking connection to the county system shall pay a connection fee for each desired connection for water service. The connection fee shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(4)  Should the county purchase, obtain, or otherwise acquire a water system already in existence, there will be no connection charge for those already connected to and using the existing system at the time of purchase. 
(5)  All consumers connected to the county system shall pay those rates for water usage as established by the county board of commissioners. The water rate usage schedule shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(6)  All charges for security deposits, connections, water usage rates, penalties and/or charges of any kind associated with connection to the county system are subject to change at any time and without notice to present or prospective consumers; provided the same are amended pursuant to a majority public vote by the county board of commissioners. 
(7)  Every residence, business or enterprise of any kind subject to this article shall have its own water connection and meter. 
a.  It shall be a violation of this article and a misdemeanor crime to connect another residence or business/enterprise of any kind, to the county system through a single residence/business metering device in order to obtain or provide water to another consumer or business, thereby avoiding paying additional security deposits, connection fees, higher rates and/or to avoid any other charge required for use of the county system. 
b.  It shall be a violation of this article and a misdemeanor crime to sell public water to any other person or permit any other household, business or adjacent land owner to use said water except for fire protection or for emergency situations as determined by the county administrator or other county designee. 
c.  Any consumer violating this provision shall be subject to the penalties and fines set out at section 66-24. 
(8)  Except for fire protection, the county shall not under any condition or circumstance furnish water free of charge to anyone connected to the county system. 
(b)  Mandatory connection. 
(1)  There shall be no mandatory connection to the county system, except as provided in subsection (2) of this section. 
(2)  Where the county system is available, capacity permits, and it is in the best interest of the county, there will be mandatory hookup to the county system in the following situations: 
a.  Where necessary to preclude the use of water obtained from a private well that is demonstrably unfit for human consumption or other intended use; 
b.  For any public water system having active service connection accounts which total more than 75,000 or have more than 200 active service accounts per square mile of total area served by any part or component part of the county system; 
c.  For any single-family residential property owner or farm which: 
1.  Has an existing well water source owned by the user and located on the same tract of land as the residence or farm, and who becomes eligible to connect to a public water system; 
2.  Has been mailed written notice, by the county to his mailing address, of the county's intent to require mandatory connection by the resident to the county system, and of his right to opt out of connecting with the county system; and 
3.  Where the owner fails to notify the county in writing of their decision to exercise their option to opt out from connection to the county system within 45 days after the date the county mailed its notice of intent to connect the resident to the county system; but 
4.  If the county purchases a private water system which services a residence or business, and the user is already connected to the private water system, continued connection to the system then owned by the county shall be mandatory and the consumer shall not have the right to opt out as set out in subsection (b)(2)c.1—3 and nor shall the requirements set out therein be required of the county; 
d.  For any project of a public water system for which revenue bonds have been validated, issued, and sold prior to January 1, 2008; 
e.  For any public water system funded primarily through a federal or state grant that contains stipulations in such grant requiring the county to levy a charge or fee for water supply services made available but not used, provided events occur on or before July 1, 2007. Thereafter, no state grant, loan, or contract for services funding any project of a public water system shall contain any stipulations requiring the county to levy a charge or fee for water supply services made available but not used or requiring the county to require single-family property owners or farms to connect with or use water supplied by a public water system, except where necessary to preclude the use of water obtained from another source that is demonstrably unfit for human consumption or other intended use. For the purposes of this subsection (b), the term "federal grant" is defined as money provided directly to the county. Federal money provided to a revolving loan fund or to the state environmental facilities authority or such other mechanism shall not be considered a federal grant; or 
f.  All new residential subdivisions and/or developments of any kind, institutional or commercial, shall be required to connect to the county system when the county system is within: 
1.  A 1,000 feet radius of the nearest property line created by a new subdivision or development; and 
2.  It is in the best interest of the county to require connection to the county system, and the county system otherwise has the capacity to accept the new subdivision or development. 
It will be the responsibility of the designated county employee of the county utilities department to determine whether mandatory connection is required under this section. 
(3)  No subdivision or development shall be permitted or approved by the county or its designee, unless it has first been determined whether the mandatory connection criterion set out in subsection (b)(2) has been evaluated by the county water department and presented to the Douglas-Coffee County Planning Commission, along with the developers request for zoning change, or subdivision approval. 
(c)  Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(1)  Water furnished by the county shall be used for consumption only by the individual household or business metered to receive said water, and for those other uses permitted by this article and/or the zoning ordinances of the county which govern the property at issue. Water shall not be used for any purposes inconsistent with this article. 
(2)  A suitable place shall be provided for the meter box which is unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(3)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(4)  The consumer's piping shall be installed and maintained in a safe and efficient manner by the consumer at the consumer's expense, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state department of public health. 
(5)  All consumers connecting to the county system must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the county system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the county system covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the county system they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the county system. 
(6)  Any individual damaging any part of the county system, including but not limited to wells, pumps, pipes or meters, shall be responsible for paying for the cost of repair to the same. 
(7)  It shall be a violation of this article and a misdemeanor crime to connect a private well to the county system. Any consumer violating this provision shall be subject to the penalties and fines set out at section 66-24. 
(d)  County responsibility. 
(1)  The county shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed. 
(2)  The county may install its meter at or near the property line, or, at the county's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(3)  The county reserves the right to refuse service as provided in this article or when due to technical and engineering reasons, or when safety is a concern, connection is not advisable. 
(4)  Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the county. 
(e)  Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(1)  Duly authorized agents of the county shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing county property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, repairs or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities. 
(2)  Extensions of the county system that require piping to cross private property shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the county a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water lines, or pursuant to the county's rights to eminent domain and condemnation. 
(f)  Meter reading, billings, collections, late fees and penalties. 
(1)  Bills to consumers for water service shall be mailed out on a monthly basis. Payment for water service is due on the 24th of each month. Bills shall be paid at the county utilities department and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. Failure of the water user to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of penalties. 
(2)  A late charge shall be added on the 25th of each month due to nonpayment of the current amount due unless the 24th falls on a weekend or holiday and then the bill will be due on the following business day. The late fee shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(3)  Nonpayment of the current amount due and late charge will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property if full payment is not made within 15 days of the due date or the next business day, provided that the due date falls on a weekend or county observed or declared holiday. When water service must be discontinued due to nonpayment, the service will be cut off on the tenth of the month. 
(4)  Water service shall not be reconnected until the customer's delinquent bill, including all penalties and reconnection charges, have been paid in full. The reconnection fee shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(5)  If no initial deposit was required or obtained by the county and service is disconnected for nonpayment of bills, a security deposit will be required before service is reinstated. 
(6)  The county reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following reasons: 
a.  To prevent fraud and abuse; 
b.  Consumer's willful disregard of the county's rules; 
c.  Emergency repairs; 
d.  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the county's control; 
e.  Legal processes; 
f.  Direction of public authorities; 
g.  Strikes, riots, fire, flood, unavoidable accidents, or acts of God; 
h.  Circumstances affecting the consumer's health or safety; 
i.  Failure to pay for water service, fees, or penalties as provided for in this article; or 
j.  For any other reason provided for by this article. 
(g)  Change of occupancy, discontinuance of service and abandonment. 
(1)  If a consumer seeks to discontinue service, the consumer shall give notice to the county, in person or in writing, of said desire and the county will discontinue service with-in 24 hours after notice is received. 
(2)  When water service is discontinued for any reason, and all outstanding fees are paid, the consumer's security deposit shall be refunded by the county. If there is any outstanding balance on the consumer's account, the consumer's security deposit shall be applied to the unpaid balance. If the security deposit is greater than the unpaid balance of the account, the consumer's security deposit shall be refunded by the county. If the security deposit is insufficient to cover the account balance, the county may proceed to collect the balance in any manner provided by law for the collection of debts. 
(3)  If a consumer abandons the premises without paying all charges associated with the account in full, the consumer's security deposit shall be applied to the unpaid balance. If the security deposit is greater than the unpaid balance of the account, the consumer's security deposit shall be refunded by the county. If the security deposit is insufficient to cover the account balance, the county may proceed to collect the balance in any manner provided by law for the collection of debts. 
(h)  Complaint; adjustments. 
(1)  If the consumer believes their bill to be in error, the consumer shall present their claim, in person, at the county utilities department, before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice their claim. If the consumer believes the meter is inaccurate, the consumer may request the following: 
a.  The county will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a flat fee, which shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
b.  When the meter is evaluated as set out at subsection (h)(1)a of this section, if the meter is found to over register beyond ten percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made for the reading and the consumer's bill will be adjusted accordingly. If the reading reflects an over registration of less than ten percent, the bill will remain unchanged and the consumer will be responsible for paying the fee associated with the special reading. 
(2)  Any decision made by the county utilities department may be submitted to the county administrator for a final decision about the bill. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the county's authorized representative of it, the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data, as determined by the county commission. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09, § II, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 66-22. - Private water systems. 
(a)  Any individual or entity seeking to develop or install a private water system and charge a fee for water service and usage shall be responsible for designing an adequate system of water supply, treatment, transmission, and distribution facilities for the proposed development. Any such individual or entity shall be required to purchase a business license from the county for said business. 
(b)  Any individual or entity owning or operating a private water system which falls within the regulatory jurisdiction of the environmental protection division (EPD) shall comply with all state and federal design and construction standards, and with the state department of natural resources' and environmental protection divisions' rules and regulations. 
(c)  No subdivision or development shall be permitted or approved by the county or its designee, if a private water system is planned for the development, unless plans or design specifications are submitted to and evaluated by the county utilities department and then presented to the Douglas-Coffee County Planning Commission, along with the developers request for zoning change, or subdivision approval. 
(d)  All water systems, public or private, shall be located entirely within the rights-of-way or permanent easements before the county will accept any roads that any individual or entity seeks to have accepted by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09, § III, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 66-23. - Hydrants. 
(a)  Specifications of the location and depth of the connection of hydrants shall meet the standards contained in the specifications set out by the county. 
(b)  After approval by the county, the developer shall stubs and lines with a cap for the future installation of fire hydrants. 
(c)  All installations shall meet any applicable county, state, and/or federal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09, § III(H), 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 66-24. - Penalties and misdemeanor crimes. 
(a)  For any action or conduct described as a violation of this article which rises to the level of a misdemeanor crime (see section 66-21(a)(7), (8), and (c)(5)), a $1,000.00 fine shall be imposed for each violation and a sentence for a term of not more than 60 days may be imposed for said violation. 
(b)  Citations for these crimes may be written by the county code enforcement officer or the sheriff's department of the county. 
(c)  Prosecution of these violations may be sought in the magistrate court of the county and the code enforcement officer, the sheriff's officer, and/or the county attorney shall have the authority to prosecute these violations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09, § IV, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 66-25. - USDA compliance. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the terms of any previously enacted water use ordinance or any water-related ordinance of any kind if the validity or enforceability of any of the following is affected, and the following shall therefore be considered valid: 
(1)  Any loan or grant which provided funding for the Oak Park Water System and the Cherokee Hills Water System, or any underlying requirements of the USDA for maintaining those loans and/or grants. Likewise, those obligations the county and the federal government owe each other and/or any obligations owed to the customers pursuant to those loans/grants shall remain in force. 
(2)  Mandatory connection to the Oak Park Water System by those residents/citizens affected by the Oak Park Water System as required by previous ordinance. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, any provision of any previously enacted water use ordinance or water-related ordinance which is contrary to this article, or which has provisions which were omitted from this article, are deemed repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09, § V, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 66-26. - Water rate schedule. 
The fees, rates and charges for security deposit, connection fees, water rates and other charges and penalties shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 2007-09, adden. A, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 66-27. - Outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)  Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable county ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waster water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(2)  The Coffee County Code Enforcement Department shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The county administrator may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(3)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. Violations of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by the imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance violation. Each day any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, §§ 1, 2, 12-20-2010, eff. 1-1-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-5, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 20, 2010, effective Jan. 1, 2011, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, the provisions were included as § 66-27. 
Appendix A - MANUFACTURED HOME AND MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK REGULATIONS[1] 
This Manufactured Home and Manufactured Housing Park Regulation is a temporary resolution to regulate the occupancy and maintenance of manufactured homes and manufactured housing parks and to establish minimum standards for manufactured homes and manufactured housing parks. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Ord. No. 2008-02, the manufactured home and manufactured housing park regulations ordinance of Coffee County, Georgia, as adopted by the Board of County Commissioners on February 4, 2008. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the title of or transitional language in the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 

Sec. 1. - Definitions. 
1.1.  Manufactured Home: (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131). A manufactured home, also known as a mobile home, is a detached structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, forty body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and designed to be used as a single family dwelling unit, with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured homes are further defined as Class "A", Class "B" or Class "C." 
1.2.  Class "A" Manufactured Home ("double wide"). A Class "A" Manufactured Home is a manufactured housing unit constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) which meets the following development standards: 
a.  Minimum width of not less than twenty-four feet. 
b.  Anchored as per manufacturer's recommendation as approved by the Federal Government. 
c.  Under skirted with a stucco-finished concrete block, or metal lath painted, concrete block, brick, or vinyl materials permanent enclosure. 
d.  Area beneath the ground floor of the home shall be completely built in accordance with approved installation code standards and this section. All such perimeter enclosures or "skirting" shall be either and be maintained from the home to ground level. Such wall shall have a minimum thickness of four inches and be penetrated only by openings for installed vents and access doors. 
e.  At each exterior door of the home there shall be a landing (minimum of three feet by four feet) with steps. 
f.  All wheels, axles, transporting lights, and hitch mechanisms removed before being occupied. 
g.  Exterior siding of masonry, wood, stucco, hardboard, or vinyl type siding material. 
h.  A fully functioning, inspected, and approved electrical, water, and sewage system before being occupied. 
i.  Roof constructed of: 
i.  A type commonly used on site constructed residences; 
ii.  A pitch of not less than two and one-half feet of rise for each twelve feet of horizontal run; and 
iii.  A boxed roof overhang of four inches. 
j.  Fronted on a public street/road. 
k.  Electrical utilities shall be connected in accordance with electrical utilities requirements, the Coffee County Code requirements, and the manufacturer's specifications, before the home is occupied. 
l.  Manufactured Homes, Class A, are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. 
1.3.  Class "B" Manufactured Home ("single wide"). A Class "B" Manufactured Home is a manufactured housing unit constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act 42 USC 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) which meets the following development standards. 
a.  Maximum width of less than twenty-four feet. 
b.  Installed to meet the minimum installation standards adopted by the State of Georgia, the manufacturer's installation instructions, when available, or Appendix (H) of the Georgia State Building Code. 
c.  Under skirted with a stucco-finished concrete block, or metal lath painted, concrete block, brick, or vinyl materials permanent enclosure. 
d.  At each exterior door of the home there shall be a landing (minimum of three feet by four feet) with steps. 
e.  All wheels, axles, transporting lights, and hitch mechanisms removed before being occupied. 
f.  A current clear county inspection sticker and permit prior to being connected to electricity by the utility company. 
g.  A fully functioning, inspected, and approved electrical, water, and sewage system before being occupied. 
h.  Front of the home shall face a public street/road. 
i.  Manufactured Homes, Class "B," are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. 
j.  Electrical utilities shall be connected in accordance with electrical utilities' requirements, the Coffee County Code requirements, and the manufacturer's specifications, before the home is occupied. 
1.4.  Class "C" Manufactured Home. A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility so that it is readily transported on its own chassis along streets, which was constructed prior to June 15, 1976 does not meet the standards of the 1976 Act and the Class "B" compatibility criteria herein. A Class "C" manufactured home may be upgraded to a Class "B" only after meeting all Class "B" building electrical, plumbing, building, and installation standards as verified by inspectors. 
a.  Class "C" Manufactured Housing must be installed to meet the minimum installation standards adopted by the State of Georgia, the manufacturer's installation instructions, when available, or Appendix (H) of the Georgia State Building Code. 
b.  The perimeter beneath each such home must be enclosed (skirted) with an enclosure as manufactured for such purposes, including but not limited to, stucco-finished concrete block, or metal lath painted, concrete block, brick, or vinyl materials that have been approved by the Coffee County Codes Department. 
c.  At each exterior door of the home, there must be steps, and landing that is a minimum of three feet by four feet in area, constructed to the standards set forth in Douglas-Coffee County (Georgia) Building Code. 
d.  All wheels, axles, transporting lights, and hitch mechanisms shall be removed therefrom and from the lot, before the home is occupied. 
e.  Electrical utilities shall be connected in accordance with electrical utilities' requirements, the Coffee County Code requirements, and the manufacturer's specifications, before the home is occupied. 
f.  The home shall have fully functioning, inspected, and approved electrical, water, and sewage system before being occupied. 
g.  The front of the home shall face a street or road. 
h.  Manufactured Homes, Class "C," are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. 
Sec. 2. - Minimum manufactured home standards. 
2.1.  Commercial or Business Use of Manufactured Homes. 
a.  When otherwise permitted by the zoning ordinances of Coffee County, a commercial or business use of a Manufactured Home shall be permitted when the Manufactured Home: 
i.  Is a Class "A " Manufactured Home as defined above; and 
ii.  Is not greater than twenty (20) years old when placed into service; and 
iii.  Is used solely for commercial or business purposes and is not also used as a residence, provided the business invites the general public onto the property to conduct business. 
b.  If at the time this ordinance is adopted, a Class "B" or "C" Manufactured Home is being utilized for commercial or business purposes, or is otherwise greater than twenty (20) years old, no matter what the class, said business shall be allowed to continue said use until one of the following occur: 
i.  The Manufactured Home is determined unsuitable for its declared use, as defined or determined by an ordinance of Coffee County, or by some other legal authority, governmental agency or entity; or 
ii.  The Manufactured Home ceases to be used for commercial or business purposes. A commercial or business use shall cease: 
1.  When the Manufactured Home is converted to residential use, if otherwise permitted by an ordinance of Coffee County; or 
2.  When a business has not actively been in continuous existence in that Manufactured Home for a period of time greater than six months as evidenced by a lapse in a business license, lack of power and utility service to the structure or any other competent evidence supporting such a conclusion; or 
3.  When the business owner seeks to relocate the business and the Manufactured Home, and relocation of the Manufactured Home is otherwise forbidden by this ordinance. In that event, the Manufactured Home shall not be allowed to be relocated to the new site. If the business otherwise relocates to another site in another facility, no continued commercial or business use of the Manufactured Home at that location shall be permitted. 
c.  All Manufactured Homes sought to be used for commercial or business purposes shall comply with all other provisions of this ordinance. 
2.2.  Residential Use of Manufactured Homes. 
a.  Manufactured Homes (Class "A," "B," and "C") as units to be occupied as residential units shall be restricted to R-2 and Agricultural-Forestry Districts, except as otherwise provided by this ordinance. 
b.  All Manufactured Homes (Class "A," "B," and "C") within Residential district R-2 shall meet all other requirements of that district. 
c.  Class "A," "B," and "C" Manufactured Homes shall be allowed in the AF Agricultural District as follows: 
i.  As a primary place of residence for the farm owner or manager. 
ii.  As a place of resident for persons not actively engaged in agricultural or farm-related activities only if the manufactured home is located on a lot with a minimum lot size of one acre. 
d.  If at the time this ordinance is adopted, a Manufactured Home of any class is being utilized for residential purposes, and the Manufactured Home is greater than twenty (20) years old, the Manufactured Home shall be allowed to continue said use until one of the following occurs: 
i.  When the Manufactured Home is determined unsuitable for its declared use, as defined or determined by an ordinance of Coffee County, or some other legal authority, governmental agency or entity; or 
ii.  When a Manufactured Home owner seeks to relocate the Manufactured Home and relocation of the Manufacture Home is otherwise forbidden by this ordinance. In that event, the Manufactured Home shall not be allowed to be relocated to the new site. 
e.  All Manufactured Homes sought to be used for residential purposes shall comply with all other provisions of this ordinance. 
2.3.  Minimum Facilities Required. All Manufactured Homes to be located, relocated, or purchased within the territorial boundaries of Coffee County, Georgia shall have the following minimum facilities: 
a.  Sanitary Facilities. Every home shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub and/or shower, and toilet all in working condition when properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe shall be in a sanitary working condition free from leaks and obstructions. 
b.  Hot and Cold Water Supply. Every kitchen sink, lavatory, tub and/or shower in a home must be connected to a supply of both cold and hot water. 
c.  Water Heating Facilities. Every home shall have water-heating facilities in safe working condition. 
d.  Heating Facilities. Every home shall have heating facilities in a safe working condition. Where a central heating system is not provided, each home shall be provided with facilities whereby heating appliances may be connected. 
i.  Unvented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited except for heaters listed for unvented use and the total input rating of the unvented heater is less than thirty (30) BTU per hour cubit feet of room area. 
e.  Smoke Detector. Every home shall have the appropriate number of State of Georgia approved smoke detectors, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation and listing. 
f.  Windows. Every habitable room excluding bathrooms, kitchens, and hallways shall have at least one (1) window that can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors. 
g.  Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be opened, or such other devices that will ventilate the room. 
h.  Electrical. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with approved listings, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all unused openings covered with blank covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connections shall be checked for tightness. Panels shall be accessible and meet National Electrical Code (NEC). 
i.  Exterior Wall. The exterior wall of the home shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that may admit rain or moisture in the interior portions of the walls or the occupied spaces of the home. 
j.  Exterior Siding. The exterior siding of the home shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform and neat in appearance. 
k.  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects, which may admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior of the home, and be maintained to prevent this from happening. 
l.  Interior Floors, Walls, and Ceiling. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be in a sound condition and must be maintained to prevent the admittance of rain moisture or the escape of heating and cooling. 
2.3.  Location of Manufactured Homes. 
a.  At the discretion of the County Commissioners new Manufactured Housing Parks may be allowed in the Residential R-2 and AF Agricultural-Forestry Districts. (See Article II, Section 1.) Manufactured Housing Parks and the Manufactured Homes to be placed in housing parks, must comply with all other Coffee County Zoning Ordinances, as well as all other provisions of this ordinance. Manufactured Homes may be utilized for residential or commercial purposes as provided herein. When said Manufactured Homes are to be placed on individual lots, they must otherwise comply with this ordinance and all other Coffee County Zoning Requirements. 
b.  Moving or relocating a Manufactured Home from one location in the county to another. 
i.  Anyone wanting to move or relocate a Manufactured Home must first submit an application requesting the same to the Coffee County Code Enforcement Department. 
ii.  At the time that an application for relocation is sought, no Manufactured Home that is twenty (20) years old or older, as determined by its manufactured date, shall be allowed to relocate within the County and no permit for the same shall be issued if said manufactured home is to be used for rental or commercial purposes once it reaches its destination. A location permit may be issued if the Manufactured Home is twenty (20) years old or older, passes inspection, and is to be occupied and used for residential purposes by its owner when the unit reaches its destination. At no time shall it be lawful to change the use of this property to rental or commercial use if the unit is twenty (20) years or older, and was allowed to be relocated pursuant to this code section. 
iii.  After an application for relocation is completed, the Manufactured Home at issue must be inspected by Coffee County Code Enforcement and determined to be suitable for relocation as determined by this ordinance. 
iv.  No Location Permit to move or relocate a Manufactured Home shall be issued unless the following criteria has been met: 
1.  It meets and passes the inspection process described in this ordinance; and, 
2.  The applicant provides proof that all outstanding property taxes are paid in full at the time of said application; and, 
3.  The solid waste bill associated with that Manufactured Home has been paid in full. 
v.  After a Manufactured Home is relocated, it must be re-inspected after connection to utilities. Only if it passes re-inspection shall an Occupancy Permit be issued. 
vi.  Moving or relocating a Manufactured Home in violation of this section shall subject an owner, a retailer, and/or a Manufactured Home Transporter to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
c.  Relocating a Manufactured Home from outside Coffee County to a location within Coffee County. 
i.  Anyone wanting to relocate a Manufactured Home from outside Coffee County to a location within Coffee County must first execute an application requesting the same at the Coffee County Code Enforcement Department. 
ii.  At the time that an application for relocation is sought, no Manufactured Home that is twenty (20) years old or older, as determined by its manufactured date, shall be allowed to relocate within the County and no permit for the same shall be issued. 
iii.  After an application for relocation is completed, the manufacture home at issue must be inspected by Coffee County Code Enforcement and determined to be suitable for relocation as determined by this ordinance. 
iv.  No Location Permit to relocate a manufactured home shall be issued unless it meets and passes the inspection process described in this ordinance. 
v.  After a Manufactured Home is relocated, it must be re-inspected after connection to utilities. Only if it passes inspection shall an Occupancy Permit be issued. 
vi.  Inspections of Manufactured Homes arriving from outside the County to be located within the County shall occur at a place designated by Coffee Code Enforcement. 
vii.  Moving or relocating a Manufactured Home in violation of this section shall subject an owner, a retailer, and/or a Manufactured Home Transporter of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
d.  Location of Manufactured Homes by retailers after sale: 
i.  New Manufactured Homes: 
1.  When a new Manufactured Home is sold for the first time by a retail vendor, no Pre-Location Inspection shall be required; however, 
2.  After the Manufactured Home is located on the residential lot, it must be inspected after connection to utilities before an Occupancy Permit shall be issued. 
ii.  Used Manufactured Homes. 
1.  Manufactured Home retailers will be permitted to move pre-owned Manufactured Homes onto their lots for refurbishing and/or resale but only consistent with the provisions of this ordinance. 
2.  Used Manufactured Home vendors shall not place in inventory for sale any manufactured home that has not first been inspected by Coffee County Code Enforcement and the retailer receives a Location Permit allowing the Manufactured Home to be placed on the retail lot for sale to the general public. This permit shall also allow the Manufactured Home to be transported from the retail lot to the purchaser's destination. 
3.  After the Manufactured Home is located on the residential lot, it must be reinspected after connection to utilities before an Occupancy Permit shall be issued. 
4.  Any retailer with Class "C" Manufactured Home(s) on their retail lot at the time of the adoption of this ordinance must upgrade the Manufactured Home(s) to a Class "A" or "B" Manufactured Home before it may be sold to the general public. During and after said upgrade, Coffee County Code Enforcement shall inspect the Manufactured Home and issue any appropriate Building and Location Permits before it may be placed on the retail lot for retail sale to the general public. The Location Permit shall allow the Manufactured Home to be transported from the retail lot to the purchaser's destination. With respect to Class "C" Manufactured Homes, the following shall also apply to any used retail dealer with intentions of selling the same to the general public: 
1.  Only that inventory of Class "C" Manufactured Homes that is in a used retailer's inventory for sixty (60) days after this ordinance is adopted may be upgraded and sold, consistent with the other provisions of this ordinance. 
2.  Every such retailer shall have sixty (60) days from the adoption of this ordinance to supply Coffee County Code Enforcement with a typed inventory list reflecting the make, model, and serial number of the manufactured home unit(s) subject to this section and is in its inventory for this sixty (60) day period. 
3.  Thereafter, such retailer shall have one-hundred and twenty (120) days to refurbish said Manufactured Home units, have them inspected, and if they are properly permitted, place them in inventory for sale. 
4.  No Class "C" Manufactured Home may be permitted or placed on a used Manufactured Home lot for sale after six (6) months from the adoption of this ordinance. 
5.  Any retailer selling a Class "C" Manufactured Home after six (6) months of this ordinance which has not also been refurbished and given permits as required herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
iii.  Abandoned Manufactured Homes. 
1.  Any Manufactured Home abandoned by its owner or any Manufactured Home transporter on private property or public right of way in Coffee County shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and up to sixty (60) days in jail. 
2.  Both the owner and the transporter may be charged with the offense described herein. 
3.  A Manufactured Home shall be considered abandoned: 
a.  If it is left on a public right of way for a period of five (5) days, and is not otherwise removed from said right of way during that time; or 
b.  Is left on private property for five days without having first obtained a Location Permit. In this event, if the Manufactured Home otherwise would pass inspection and qualify for an Occupancy Permit, said permit may be extended, provided the owner pays for the inspection cost as if the Manufactured Home had been properly inspected before relocation, pays a surcharge of $150.00, and otherwise complies with all other applicable provisions affecting location of Manufactured Home. If the Manufactured Home does not pass inspection, the County has an automatic easement onto the real property at issue for purpose of removing and disposing of the same as set out in subsection (c) below. The offending parties shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and up to 60 days in jail; 
c.  If a Manufactured Home is so abandoned, the county may take any reasonable steps to remove the Manufactured Home from the private property or right of way. The cost associating with said removal shall be chargeable to both the owner and the transporter. In such event, if the sale of the Manufactured Home is necessary to recover said costs, the county may take any and all legal steps to dispose of said Manufactured Home, including issuing a fi fa for said cost and selling the Manufactured Home in the same manner that a Manufactured Home would be sold to recover for any outstanding ad valorem tax. 
Sec. 3. - Permits. 
3.1.  Types of permits. 
A.  Location Permits. A location permit must be obtained by any individual or business seeking to locate a home within Coffee County as provided by this ordinance, unless otherwise exempted. All Manufactured Homes are subject to an inspection prior to the issuance of a Location Permit unless otherwise exempted. 
B.  Occupancy Permits. No occupancy permit may be issued unless a Manufactured Home passes the inspections described herein. After the Manufactured Home reaches its destination site, is properly set up, and is connected to all necessary utilities. An Occupancy Permit must be issued before any Manufactured Home may be occupied. 
Sec. 4. - Minimum requirements for purposes of obtaining a location permit. 
4.1.  The designated Coffee County inspecting official shall inspect all Manufactured Homes prior to issuing a location permit. The official shall inspect the Manufactured Home for the following: 
A.  An inspection to evaluate whether the facilities set forth at Section 2.3 are available, in tact, and functioning as required by that Section; and 
B.  That the Manufactured Home to be relocated otherwise complies with all of the other provisions of this ordinance. 
4.2.  Failure to meet any of the requirements of this section shall result in denial of an application for location of a Manufactured Home. 
Sec. 5. - Minimum requirements for purposes of obtaining an occupancy permit. 
The designated Coffee County Inspecting Official shall inspect all Manufactured Homes prior to residential occupancy. A previously inspected unit shall be required to be re-inspected on being moved to a new location within the county. Coffee County Code Enforcement shall be granted a final inspection to each home, after set-up, to verify facilities required. Inspections shall include: 
a.  Proper setbacks. 
b.  Sufficient off-street parking. 
c.  Installation of an approved septic tank or an approved sewer system. 
d.  Inspection of electrical wiring. 
e.  Inspection of anchoring and tie-down installations. 
f.  Inspection for proper utilities connections. 
g.  Inspection for proper sewage connections. 
h.  Adherence to all applicable Coffee County Codes. 
i.  Reinspection of the required facilities to ensure that no change in condition or function occurred during transport. 
j.  All Manufactured Homes that are located in Coffee County, and change ownership, but are not relocated must be inspected on site prior to issuance of occupancy permit. 
k.  Individuals purchasing Manufactured Homes that require repairs must understand that if the home fails inspection, Coffee County will not issue an occupancy permit. 
Sec. 6. - Inspection fees. 
6.1.  Inspections conducted within the jurisdictional boundaries of Coffee County are subject to a fee established by the Board of Commissioners for Location Permits and Occupancy Permits. Should follow up inspections be required, an additional fee must be paid. A fee schedule is attached hereto as Addendum ____________ . 
Sec. 7. - Revocation of occupancy permit. 
All Manufactured Homes within Coffee County shall be subject to inspection at any time. After personal inspection of the manufactured housing unit and upon discovering code violations, the Coffee County Building Inspector shall notify the owner of the unit in writing of the specific code violations, the corrections, repairs, or changes needed, and the number of days allotted for such. If the sited violations are not corrected within sixty days after receiving written notice of the specific code violations from the building inspector and if further inspection reveals that the sited violations have not been corrected, the Occupancy Permit may be revoked. Notice of revocation of an Occupancy Permit shall be given in writing. 
ARTICLE II. - MANUFACTURED HOME PARK PERMIT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 1. - Authorization and permit required. 
1.1.  Authorization Required. The Coffee County Commission reserves the right to evaluate and make decisions regarding request for the construction of all new manufactured housing parks as to location, compatibility with existing highway systems and traffic patterns, community and safety standards, and neighborhood values. No person(s) shall locate a new manufactured home park or construct, alter, enlarge, or extend an existing manufactured housing park within the unincorporated areas of Coffee County without the express approval and authorization of the Coffee County Commission. 
1.2.  Permits Required. No person(s) shall located a new manufactured home park or construct, alter, enlarge, or extend an existing manufactured housing park within the unincorporated areas of Coffee County until the plan has been reviewed and approved by the Coffee County Planning Commission. Upon approval, the Coffee County Building Inspector may issue a valid permit providing the plans meet all other necessary requirements. 
1.3.  Additional Requirements. Owners of all planned new manufactured housing parks or enlargement to existing parks shall be required to notify the nearest branch of the Georgia State Game and Fish Commission regarding possible endangered or threatened species within the area and follow any directions given. A letter from the state agency will be required of the owner to insure that this provision has been carried out. 
Sec. 2. - Application. 
2.1.  At least thirty (30) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Commission: 
a.  An appropriate county application form. 
b.  Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plan of the proposed park. 
c.  A receipt showing that all county ad valorem taxes on the subject property have been paid in full and that no delinquencies exist. 
d.  Any state or federal compliance reviews, along with any special or technical studies as may be deemed necessary by the county. 
e.  The applicant shall submit with the application form review fees that will be assessed at the time of filing according to the following schedule: 

 
2.2.  Any Tier II or Tier III application that involves development phasing as described in Article XIV shall be subject to application and review fees for each submission of a preliminary plan. 
2.3.  The plans are deemed submitted when turned over to the County Building Inspector. Upon action or recommendations made by the Planning Commission, the plan will be forwarded to the County Board of Commission for final action. The County Board of Commissioners will render action within thirty (30) days, provided that new special or technical studies are determined to be needed to review the application. 
Sec. 3. - Manufactured housing park plan specifications. 
3.1.  Information Required. A Manufactured Housing Park plan layout shall be drawn to a scale no matter [smaller] than 1 inch for 100 feet and three prints of the final site plan on or before the first working day of the month shall be submitted to the planning commission shall show the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant. 
b.  Name and address of the landholder. 
c.  Location (vicinity map) and legal description of the housing park. 
d.  Scale of the map, North & South direction arrows. 
e.  Areas and dimensions of the tract of land. 
f.  Number, location, and size of all manufactured home lots or stands. 
g.  Location, width, and areas of roadways, driveways, and walks. 
h.  Location of service buildings and any other proposed structures. 
i.  Location of parking spaces. 
j.  Location and acreage of recreational land. 
k.  Gross Density. 
l.  Location of any wetlands involved. 
Sec. 4. - Procedure for plan approval. 
4.1.  Before acting on the manufactured housing park site plans, the Planning Commission may request reports from concerned persons and agencies such as highway engineers, public utilities, school boards, and health department officials. 
4.2.  Coffee County Planning Commission shall review and either approve of disapprove plans. Approval or disapproval of the final site plans shall be noted on all seven prints and attested by the signature of the Planning Commission Chairman. One print shall be returned to the applicant, one retained by the Planning Commission, and one retained by the Coffee County Building Official. 
4.3.  Upon approval of the final site plan by the Planning Commission, the application may be made to the building official for construction permit. One set of construction plans shall be submitted to the Coffee County Building Inspector and contain the following information: 
a.  Approved final site plan with signatures. 
b.  Location of all utility lines, water lines, and, if applicable, all sewage disposal lines. 
c.  Location and details of the lighting and electrical systems within the proposed park. 
4.4  The Coffee County Building Inspector shall issue a permit for construction if: 
a.  An inspection of the site demonstrates the actual conditions within the park meet the conditions upon which the site plans were approved. 
b.  The actual site meets the requirements of these regulations. 
c.  The housing park meets the standards of the local and state health departments. 
Sec. 5. - Inspection. 
5.1  The building official is authorized to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with the conditions on the Planning Commission's approved plat and these regulations. The Coffee County Building Official shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property subject to this ordinance to inspect conditions for enforcement purposes. 
5.2  The building official may request inspections from the Health Department as to compliance of their regulations and Health Department shall have the same entry and inspection powers as provided the building inspectors. The Health Department officials upon finding violations that threaten public health or safety shall notify the building inspectors of such violations and the requirements for correction. The building inspector may then proceed with enforcement under the provisions of these regulations. 
Sec. 6. - Manufactured home park license fees. 
All owners and/or operators of mobile home parks as herein defined shall be required to pay the annual business license tax as prescribed by resolution, if possible. 
Sec. 7. - Revocation of permits. 
Any permit for a manufactured home park may be revoked then it is found to be in violation of these regulations. The Building Official shall give written notice to the permitted of violations of these regulations. If after sixty (60) days further inspection reveals such violations have not been corrected, the Building Official shall give the permitted written notice of suspension of the permit and the permitted shall then cease operation and/or construction of the manufactured housing park. 
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS 

Sec. 1. - Manufactured home park size. 
A Manufactured Housing Park shall have a minimum size of five acres in an area including buffer strips, streets, non-habitable and habitable areas free from stagnant pools of water and any EPA designated wetlands. A housing park in existence prior to the date of approval this ordinance may contain less than five acres in total size. 
Sec. 2. - Density. 
2.1.  Areas used for computing density only habitable, non-buffer, and non-wetland areas may be used in computing the density of units within a manufactured home park. 
2.2.  Class "A" (double wide), Class "B" (single wide), and Class "C" (single wide) manufactured homes. Lot size for all manufactured homes (Class "A" (double wide), Class "B" (single wide), and Class "C" (single wide)) shall consist of a minimum of 16,500 square feet for each home. Maximum allowed density of manufactured homes per acre shall be 2.6 total units per acre. 
Sec. 3. - Manufactured home lots. 
Minimum lot size for each Class "A" ("double wide), Class "B" (single wide), and Class "C" (single wide) manufactured home unit shall be 16,500 square feet. Each space or lot shall be at least seventy feet wide and clearly defined. 
Sec. 4. - Site improvement requirements. 
4.1.  Conditions of soil, ground water level, drainage, topography, and flooding susceptibility shall not create hazards to the health and safety of the public or to surrounding property. 
4.2.  Exposed ground surfaces in all parks shall be protected with either vegetation or a solid surface to prevent oil erosions, dust, and mud. 
4.3.  The ground surface shall be adequately graded and drained. 
4.4.  Manufactured homes shall have an open space separating distance from each other of at least thirty feet. 
4.5.  No part of the permanent manufactured home stand, excluding driveways and/or carports shall be within 30 feet of the lot and/or property line. 
Sec. 5. - Required recreational areas. 
All parks designed for twenty or more home lots shall have and shall maintain one or more recreational areas. The size of the recreational area shall be based upon a minimal of 100 square feet for each planned home. No single outdoor recreation area shall contain less than 2,000 square feet. Such recreation area shall be conveniently located, accessible to all occupants of the park, free of traffic hazards, and maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. 
Sec. 6. - Setback and buffer strips. 
6.1.  Along Rear and Side Property Lines. All community exterior boundaries not adjacent to a public street shall be provided with a ten-foot minimum building line. 
6.2.  Along Abutting Community Streets. There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between the manufactured home and any abutting community streets. 
6.3.  Buffer Zone. Surrounding the park (excepting ingress and egress points) there shall be a planted buffer zone of at least twenty feet upon which buildings, signs, and other structures shall not be permitted and which shall be permanently maintained with trees and shrubbery at a height of no less than six feet in height. 
Sec. 7. - Street system. 
7.1.  All manufactured housing park road, street, and infrastructure development requirements shall conform to and be identical to those governing street and road improvements for subdivisions as provided for at Article 8 Section 80.1 of the Subdivision Regulations of Coffee County, said Regulations being attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein as if fully set out and rewritten as text. 
7.2.  This amendment shall apply to the development of any new manufactured housing park and shall affect and be applicable to the expansion of an existing manufactured housing park as provided for in Section 7.3 below. 
7.3.  If an existing manufactured housing park is to be expanded, the expansion must comply with the road, street, and infrastructure requirements provided for herein. Likewise, any existing road or street in said manufactured housing park which is used for ingress and egress to access the proposed expansion must also be brought up to the same standards as the expansion and thus must also conform to and comply with the road, street, and infrastructure requirements provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 11-4, § 7, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 8. - Lighting. 
Each manufactured housing park shall have street lighting throughout the park. 
Sec. 9. - Identification. 
9.1.  Individual Unit Identification: Each lot, space, or stand shall be clearly numbered and identified externally in such a way that the number can be easily identified from the nearest street or driveway. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (4") in height. Numbers shall be placed near the front door of the unit or on a permanent marker in the front lawn. 
9.2.  Identification of the Manufacturing Housing Park. Each park shall have a large, clearly visible, permanent sign of a minimum size of four by eight (4 x 8) feet at either the park entrance or at the front of the park facing the main highway which clearly states the following: 
a.  Name of the Park. 
b.  E-911 address of the Park. 
c.  Number of lots within the Park. 
d.  Telephone number to be called regarding the Park. 
Sec. 10. - Water supply. 
All public or community water utilities, including sewage shall be subject to local approval by the Board of Commissioners upon submission of appropriate plans and drawings. All such plans and drawings for water or sewer utilities shall be submitted with appropriate certification by a professional engineer along with documentation of preliminary or final approval from the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, as required. If no approval from the Environmental Protection Division is required, then the applicant shall submit "as-built" drawings identifying the proposed placement of any utilities within or upon public right-of-ways, easements or properties. 2 
Sec. 11. - Sewage disposal. 
An adequate and sewage system shall be provided and maintained in the manufactured housing park with a sewer connection to each housing unit. The Public Health Department shall approve all sewage system and/or septic tank types and installation. The park owner shall properly maintain sewer distribution lines and/or septic tanks in good working order. 
Sec. 12. - Electrical distribution. 
12.1.  General. Each park shall contain an electrical wiring system in accordance with the electrical code of the State of Georgia and Coffee County. 
12.2.  Specific. Each housing unit shall have a fully functioning, inspected, and approved electrical system before being occupied. The housing unit shall have electrical utilities installed by a licensed electrician in accordance with the electric utility company's requirements, the Coffee County Code requirements, and the manufacturer's specifications. Prior to being hooked up to electricity, it shall be the obligation, duty, and legal responsibility by the owner, occupant, and the utility company to ensure there is a valid current county permit for the unit. 
Sec. 13. - Refuse handling. 
13.1.  General. Refuse (solid waste, garbage) shall be handled in the manner prescribed in the most recent Coffee County Solid Waste Regulations in that each housing unit within the housing park shall be provided with a garbage can. 
13.2.  Specific. Each housing unit within the housing park shall be provided with a garbage can as provided by the Coffee County Solid Waste Ordinance. It shall be the obligation and duty of each manufactured housing park owner to promptly notify the solid waste authority and/or the Coffee County Commission of the arrivals of all new occupants to the housing park and all vacating (permanent departures) occupants from the housing park. Failure to do so, or failure to do so in a timely manner, shall be assumed to be deliberate noncompliance on the part of the park owner. 
Sec. 14. - Front entrance. 
14.1.  Individual Unit. All home units shall have a front entrance that is clearly marked. Each unit shall have a clearly visible address number or lot number that can be readily seen from the driveway or street. 
14.2.  Park Entrance. The front (primary) entrance to the housing park shall be clearly marked and shall have a large, clearly visible, permanent sign at the park entrance or at the front of the park as stated above. 
Sec. 15. - Landscaping. 
15.1.  General. Spaces between individual housing units and spaces between housing units and internal roads or driveways shall consist of planted or seeded grass or other planted vegetation. Such spaces shall be landscaped in such a way to be visually pleasing and provide safety for the occupants. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be provided at each manufactured home stand. 
15.2.  Each Manufactured Housing Lot. Each housing unit shall be landscaped with a border of bushes, shrubs and/or plants beginning not more than three feet from the foundation of the housing unit. Each housing unit shall be completely enclosed and under skirted with painted metal lath, vinyl material, or other suitable material. 
15.3.  Abandoned Objects. Abandoned, inoperable, or unlicensed automobiles, appliances, etc. shall not be allowed. 
Sec. 16. - Additional requirements. 
It shall be the responsibility and obligation of the park owner to ensure that: 
a.  All dogs within the park shall be securely contained in a pen or safely restrained on a chain or leash. 
b.  Discharging firearms shall not be permitted inside the park. 
c.  All noise is kept within a normal, non-nuisance level. 
d.  All complaints from surrounding residences or from park occupants are addressed and/or corrected in a timely manner. 
Sec. 17. - Vacant units. 
Vacant manufactured housing units and units in storage [that] are not used for occupancy shall be required to meet the same zoning and setback requirements as manufactured housing units used for occupancy. 
Appendix B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Recording of maps and plats, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67 et seq.; subdivisions abutting state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.; the Zoning Procedures Laws, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

Appendix C - ZONING[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, §§ II, ¶ IV; the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

APPENDIX D - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Land Development Code of the county, as adopted on July 20, 2015. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1-1. - Title. 
This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "Land Development Code, Coffee County, GA," and may be referred to alternatively as the Code or the "LDC". 
1-2. - Findings. 
1-2.1. General Public Need. The Coffee County Commission finds that controlling the location, design and construction of development within the unincorporated area of Coffee County is necessary to maintain and improve the health, safety, welfare and quality of life of the citizens of Coffee County. The Coffee County Commission further finds: 
a.  A single set of administrative procedures for making all land use decisions promotes efficiency, predictability and citizen participation. 
b.  All development proposals excluding single-family homes or the re-use of an existing building where the re-use does not create a greater impact, must undergo a development review process to assure compliance with the requirements of this Code. 
c.  All administrative decisions should be supported by a record with written findings to assure accountability and efficient appellate review. 
d.  A quick and efficient avenue of appeal should be available for all ministerial and administrative decisions. 
e.  Enforcement of development permits and the provisions of this Code should be through procedures that are efficient, effective and consistent with the code enforcement procedure established by state law. 
1-3. - Purpose and Intent. 
a.  General Intent. The general intent of this Code is the implementation of the current "Coffee County and the Cities of Ambrose, Broxton, Douglas, and Nicholls" Comprehensive Plan as adopted and its successors. 
b.  Purposes. The purposes of this Code include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, convenience, order and prosperity of the Citizens of Coffee County. 
2.  Conserve the value of land, buildings and resources, and protect landowners from adverse impacts of adjoining developments. 
3.  Protect the character and maintain the stability of residential, agricultural, business, industrial, recreation, and public areas. 
4.  Promote responsible growth, lessen the congestion in public streets, secure safety from fire and health dangers, and promote desirable living conditions. 
5.  Direct and regulate, through the establishment of appropriate standards, the type, distribution and intensity of development. 
6.  Balance the interest of the general public in Coffee County and that of the individual property owner. 
1-4. - Authority. 
This Land Development Code is enacted pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, § 36-70 et seq. 
1-5. - Applicability. 
1-5.1. General Applicability. Except as provided below, the provisions of this Code shall apply to all development in the unincorporated County. No development shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to the provisions in this Land Development Code. 
1-5.2. Application of Zoning Regulations. 
a.  Height and Density. No building or other structure shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, so as to: 
1.  Accommodate or house a greater number of persons or occupy a smaller lot area per person; or 
2.  Occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or 
3.  Have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces; unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
b.  Allocation of Parking or Loading Spaces. Any off-street parking or loading space required by this Code for any development permit may only be counted by one development towards meeting the requirements of this Code. No parking space or loading space may be counted towards meeting the parking space/loading space requirements of this Code by more than one development. 
c.  Only One Principle Building. Every single-family building or structure hereafter in a single-family (R-1, R-2, R-3) or mixed-residential (RM, RP) zoning district shall be located on one lot or tract as defined herein; and in no case shall there be more than one principal single-family building or structures including manufactured homes on one lot as permitted or restricted in other places in this Code. 
d.  Reduction of Lot Area. No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced so that the lot width or depth, front, side or rear yard, lot area per unit or other requirements of this Code are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is subsequently acquired for public purposes. 
e.  Street Frontage. No building shall hereafter be erected on a lot which does not abut or have immediate frontage on a publicly dedicated, or publicly approved, or publicly maintained street or a privately owned road which conforms and is maintained to County standards. 
1-5.3. Exceptions. 
a.  Previously Approved Development Permits and Development Plans. The provisions of this Code and any amendments hereto shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued development permit or plan provided, however: 
(1)  Any such development permit or plan must either have begun the development activity or must begin the development activity within two years of the adoption of this Code. 
(2)  Any approved development permit or plan which has not begun its development activity within this two year grace period shall by operation of law lose its validity and shall have no legal effect. Any effort thereafter to develop such previously approved development permit or plan shall not be permitted, and the developer shall be required to reapply for approval of its development permits or plans in conformance with the requirements of this Code. 
1-5.4. Zoning in Progress. 
a.  Purpose. The "zoning in progress" rule allows the County to make a text or map amendment to this Code, and apply that change to development applications submitted after the declaration has been made of a zoning in progress. 
b.  No Permits Issued and Period of Time. During the period of time that the County Commission is considering either a text or map amendment to this Code, no permit(s), license(s), or other development order(s) of any kind shall be issued if issuance would result in the non-conforming or unlawful use of the subject property should the text or map amendment change be enacted by the County Commission (rest period). The maximum freeze period allowed for a zoning in progress shall be three months, except that the County Commission may extend the period of up to an additional period of time acceptable to the Commission for good cause, but not to exceed six months, and if it makes a finding that it is in the public interest to do so. 
c.  Notice of Declaration. The declaration of "zoning in progress", and rest period on development orders, permit and licenses shall begin on the earlier of: 
1.  Publication of a notice of a public hearing before the County Commission to consider a resolution declaring a zoning in progress; or 
2.  Public notice given as required by law for the initial public hearing on a text or map amendment to this Code. 
d.  Applicability. 
1.  Upon adoption of a text or map amendment, all pending applications, permits, licenses, and other development orders shall conform to the new provisions. 
2.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, no application for a text or map amendment to this Code, or permit or development order, shall be held up by this procedure for more than nine months, including all time periods described herein. 
3.  If it is determined by the County that an application for a text or map amendment, or permit, license, or other development order would not violate the provisions of a pending zoning measure, such application, and any subsequent permits, licenses and other development orders shall be exempt from this section. 
1-6. - Incorporation by Reference. 
1-6.1. Maps. The boundaries of the zoning districts of Coffee County are shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map, Coffee County, Georgia", date and certified by the Zoning Administrator. Said map is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Code by reference. 
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the "Zoning Map, Coffee County, Georgia", which may from time to time be published, the zoning map of Coffee County, Georgia, in the office of the Zoning Administrator, shall be the only recognized authoritative zoning map for zoning districts in the County. 
1-6.2. Other Materials. Other materials which should be considered and may impact decisions under this LDC include, but are not limited to, the Future Development Map, and the Comprehensive Plan, the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, the Building and Construction Codes, Wetlands, the Flood Damage Protection Ordinance, the River Corridor Protection Ordinance and Plan, the Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance, the Water Resource Protection and Groundwater Codes. 
1-7. - Rules of Interpretation. 
1-7.1. Generally. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. 
In the interpretation and application of this Code, all provisions shall be liberally construed in favor of the objectives and purposes of Coffee County and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state law. 
1-7.2. Abrogation. It is not intended by this Code to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. 
1-7.3. Stricter Provisions Apply. Where this Code imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings; or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provision of this Code shall control. 
1-7.4. Interpretation. 
1-7.4.1. Responsibility. In the event that any question arises concerning the application of regulations, performance standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of this Code, the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for interpretation and shall look to the "Coffee County and the Cities of Ambrose, Broxton, Douglas, and Nicholls" Comprehensive Plan and other materials for guidance. Responsibility for interpretation by the Zoning Administrator shall be limited to standards, regulations and requirements of this Code, but shall not be construed to include interpretation of any technical code adopted by reference in this Code, nor be construed as overriding the responsibilities given to any commission, board or official named in other sections or articles of this Code. 
1-7.4.2. Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries (District Boundaries). Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the "Zoning Map, Coffee County, Georgia", the following rules shall apply: 
a.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
b.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
c.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines of highway right-of-way, such district boundaries shall be construed to being parallel thereto and at such distance there from as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given such distance shall be determined by the use of the scale on said zoning map. 
d.  Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of said railroad line. 
1-8. - Delegation of Authority. 
Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other County official or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize delegation to professional level subordinates or professional consultants to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
1-9. - Relationship of Specific to General Provisions. 
More specific provisions of this Code shall be followed in lieu of more general provisions that may be more lenient than or in conflict with the more specific provision. 
1-10. - Conflict with Other Regulations. 
Whenever this Code requires or imposes more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statutes, the requirements of this Code shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this Code, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
1-11. - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or provision of this Code be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Code as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
1-12. - Effective Date. 
This Code shall be in full force and effective upon adoption by the County Commission and shall apply to any development for which the first submittal of development plans is received after the effective date of this Code. 
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS 

2-1. - Rules of Interpretation. 
The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions, or any other provisions of this Code, unless that authority is provided to another administrative official within a specific chapter. 
2-2. - Interpretations. 
In the interpretation and application of this Code, all provisions shall be considered minimum requirements. Where the literal interpretation is clear, it shall be construed literally. Where the chapter, section or subsection has a statement of purpose and intent, such purpose and intent shall be considered in making the interpretation. Where ambiguity exists, the Zoning Administrator shall interpret this ordinance in favor of the least restrictive use of the property. 
2-3. - Use of Words and Phrases. 
For the purpose of this Code, the following shall apply to the use of words and phrases: 
a.  The word "person" is intended to include any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other subdivision of this State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
b.  Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural included the singular. 
c.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and are intended to be gender neutral. 
d.  The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory and not discretionary, while the word "may" is permissive. 
e.  The word "and" indicates that all of the conditions, requirements, and factors so connected must be met or fulfilled, while the word "or" indicates that at least one condition, requirement or factor so connected must be met. 
f.  The term "such as" is intended to introduce one or more examples in illustration of a requirement or point, and is intended to mean "including but not limited to the following," 
g.  The word "day" shall mean a calendar day unless otherwise specified. 
h.  Where a term is defined in this chapter, it shall be construed to have that meaning and application throughout this Code. 
i.  Where a term is defined in any chapter other than this chapter, it is the intent that such definition only applies within the chapter it appears. 
j.  Except as specifically defined herein, all words use in this Code shall have their customary dictionary definitions. 
k.  Unless indicated otherwise, reference to zoning districts refer to the most recent copy of the "Official Zoning Map of Coffee County, Georgia". 
2-4. - General Definitions. 
When used in this Code, the following shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them. 
ABUTTING/CONTIGUOUS. This means having property lines in common, or having property separated by only an alley. Separation by a street right-of-way is not considered abutting. 

ACCELERATED EROSION. Erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action. 
ACCELERATION/DECELERATION LANE. These are paved areas adjacent to exits and entrances of a high traffic area for the purpose of enabling the free and safe flow of traffic. 
ACCESS. A paved or unpaved area intended to provide ingress or egress of vehicular or pedestrian traffic from a public or private right-of-way or easement. 
ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. An accessory use, building or structure is one that: 
(1)  Is located on the same lot as the principal building, structure or use; 
(2)  Is subordinate to an existing principal building, structure or principal use; 
(3)  Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal building, structure or use; 
(4)  Contributes primarily to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupant, business, or industry in the principal building, structure or use and as more particularly defined further in this Code. 
ADDITION. Any walled or roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition that is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall is new construction. 
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT/ENTERTAINMENT. Any commercial establishment that has, as its primary purpose or business, the rent, sale or presentation of any adult materials or adult entertainment. Such establishments include, but are not limited to: Escort Services, Adult Arcade, Adult Bookstore, Adult Dancing, Adult Massage Parlor, Adult Motel/Hotel, Adult Motion Picture Booth, Adult Motion Picture Theater or drive-in, or Adult Theater. 
Adult materials shall mean any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, DVD's, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations that have as their primary or dominant theme the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" as more particularly described or defined in chapter 6 of the Code of Ordinances of Coffee County. 
ADVERSE IMPACT. A condition that creates, imposes, aggravates, or leads to inadequate, impractical, unsafe, or unhealthy conditions on a site proposed for development or off-site. 
AGRICULTURE. For Profit raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock or poultry; growing plants, sod, and trees for sale; the production of horticultural, dairy, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products. 
ALLEY. A right-of-way privately or publicly owned, primarily for secondary access to the back or sides of property. 
ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, columns, and girders, except such emergency change as may be required for safety purposes; and addition to a building; any change in use; or, any movement of a building from one location to another. 
ANIMAL SHELTER. Any facility operated by or under contract for the state, county, municipal corporation or any other political subdivision of the State for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, and other animals; any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians which operates for such purpose in addition to its customary purposes; and any facility operated, owned, or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, or other non-profit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. 
ANIMAL FOSTER HOME. Any place routinely or in the practice of providing temporary care for animals, except equine. An Animal Foster Home must be under a written contract with a licensed Animal Shelter. An Animal Foster Home will be considered an agent for the Animal Shelter, and not an animal shelter itself. 
ANTENNA. A transmitting and/or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in telecommunications personal wireless services that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signal, analog signals, and radio frequencies; such devices include but are not limited to, directional antennas such as panel and microwave dish antennas, and omni-directional antennas such as whips, but excluding radar antennas, amateur radio antennas, and satellite earth stations. 
(1)  INNOVATIVE SITING TECHNIQUES. Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers and are compatible with the scale and character of the surrounding natural setting and/or structures. 
APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms, with bathroom and kitchen facilities, used or designed for use as a residence, located in a building that contains three or more independent, separated residential living units. 
APPEAL. This is a request for a review of final decisions by the Coffee County Board of Commissioners or an administrative official's interpretation of any provision of this Code, or a request for a review of an action taken by an administrative official in the application or enforcement of this Code. 
APPLICANT. A person or entity requesting an action under the definition as provided for under this Code. The applicant may be the owner, developer, project manager or contractor. 
AWNING/CANOPY. Any roof or other form that shelters from sunshine, rain, snow, or other forms of precipitation, open on at least one side. A canopy may be attached to a permanent building or it may be independent structure permitted in accordance with the International Building Code. 
AS-BUILT PLANS. Amended, detailed plans specifying the location, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of facilities and structures, including storm drainage facilities and structures, as they have been constructed. 
BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A facility where overnight accommodations are provided to transients for compensation, with or without a morning meal, and where the operators of the facility live on the premises. 
BLOCK. An area of land within a political subdivision that is entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, public lands, rights-of-way, watercourses, or other well-defined and fixed boundaries. 
BOARD OF APPEALS. The Coffee County Board of Appeals. 
BUFFER. A strip of land located between a side or rear property line and a building, structure, or use, intended to separate and obstruct the view or other nuisances of the site on which the buffer is located from an abutting property, or to protect natural features such as streams or wetlands. 
BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of a lot which is not located within any minimum required yard, landscape strip/area or buffer; that portion of a lot wherein a building or structure may be located. 
BUILDING. A temporary or permanent building or structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. A modular home shall be considered a building for the purposes of this Code. A mobile or manufactured home shall not be considered a building for the purposes of this Code. 
BUILDING FRONTAGE. The linear feet of the exterior wall of a building that faces any road or street that provides a means of direct ingress or egress to the lot. 
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
BUILDING PERMIT. Any permit for the erection, placement, or construction of any building, structure or related building system or building system component, or manufactured home, or portion thereof. 
BUILDING, Accessory. A detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to, customarily associated with, and related to the principal structure or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use, and has a separate means of egress. 
BUILDING, Principal. The building in which the primary use permissible on the lot is conducted. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings. However, storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line beyond which no foundation wall or part of the structure of any building shall project, with the exception of roof overhang up to 24 inches, walkways, and the subsurface projection of footings; provided, however that such overhang and footings do not encroach upon the adjacent property, right-of-way, or an easement. 
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION. A document from the Building Official that an uninhabited structure or system is complete and is released for use. These would include signs, fences, walls, and accessory buildings. 
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A document from the Building Official, certifying that all requirements for development or redevelopment of a property or structure have been met and authorizing occupancy of buildings and structures for residential or commercial purposes. For one- or two-family dwellings, the approval of all final inspections may serve as the Certificate of Occupancy. 
CHANNEL. A natural or artificial water course with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
CLEARING. The removal of trees, other vegetation and/or above ground improvements including, but not limited to, buildings and structures, walls, fences, steps, walks, curbs, gutters, concrete slabs, pavements (including bases for pavements) and surfacing. 
CLUB, Private. A non-commercial establishment organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests, or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings and a constitution or by-laws. 
(1)  Club or Lodge: An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
COMMERCIAL USE. A use that is carried out for profit by the owner, lessee, or licensee. 
COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENT. Residences, whether operated for profit or not, which undertake through their ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of daily personal services, support, care, or treatment exclusively for two or more adults, who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage and whose residential services are financially supported, in whole or in part, by funds designated through the Department of Behavior Health and Developmental Disabilities. 
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. Any water system which serves more than one household and which has been approved by the Health Dept. There are two types of community water systems, Georgia EPD regulated and unregulated. An EPD regulated water system is defined as a public water system, which serves at least 15 service connections, used by year-round residents or regularly serves at least 25 year-round residents (i.e. cities, counties, subdivisions, mobile home parks, etc.). 
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The "Coffee County and the Cities of Ambrose, Broxton, Douglas and Nicholls" Comprehensive Plan, as currently adopted or amended. 
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEED LOT OPERATIONS (CAFO). Factory farms are also known as concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs) confined animal feeding operations, or intensive livestock operations (ILOs). "A confined animal feeding operation means a lot or facility, together with any associated treatment works, where both of the following conditions are met: First, animals have been, are, or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period. And secondly, crops, vegetation, forage growth, or post-harvest residues are not sustained over any portion of the operation lot or facility." The definition is used as part of waste management and environmental protection laws to deal with the concentrated pollution from large quantities of animal waste. CAFOs and factory farms can be mostly indoor or mostly outdoor operations. The "confinement at high stocking density" aspect refers to lack of natural vegetation that the animals can eat and that can naturally process the resulting animal waste. High stocking density destroys the vegetation and produces unacceptable pollution from the animal waste in run-off and ground water unless it is handled appropriately, so laws have been enacted to deal with that; thus the legal definition for the term CAFO. 
CONCEPT PLAN. The conceptual site plan submitted with an application for development under this Code, which requires the applicant to show the intended development and its conceptual design. Approval of the application request does not constitute approval of the concept plan; said plan must be adjusted according to the requirements listed for submittal of civil plans and reviewed by the appropriate departments for permitting. 
CONSTRUCTION (erect, build, locate, relocate). The building, erection, location, relocation or substantial improvement to any structure; or the clearing, filling or excavation of any land. It shall also mean any alterations in the size or use of any existing structure or the appearance of any land. When appropriate to the context, "construction" refers to the act of construction or the result of construction. 
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC). A large scale facility which has a primary purpose of providing housing and continuing care for older people, and which consists of Independent Living Units, Assisted Living Facilities, Skilled Care Nursing Facilities and related accessory uses, all as defined by this Code and as regulated by the Georgia Department of Community Health or other appropriate state agency. Continuing care means the provision of lodging, nursing, medical or other health related services at the same or another location to an individual pursuant to an agreement effective for the life of the individual or for a period greater than one year, including mutually terminable contracts, and in consideration of the payment of an entrance fee with or without other periodic charges to an individual. The following definitions are subsets of a continuing care retirement community: 
(1)  Independent Living Unit. A dwelling unit within a CCRC, containing living area(s), kitchen area and bathroom(s), including multi-family dwellings, single-family detached or attached dwellings, which house one or older persons in a manner in which they may live independently while receiving one or more meals per day in a congregate care setting. 
(2)  Assisted Living Facility. A facility located within a CCRC that provides a residential living environment, assisted by congregate meals, housekeeping, and personal services for older persons, who have temporary or periodic difficulties with one or more essential activities of daily living, but do not require services in or of a Georgia Department of Community Health licensed long-term care facility or nursing facility. An ALF shall include dwelling units, dining rooms, bathing area(s), common area(s), offices and other spaces necessary to provide the above services, and shall be operated by a legal entity holding a license issued by the George Department of Community Health or other appropriate state agency permitting the operation of an ALF at the location of the facility. 
(3)  Skilled Care Nursing Facility. A facility which provides board, shelter and 24-hour skilled nursing and medical care to chronic or convalescent patients. A Skilled Care Nursing Facility shall include nursing beds and/or individual rooms, dining rooms, bathing areas, common areas, offices, clinics, therapy areas, medical facilities and other space necessary to provide the above services and shall be operated by a legal entity holding a license issued by the Georgia Department of Community Health, or other appropriate state agency, permitting the operation of a nursing facility at the location of the facility. 
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY. A public or privately operated facility housing persons who are duly arrested, or are awaiting trial or persons serving a sentence after being found guilty of a criminal offense. 
COUNTY. Coffee County, Georgia. 
COUNTY COMMISSION. The Board of Commissioners for Coffee County, Georgia. 
COUNTY ENGINEER. The County's official or his/her designee, responsible for implementing and enforcing the applicable engineering requirements of the County. 
CUL-DE-SAC (see STREET, Dead End). A dead-end local street, of limited density, open at one end and closed at the other end by a permanent and safe turn-around. 
CURB CUT. The opening along the curb line or edge of pavement of a public street at which point a driveway begins for vehicular ingress and egress from a property. 
CUT (excavation). A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavations; the depth of which is below the original ground surface. 
DAY CARE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group, wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody, children under 18 years of age and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. The following categories shall be designated: 
(1)  Family Day Care: (12 or less children). A private residence operated as a day care for up to 12 children. 
(2)  Day Care Center: (13 or more children). Any place operated as a day care for 13 or more children. 
DAY CARE CENTER (Adult). An establishment, licensed by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, operated by any person with or without compensation for providing for the care, supervision, and oversight during daytime hours only of six or fewer adults who are elderly, physically ill or infirm, physically handicapped, or mentally handicapped. 
DEDICATION. The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
DEMOLITION. The removal of any above ground improvements including, but not limited to, buildings and structures, walls, fences, steps, walks, curbs, gutters, concrete slabs, pavements (including bases for pavements) and surfacing. 
DENSITY, Gross. The total number of dwelling units divided by the total acres of a parcel or tract of land. 
DENSITY, Net. The total number of dwelling units divided by the number of acres of a parcel or tract of land less the area for streets, right-of-way, common open space, floodplain, wetland, and surface water. 
DETENTION. The temporary storage of storm run-off in a stormwater management practice, with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
DETENTION FACILITY. A detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
DEVELOPER. Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit undertaking any land development activities as defined in this Code, including, but not limited to the subdivision of land, the construction of buildings and/or other land disturbance activities. 
DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment; any activity which alters the elevation of the land, removes or destroys plant life, or causes structures of any kind to be erected or removed other than for agricultural purposes. 
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices. 
DEVELOPMENT PLANS. The detailed and professional plans showing the layout and design, site work and construction activities proposed for a project (other than architectural/engineering building plans), including but not limited to: site plans, grading plans, erosion and sediment control plans, tree protection plans, landscape plans, street plans and profiles, water supply plans, sanitary and storm sewer plans and profiles, other site improvement plans. Such plans shall also include other appropriate sections, details, notes, schedules, legends and diagrams. 
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. An official authorization issued by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with this Code to proceed with land disturbance, construction and grading, as set forth in this Code. 
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE. An informative and advisory committee assembled to provide insight and guidance to the Zoning Administrator and his/her associated staff, to applicants for developments and rezoning and to the Coffee County Board of Commissioners. The role of the DRC shall be voluntary and advisory only. The DRC shall include: Zoning Administrator, E911 Director, Solid Waste Director, Road Department Director, Fire Chiefs and, when possible, representatives from EMS, Coffee County Health Department, Board of Education and any affected utilities. 
DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS. Those facilities and structures intended to control and direct the passage of stormwaters and other surface water flows from and across property; including, but not limited to: modified natural drainage ways, modified creeks, streams, channels, swales, ditches flumes, culverts, cross drains and other piping, catch basins, area drains, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, flared end sections, detention ponds and basins, rip rap, drainage way lining systems, and energy dissipation devices. 
DRIVEWAY. Any public or private ingress or egress allowing access between a public street and abutting property. 
DRIVEWAY, Joint Access. A driveway that provides vehicular access to two or more abutting properties from a public street. 
DWELLING. Any building or structure or portion thereof, which is arranged, designed or used for residential occupancy on a permanent or long-term basis, or for shorter durations where the property is intended for more long-term stable habitation not including transient use such as hotels and motels, and recreational vehicles or campers; and which comply with the provisions of this Code and the International Building Code. 
DWELLING, Accessory. A secondary dwelling established in conjunction with, and clearly subordinate to, a primary dwelling unit on the same lot; whether a part of the same structure as the primary dwelling unit or in a detached structure. 
DWELLING, Duplex. A building containing two dwelling units, designed to be occupied by no more than two families living independently from each other, each as a separate housekeeping unit. 
DWELLING, Live-Work. An owner-occupied dwelling unit in which a significant portion (more than 50 percent) of the ground floor space includes a non-residential use which is operated by the property owners. Such dwellings shall not include Home Occupations. 
DWELLING, Multi-Family. A building containing three or more dwelling units, designed to be occupied by three or more families living independently of each other, each as a separate housekeeping unit, i.e. apartments or condominiums. 
DWELLING, Single-Family, Attached (Zero Lot Line). A building subdivided by a joint property line and wall which separates the structure into two or more dwelling units, each occupying its own lot. An attached single-family structure must meet all front, rear and side yard setback requirements in the zoning district in which it is located, except for the joint property line and wall. Each unit must be separately metered for all utilities and the joint property wall must be fire-rated and extend from the foundation to the roof decking of the structure. 
DWELLING, Single-Family, Detached. An individual detached dwelling unit that is designed to be occupied by no more than one family, living as a separate household unit, excluding mobile homes and double-wide mobile homes. 
DWELLING, Townhouse. Two or more attached single-family dwellings which (1) may or may not have a common roof, (2) a common exterior wall; and (3) are separated from each other by fire resistant walls extending at least from the lowest floor level to the roof. 
DWELLING UNIT. Any building or part thereof, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for nor more than one family, and physically separated from any other rooms or housekeeping establishments which may be in the same structure. A dwelling unit contains sleeping facilities, sanitary facilities, and a kitchen. 
EASEMENT, Public or Private. A grant of one or more property rights, given by a property owner to the general public, a public utility, a governmental unit, or a private individual or corporation for the use of a portion of the owner's land for a specific purpose, or use as a means of access to other property. Easements shall be designated 'public" or "private" depending on the nature of the usage. 
DRAINAGE EASEMENT. The legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes; thereby allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff on the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Utility Easement. A grant by a property owner for the use of real property for the specified purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities including but not limited to: sanitary sewers; water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, cable lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines. 
ENGINEER. A professional engineer who holds an active license in the State of Georgia, and who has extensive education or experience regarding civil/structural/mechanical design. 
EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN. A plan and actions that are designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment run-off at a site during construction activities. 
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES. The architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure including but not limited to the kind of texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appurtenances, architectural fixtures, features, details, or elements relative to the foregoing. 
FAA. Federal Aviation Administration. 
FAÇADE. The exterior of a building facing the principal street entrance and extending the entire width of the building elevation. 
FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a premise and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel, or fraternity or sorority house. 
FARM. A bona fide farm is the primary or principal use of land and buildings for the purpose of conducting agricultural activities for profit or self-use including raising, harvesting, or storing of crops: feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock; or the production of plants, trees or timber. When agricultural activities are secondary to the use of the land or an accessory to the principal residential or other use and are not for profit, the property shall not be considered a bona fide farm. 
FCC. The Federal Communication Commission is an independent agency of the United States government. The chief purpose of the FECC is to make available so far as possible, to all people of the United States, wire and radio communications services. 
FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency is an agency of the United States Department of Homeland Security. The primary purpose of FEMA is to coordinate the response to a disaster that has occurred in the United States that overwhelms the resources of local and state authorities. FEMA intervention follows a declaration of disaster from the state governor and a formal request for assistance to the President of the United States. 
FILL. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added and where the finished grade is above the original ground surface or excavation grade. 
FLEA MARKET. A temporary market held in an open area or structure where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public. 
FLOOD OR FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(1)  Base Flood. Means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(2)  Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
(3)  Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
(4)  Flood Insurance Study. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary/floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
(5)  Flood Way. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
(6)  Minimum Flood Elevation. The base flood elevation established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
(7)  Flood Plain. Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
(8)  Flood Proofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to land, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and contents of buildings. 
FLOOR. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
FLOOR AREA. The sum of all square feet of each floor of a building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. The following areas are excluded from the measurement of the floor area: unfinished attics and basements, attached garages or spaces used for off-street parking or loading, breezeways, and enclosed or unenclosed decks and porches. 
GUEST HOUSE OR GUEST QUARTERS. An attached or detached accessory building that provides living quarters for guests that does not include a full kitchen facility. 
GRADING. Altering the shape or topography of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, grubbing, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
GRADE. The elevation of the finished surface of the ground immediately surrounding the building or structure. 
(1)  Finished Grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling. 
(2)  Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
(3)  Natural Grade. The elevation of the ground surfaces in its natural conditions, prior to any man made alteration resulting in an increase or decrease in elevation relative to Mean Sea Level (MSL). 
GROUP CARE HOME. A facility or dwelling unit licensed by the Georgia Department of Human Services housing persons unrelated by blood, adoption or marriage and operating as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based on an internally structured relationship providing organization, supervision and care necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of its residents. The capacity of such facility shall be at least four residents but not more than 15 residents, and specifically excludes a boarding house, lodging house, hotel, or fraternity or sorority house. 
GRUBBING. The removal of vegetation from land by means of digging, raking, dragging or otherwise disturbing the roots of vegetation and the soil in which such roots are located. 
HARDSHIP. A condition of significant practical difficulty in using a lot because of the physical problems relating solely to the size, shape or topography of the lot in question, which are not economic difficulties, and which are not self-imposed. 
HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from average elevation of the proposed finished grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof on a building. When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
HISTORIC RESOURCE OR HISTORIC PROPERTY. A building, site, district, object, or structure evaluated as historically significant by Coffee County. These are usually, but not necessarily, 50 years of age or older. 
HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that meets one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historical Places (as maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible under the state historic preservation program which has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible under the local historic preservation program which has been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior. 
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG). A Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from Class A soils with high permeability and little runoff production to Class D soils which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
IMPERVIOUS. A material that water cannot pass through or be absorbed by. 
IMPERVIOUS AREA. The hard-surface areas which either prevent or retard the entry of water into the soil, as is entered under natural conditions as undeveloped property, and/or cause water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions as undeveloped property. 
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
INERT WASTE LANDFILL. A disposal facility permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources as an inert waste landfill to accept only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rocks, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and trees. 
INFILL. Development of vacant or remnant lands passed over by previous development in the area. 
JUNK. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use related to disposition. 
JUNKED VEHICLE. Any wrecked or inoperable dismantled or abandoned automobile, truck, boat, motorcycle, or similar device. 
JUNK YARD. Any parcel and/or building which is wholly or partly utilized for the parking, storage or dissembling of junked vehicles, wrecked or inoperable automobiles, trucks or other vehicles; storage, bailing or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, scrap iron and other metals, used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures, old household appliances, scrap tires and used building materials. These uses shall be considered junkyards, salvage operations or recyclable material wholesalers. 
Use of property for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, or for the dismantling demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND. Wetlands that are regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices. 
LANDFILL. A property operated as a commercial venture for profit or operated by a county or municipality for the disposal of solid waste or any location where a private owner accepts solid waste for compensation from sources other than his own property for disposal. As used herein, the term "solid waste" means putrescible and non-putrescible wastes, except water carried body waste, and shall include garbage, rubbish (paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture and appliances, metal, tin cans, glass, sludge, animal manures, industrial wastes (waste materials generated in industrial operations), residue from incineration, food processing wasters, demolition wastes, abandoned automobiles, dredging wastes, construction waste, and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state. 
LAND OWNER. The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
LOADING SPACE. A space within the principal building, or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and other carriers. 
LOT (plot, parcel). A portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description, as on a subdivision plat or record of survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of this LDC, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
(1)  Lot Area. The total area within the boundaries of a lot. 
(2)  Lot by Default. A lot which was once whole but divided into parts through the acquisition of public property or construction of a public road. Each piece of the once whole lot shall henceforth be considered a separate and independent lot. The lots shall be governed by section 9.01.02 Nonconforming Lots of Record. 
(3)  Lot, Conforming. A lot that meets all the requirements of this Code. 
(4)  Lot, Corner. A lot having frontage on two or more public streets at their intersection. 
(5)  Lot Coverage. The percentage of total area of a lot that is occupied by buildings. 
(6)  Lot Depth. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
(7)  Lot, Double Frontage or Through Lot. A lot other than a corner lot, that has frontage upon two or more streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
(8)  Lot, Flag. A lot having only its driveway fronting on a public street, with the result that the width of the driveway substantially constitutes the frontage of the lot: Lots A, B, and C are all flag lots. 

(9)  Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot. 
(10)  Lot Line (Property Line). The property boundary, abutting a right-of-way line, or any line defining the exact location of a lot. 
(11)  Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision plat recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court after the adoption of the subdivision regulations on September 6, 1972. Also, a lot which was created either by a recorded metes and bounds description or a recorded subdivision plat before the adoption of the subdivision regulations on September 6, 1972. 
(12)  Lot Width. The distance between the side lot lines, measured at the building line, parallel to the street right-of-way line. 
LOT SPLIT. The platting of real property into no more than two parcels, lots, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land. 
MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home and Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401—5445, and meeting each of the following standards: 
(1)  The term "manufactured home" includes a structure, transportable in one or more sections; 
(2)  Which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area; 
(3)  Which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; and 
(4)  Which is manufactured after June 15, 1976. 
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A parcel of land (or contiguous parcels) divided into six or more manufactured home lots or sites for rent. 
MEAN SEA LEVEL. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide, used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this LDC, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum. 
MINI-WAREHOUSE. A building or group of buildings that contain(s) individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers used for storage, including accessory office, but not including retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing, outside storage, or any other commercial use. 
MOBILE HOME. A dwelling manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight feet or more in width or 40 feet or more in length, and when erected on site, is 320 or more in square feet floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
MODULAR HOME OR INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING. Certain manufactured buildings which are regulated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Georgia law defines an Industrialized Building as "any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof." Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the "Industrialized Buildings Act", Georgia Law 1982 (O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 2, Part 1). 
MIXED USE. Development or a development project that incorporates more than one land use or activity, such as residential, commercial, office, and/or industrial. 
NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM. A vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations. 
NON-CONFORMING LOT OF RECORD. A lot of record on the effective date of this Code that does not comply with the current requirements of this Code, but was lawfully established and authorized by Coffee County. 
NON-CONFORMING LEGAL STRUCTURE. Any lawfully existing structure or building on the effective date of this Code that does not comply with all of the provisions of this Code. 
NON-CONFORMING LEGAL USE. Any use lawfully being made of any land, building, or structure on the effective date of this Code that does not comply with the provisions of this Code. 
NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any property developed for commercial, industrial, governmental or institutional use including churches, hospitals, and other such institutions, but excluding undeveloped property and property used exclusively for agricultural purposes. 
OPEN SPACE. Any lot area not used for or occupied by a driveway, off-street parking or loading space, refuse storage, or structure. Naturally wooded areas or other densely vegetated areas may not be considered as open space. 
OUTSIDE STORAGE. The placement or containment of goods, materials, or equipment other than within a building, for purposes of keeping such goods, materials, or equipment for processing, use, sale, or transfer to other locations. 
OVERLAY ZONE. A defined geographic area that encompasses one or more underlying zoning districts and that imposes additional requirements above those required by the underlying zoning district. An overlay district can have the same boundaries as the existing zoning districts or contain only parts of one or more such districts. 
PARCEL OF LAND. Any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest County tax assessment records. 
PARKING AREA. All property used for off-street parking vehicular aisles and access ways, loading zones, interior and perimeter landscaping, and other outdoor vehicular use areas. 
PARKING LOT. An area or plot of land used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles. 
PARKING LOT ISLAND. A strip of property, which separates groups of parking spaces from other groups of parking spaces or internal driveways. 
PARKING SPACE. An area designed for the temporary storage of a motor vehicle. 
PAVING. An area covered by asphalt, concrete, brick or pavers meeting the specifications of the County. Pervious paving materials are subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator and County Engineer and/or the Board of County Commission. 
PERMIT. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity, land development activity, building construction, or other activity regulated by Coffee County that requires an official authorization under provisions of this LDC. 
PERSONAL CARE HOME. A building or group of buildings, a facility, or place in which is provided beds and other facilities and services including room, meals and personal care for non-family ambulatory adults, which is licensed as a personal care home by the State of Georgia Department of Human Resources. This term does not include buildings which are devoted to independent living units which include kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and servicing some or all of their own meals or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. Personal care homes are categorized as follows: 
(1)  Family Personal Care Home. A home for adults in a family type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to four through six persons. 
(2)  Group Personal Care Home. A home for adult persons in a residence or other type building(s), non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven through 15 persons. 
(3)  Congregate Personal Care Home. A home for adults which offers care to 16 or more persons. 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. Development intended to encourage both residential and non-residential land uses according to a master development plan, with related covenants and restrictions. Developments within a PD project may have flexibility in the application of development standards when approved according to a master development plan, and to promote the conservation of natural resources, more efficient use of land, and, efficiency in the extension of streets and utilities. 
PLANNING COMMISSION. The Douglas-Coffee County Planning Commission, as established by the governments in accordance with Georgia General Act No 358, 1957, as amended. 
PLAT. A map, plan or other graphic layout of a lot, tract, parcel or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of one or more properties. Plats are typically used for recording purposes. 
PLAT, As-Built. An as-built plat may be performed to verify that a particular improvement has been built according to design plans or codes (e.g. setbacks). This type of survey may also be used to document the size or location of an improvement to aid in the design of additions (e.g. building additions, sewer extensions). 
PLAT, Final. A finished drawing or map of a subdivision or development site plan, meeting all of the requirements of this Code and approved by Coffee County and fully certified for recording. 
PLAT, Preliminary. A tentative plan of a proposed subdivision or development meeting the specified requirements of this Code and showing the layout in sufficient detail to allow an evaluation of the proposed project. 
PORTABLE ON DEMAND STORAGE UNITS (PODS). Portable sheds (hereinafter referred to as "PODS") that are loaded with materials and placed on a residential or commercial property for the purpose of storing materials. 
PRINCIPAL USE. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied, or maintained. 
PROPERTY LINE. The legal boundary that separates a lot or parcel of land from other lots or parcels or right-of-way as recorded by a graphic description on a subdivision plat of record or a survey. 
PUBLIC HEARING. An official session of any elected or appointed board advertised according to law. 
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Any improvement, facility, or service together with its associated public site or right-of-way. Public improvements differ from lot improvements because public improvements are constructed either on public property, or on the portion of a site undergoing development that is to be dedicated for public ownership and maintenance. Common examples of public improvements include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, curbs, traffic control devices, street lights, and utilities. 
PUBLIC USES AND STRUCTURES. Buildings, structures and uses of land by a unit of government, including but not restricted to government administration, water treatment facilities, streets, libraries, public schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation centers and fire stations. 
RECHARGE. The replenishment of underground water reserves. 
RECHARGE AREA. Any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant Recharge Areas. Those areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (latest edition). 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular-type portable structure, built on a single chassis, without permanent foundation which can be towed, hauled, or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreation, camping, and travel use. Examples of recreational vehicles include travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. Any area, that meets the requirements and supplemental standards of this LDC, that is occupied or intended for occupancy by transients using recreational vehicles, mobile trailers or tents as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes and is open to the public. 
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL WHOLESALER. Any operation where glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, metal cans, non-ferrous materials and yard waste is collected and stored for resale purposes. 
REDEVELOPMENT. A land development project on a previously developed site. Excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements, which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
RELIGIOUS FACILITY. A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and that is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
RESIDENTIAL. Pertaining to the use of land, means premises such as homes, townhomes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums or apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY, Public Dedicated. A strip of land dedicated to, designated, reserved or deeded to the City, County or State, and duly accepted, on which facilities such as roads, railroads, canals, utilities, and other similar uses exist or may be constructed. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE. The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH. The distance between property lines measured at right angles to the centerline of the street. 
ROAD FRONTAGE. The length of the lot line of any one lot or parcel along a street on which it borders, including proposed streets, within a subdivision of land approved by Coffee County. 
SALVAGE OPERATION. See Junk Yard. 
SANITARY SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
SEDIMENT. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
SEDIMENTATION. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
SETBACK, Front. The shortest distance between the right-of-way of a street and the front exterior wall of the principal building or structure on a lot. Primary and accessory buildings may not be placed within a required setback. 
SETBACK, Side or Rear. The distance between the property line and any structure, measured from the back or side property line. 
SEWER, Public. A common sewer controlled by a government agency or public utility. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or stormwater. 
SIDEWALK. That portion of the right-of way which is parallel to the street or road which is intended for pedestrian traffic. 
SIGN. Any device or display consisting of letters, numbers, symbols, pictures, illustrations, announcements, cutouts, insignia, trademarks or demonstrations, including all trim and borders, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information when the same is placed in view of the general public. 
SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT APPROVED PLAN. An erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Alapaha Soil and Water Conservation District. 
SPECIAL EVENTS. Events of a temporary nature including outdoor meetings, auctions, bake sales, car washes, yard sales from other than residential properties, carnivals, special outdoor entertainment and similar activities which are not part of the property's normal use and which are not otherwise permitted on the site. Outdoor displays or sales accessory to an established retail use are not considered special events. 
STOP WORK ORDER. An order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
STORMWATER FACILITY, Off-Site. A stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
STORMWATER FACILITY, On-Site. A stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. The use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates. 
STORMWATER RETROFIT. A stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
STORMWATER RUNOFF. The flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation, which reaches a drainage system. 
STORMWATER MEASURES. Measures, either structural or nonstructural that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies. 
STREET or ROAD. This term includes streets, roads, sidewalks, alleys, highways and other ways open to travel by the public including the roadbed, right-of-way, and all culverts, drains, sluices, ditches, water storage areas, waterways, embankments, slopes, retaining walls, bridges, tunnels, viaducts necessary for the maintenance of travel. This definition does not include any private street or way that is not constructed in conformance with the provision of this Code. 
STREET or ROAD CLASSIFICATIONS. 
(1)  Arterial (Principal): A road which is intended to provide swift and safe movement of traffic through the County. In addition, every United States or State numbered highway is an arterial road. 
(2)  Arterial (Minor): A street which is intended to provide easy and convenient traffic movement within the County. 
(3)  Connector/Collector: A road which is intended to collect traffic from local streets and direct it safely to minor or major arterial roads. A collector may also provide direct access to adjacent properties. 
(4)  Local Road: A road providing service which is of low average traffic volume, short trip length or minimal through traffic and high access for abutting property. 
STREET, Controlled Access. The right-of-way of a public street, road or highway where curb cuts are prohibited or limited because of potential interference with safe and efficient movement of vehicles. 
STREET, Dead End (Cul-de-Sac). A local street or road of limited length, opened at one end and closed at the other end by a permanent turnaround. 
STREET, Grade. The percent change in vertical elevation of the street centerline measured along the finished surface of the street. 
STREET, Frontage. The width in linear feet of a lot or parcel, where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
STREET, Half. A street or road adjacent to a subdivision tract boundary where only half the required right-of-way and road improvements are provided within the proposed subdivision and the responsibility for the other half is undecided or is left to the adjacent property owner. 
STREET, Jog. Where two streets or two portions of a single street are separated by a relatively short distance, usually at their intersection with another street. 
STREET LIGHT. A pole or pedestal mounted luminary, 10—12 feet in height, with a metal halide or other full spectrum bulb. 
STREET, Private. A strip of land improved and used for vehicular access but has not been accepted by Coffee County for maintenance. 
STREET, Public. Right-of-way dedicated to Coffee County held or owned by the County for public street purposes. 
STREET, Shoulder. That portion of the street or road from the outer edge of the paved surface or back of curb to the inside edge of the ditch or gutter or original ground surface. 
STREET, Substandard. A street which does not meet the specifications of this Code. 
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or installed or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. It includes a movable structure, even when it is located on land that can be used for housing, business, commercial, agricultural, or office purposes either temporarily or permanently. It also includes fences, billboards, swimming pools, and signs. Structures shall meet International Building Code Requirements and be permanently affixed. 
STRUCTURE, Pre-Constructed. See modular home and industrialized building. 
SUBDIVISION. The cumulative platting of real property into six or more parcels, lots, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land, including all division of land involving a new street or six or more parcels involving existing streets, for the purpose of conveyance, except as otherwise excepted or modified herein. (See chapter 4, section 4-9.1). 
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
SUBSTANTIAL RENOVATION. Renovation to a structure whereby the cost of renovating the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the renovation. 
SURFACE MINING. Any activity constituting all or part of a process for the removal of minerals, ores, and other solid matter for sale or for processing or for consumption in the regular operation of a business. Tunnels, shafts, borrow pits of less than 1.1 disturbed acres, and dimension stone quarries shall not be considered to be surface mining. 
SURVEY, As-Built. Drawings specifying the dimensions, location, elevations of improvements as they have been constructed. 
SURVEYOR. A professional surveyor who holds an active license in the State of Georgia. 
TAX ASSESSOR. The Coffee County Board of Tax Assessors. 
TEMPORARY USE/BUILDING. Land uses/buildings established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue/remove such use within a designated time period. 
TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes, but is not limited to radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, communication towers, alternative tower structures. 
USE OR OCCUPIED. The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, intended, or occupied and maintained. Used and occupied include the words "arranged, designed or intended to be used," and the word "occupied" shall be deemed to include the words "arranged, designed or intended to be occupied." 
UTILITY. Any community service available to the public by means of an overhead or underground distribution or collection system such as electricity, telephone, domestic water, gas, stormwater system and sewerage disposal. 
a.  County Water System. Refers to the Coffee County water distribution system, and all component parts, equipment, and structures necessary to provide such services. 
b.  Private Water and Sewage System. A system owned and operated by a community corporation or an individual serving two or more premises and approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the dimensional requirements of this Code which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this LDC where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. See chapter 10 of this Code. 
WATERCOURSE. A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. 
YARD. A required open space located on the same lot as the principal building, unoccupied and unobstructed except for accessory uses, vegetation, and fences. 
(1)  Front Yard. That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way line and the principal building of the lot and extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. The front yard of a corner lot shall be that yard abutting the street with the least frontage, unless otherwise determined on a recorded plat or in a recorded deed. The front yard of a lot existing between two streets not intersecting at a corner of the lot, shall be that yard abutting the street on which adjoining properties face, unless otherwise determined on a recorded plat or in a recorded deed. 
(2)  Rear Yard. That area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building on the lot. 
(3)  Side Yard. The area extending from the front building line to the rear building line between the side lot line and the side building line. 
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The officially designated administrator for Coffee County, or his/her designee, who is responsible for administering all elements of the County's Land Development Code. 
ZONING DISTRICT. The use classification of parcels of land as generally defined under this LDC. 
ZONING MAP (Map, Zoning Map of Coffee County, GA). 
ZONING ORDINANCE. The Zoning Ordinance or Land Development Code enacted by the Coffee County Commission, Georgia, as duly amended. 
(Ord. No. 2016-11, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 2016-12, 9-6-2016) 
CHAPTER 3. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

3-1. - General Provisions. 
3-1.1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to describe the specific uses and restrictions that apply to zoning districts in Coffee County. These regulations are intended to allow development and use of property in compliance with the goals and policies of the County expressed in the Joint Coffee County Comprehensive Plan. 
3-1.2. Permitted Uses. Principal permitted uses and structures for each zoning district are listed in Table 3-1 "Table of Permitted Uses". In some instances, additional requirements and limitations on principal uses and structures are contained in the individual sections addressing each zoning district in this chapter or are separately addressed under "Supplemental Standards". 
3-1.3. Accessory Structures. Accessory uses and structures may be permitted in each zoning district in accordance with Table 3-1 "Table of Permitted Uses" and as provided in the standards of chapter 4 and chapter 5 of this Code. 
3-1.4. Development Standards. Property may be developed in accordance with chapter 4, Table 4-1, Development Standards, and chapter 5, Supplemental Standards. 
3-1.5. Supplemental Standards. Certain uses may be permitted in each zoning district as provided in the standards of chapter 5. 
3-2. - Zoning Districts. 
Coffee County is hereby divided into ten zoning districts. There is one agricultural district (AG), four residential districts (R1, R2, R-3, RM), two commercial or mixed use districts (R-P, C), and two industrial districts (W-LI, H-I). A special Planned Development District (PD) is available for combined rezoning/site plan projects which have unique characteristics that will benefit Coffee County. 
3-2.1. AG (AGRICULTURAL USE). 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the AG District is to provide for productive agricultural uses, together with such other uses as may be necessary to, and compatible with, productive agricultural surroundings. Further the purpose is to preserve forests and other agricultural lands away from areas of population growth and where intensive urban uses of land are discouraged. Single-family residential dwellings, Manufactured Homes and Industrialized (Modular) Homes are permissible subject to all other related zoning and subdivision ordinances and restrictions. Rural Large Acreage Subdivisions are permitted, subject to subdivision regulations, with a minimum of ten acres per lot where limited, non-commercial, agricultural uses are allowed and paving of roads is not required. 
2.  Permitted Uses. See Table 3-1. 
3.  Additional Development Standards. See chapter 5 "Supplemental Standards". 
4.  Lot Size Requirements and Dimensional Standards. See chapter 4, Table 4-1. 
5.  Parking and Loading Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-4. 
6.  Landscaping Requirements. See chapter 4. 
3-2.2. R-1 (SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL). 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the R-1 District is to provide for single-family detached residential uses on lots with a minimum of one acre. 
2.  Permitted Uses. See Table 3-1. 
3.  Additional Development Standards. See chapter 5 "Supplemental Standards". 
4.  Lot Size Requirements and Dimensional Standards. See chapter 4, Table 4-1. 
5.  Parking and Loading Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-4. 
6.  Landscaping Requirements. See chapter 4. 
3-2.3. R-2 (SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL). 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the R-2 District is to provide for single-family detached residential uses including Industrialized (Modular) Homes on lots with a minimum of one-half acre. 
2.  Permitted Uses. See Table 3-1. 
3.  Additional Development Standards. See chapter 5 "Supplemental Standards". 
4.  Lot Size Requirements and Dimensional Standards. See chapter 4, Table 4-1. 
5.  Parking and Loading Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-4. 
6.  Landscaping Requirements. See chapter 4. 
7.  Overlay Exception An overlay exception in R-2 Zoning District is created specifically for the Baymeadows Subdivision zoned R-1 prior to July 20, 2015. A land use overlay is created for this area. Where the overlay applies, the zoning is R-2, a minimum of 1,400 square feet of heated floor area is required for a dwelling. Dimensional requirements are as shown in Table 4-1. 
Manufactured home on a minimum two acre lot. 
The overlay exception is applicable only to the area around General Coffee State Park that is zoned R-2 and is shown on the Official Zoning Map as State Park Overlay. 
3-2.4. R-3 (SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL). 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the R-3 District is to provide for single-family detached residential uses on lots with a minimum of one-half acre and to provide for the location of Manufactured Homes consistent with chapter 5, Supplemental Standards and Industrialized (Modular) Homes. Duplex and Quadruplex residential housing is permitted consistent with other requirements of this LDC. 
2.  Permitted Uses. See Table 3-1. 
3.  Additional Development Standards. See chapter 5 "Supplemental Standards". 
4.  Lot Size Requirements and Dimensional Standards. See chapter 4, Table 4-1. 
5.  Parking and Loading Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-4. 
6.  Landscaping Requirements. See chapter 4. 
3-2.5. R-M (MIXED RESIDENTIAL) . 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the R-M District is to provide for a balanced mix of single-family detached, single-family attached, duplex and multi-family housing on moderately sized lots Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks consistent with chapter 5, Supplemental Standards are permitted. 
2.  Permitted Uses. See Table 3-1. 
3.  Additional Development Standards. See chapter 5 "Supplemental Standards". 
4.  Lot Size Requirements and Dimensional Standards. See chapter 4, Table 4-1. 
5.  Parking and Loading Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-4. 
6.  Landscaping Requirements. See chapter 4. 
3-2.6. R-P (RESIDENTIAL-PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT). 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the R-P District is to provide for areas in which residential, professional, educational and institutional uses can be compatibly mixed while maintaining a safe and healthy living environment for the residents of that district. Limited accessory retail use is also permitted, but only as accessory uses within the same building. Primary retail uses are not permitted in the R-P Zoning District. This district may serve as a transition between less intense residential and more intense commercial or industrial districts. 
2.  Permitted Uses. See Table 3-1. 
3.  Additional Development Standards. See chapter 5 "Supplemental Standards". 
4.  Lot Size Requirements and Dimensional Standards. See chapter 4, Table 4-1. 
5.  Parking and Loading Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-4. 
6.  Landscaping Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-7. 
3-2.7. C (COMMERCIAL). 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the C District is to provide and protect an environment for a wide variety of commercial uses for the various types of community and regionally oriented commercial activities including retail and wholesale that serve a large sector of the population. C districts are intended to be located along major arterial streets and at locations that are appropriate for larger or more intense commercial businesses. 
2.  Permitted Uses. See Table 3-1. 
3.  Additional Development Standards. See chapter 5 "Supplemental Standards". 
4.  Lot Size Requirements and Dimensional Standards. See chapter 4, Table 4-1. 
5.  Parking and Loading Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-4. 
6.  Landscaping Requirements. See chapter 4. 
3-2.8. W-LI (WHOLESALE/WAREHOUSE/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL). 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the W-LI District is to provide and protect an environment that is suitable for light manufacturing, wholesale, and warehousing activities that do not impose undesirable noise, vibration, odor, dust or other offensive effects on the surrounding area, together with such other uses as may be necessary to and compatible with light industrial surroundings. 
2.  Permitted Uses. See Table 3-1. 
3.  Additional Development Standards. See chapter 5, "Supplemental Standards". 
4.  Lot Size Requirements and Dimensional Standards. See chapter 4, Table 4-1. 
5.  Parking and Loading Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-4. 
6.  Landscaping Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-7. 
3-2.9. IH (HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT). 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the IH District is to provide an environment suitable for heavy manufacturing and other activities that may impose undesirable noise, vibration, odor, dust, or other offensive effects on the surrounding area together with such other nonresidential uses as may be necessary to and compatible with heavy industrial surroundings. 
2.  Permitted Uses. See Table 3-1. 
3.  Additional Development Standards. See chapter 5, "Supplemental Standards". 
4.  Lot Size Requirements and Dimensional Standards. See chapter 4, Table 4-1. 
5.  Parking and Loading Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-4. 
6.  Landscaping Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-7. 
3-2.10. PD (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT). 
1.  Purpose. Planned Development Districts are intended to provide an alternative method of land development and redevelopment, not available within the framework of the standard zoning districts. Planned Development Districts are intended to promote flexibility of design and allow for planned diversification and integration of uses and structures while at the same time retaining for the County Commission the absolute authority to establish such conditions, limitations and regulations as it deems necessary to maintain community aesthetics and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Planned Development Districts are intended to achieve the following: 
a.  Accomplish a more desirable development pattern than would be possible through strict adherence to the standard zoning districts. 
b.  Accommodate a mixture of uses and/or development patterns which are compatible both internally and externally through sign control, building orientations, combination of architectural styles, building forms and landscaping, design or other techniques which may be appropriate to a particular development proposal. 
c.  Encourage flexible and creative concepts of site development planning. 
d.  Preserve natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas. 
e.  Encourage a more efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of streets and utilities, thereby lowering development and housing cost. 
f.  Maintain consistency with goals, policies and Character Areas of the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Permitted Uses. See Table 3-1. 
3.  Additional Development Standards. See chapter 4, "Supplemental Standards". 
4.  Lot Size Requirements and Dimensional Standards. See chapter 4, Table 4-1. 
5.  Parking and Loading Requirements. See chapter 4, Table 4-4. 
6.  Landscaping Requirements. See chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12, 4-2-2018) 
3-3. - Table of Permitted Uses. 
1.  The uses listed in Table 3-1 shall be permitted only in the zoning district where the uses are listed, and only in the manner so listed. No use shall be permitted and no structure associated with such use shall be constructed, altered or enlarged unless the use is permitted as one of the following: 
"P": A permitted use in the zoning district. 
2.  Any use not listed with the letter "P" in a particular zoning district shall be prohibited in that zoning district, unless it is a nonconforming use lawfully established prior to the effective of the regulation that rendered it nonconforming. 
3.  Public utilities shall be allowed in all zoning districts within the County in order to serve the public health, safety, and welfare. Such use shall only be approved after a public hearing is held to the proposed public utility. Utility stations shall comply with applicable design standards in order to blend in with other adjacent land uses. 
4.  Public parks shall be allowed in all zoning districts within the County in order to serve the public health, safety and welfare. 
5.  Specific site design and development standards are contained in chapters 4 and 5. 
6.  Any use listed with a "yes" (y) in the column headed by the words "Supplemental Regulations" shall satisfy the applicable supplemental use standards as shown in chapter 5, in addition to the development regulations of the district in which it is located as shown in chapter 4. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-04, 3-7-2016; Ord. No. 2016-11, 6-20-2016) 
CHAPTER 4. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

4-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide development design and improvement standards applicable to all development activity within Coffee County. 
4-2. - Responsibility for Improvements. 
All improvements required by this Code shall be designed, installed, and paid for by the developer. The nature and extent to which these improvements must be implemented may vary depending on the nature of the development, zoning criteria and other factors, which are set forth within this LDC. 
The Developer must construct all streets, roads, alleys, drains, driveways, traffic control, curbs, gutters and any other subdivision infrastructure according to Building and Construction Standards for Roads, Streets and Public Utilities which are set out in chapter 7 of this LDC. 
Evidence of adherence to the standards set forth at chapter 7 shall be required before any subdivision infrastructure of any kind is accepted by the County. 
To the extent that third party testing shall be necessary to establish adherence to the building standards set forth herein, the cost of testing shall be wholly born by the developer. 
No subdivision may be re-subdivided unless it otherwise complies with this ordinance and all other subdivision developmental requirements and the requirements of this LDC. 
After the final subdivision plat has been approved, and the developer is thereafter allowed to sell lots in the approved subdivision, no building permit shall be issued for construction of any home in said subdivision until such time as all subdivision construction and infrastructure requirements have been met, and said infrastructure has been dedicated to and accepted by the County. 
With respect to the infrastructure standards set forth herein, developer shall be responsible for providing a two-year warranty for all infrastructure components of said subdivision. Said warranty may be secured with a bond, insurance policy, or other security approved by the County. All forms of insurance or bonding must be procured by the developer for the benefit of the County. 
No subdivision shall be approved unless the primary means of ingress and egress to the subdivision connects to a public county road with existing right-of-way of no less than 60 feet. 
4-3. - Principles of Development Design. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure functional and attractive development. All development shall be designed to avoid unnecessary impervious surface cover; to provide adequate access to lots and sites; to avoid adverse effects of shadow, glare, noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities on surrounding properties; and to increase public safety, health and welfare. 
4-4. - Area, Setback, and Height Requirements. 
Table 4-1 - See Table below. 

 
(a) Provided lot has on-site sewer but is otherwise served by a community water system, the minimum lot size shall be 21,780 sq. per unit. If served by on-site sewer and on-site well, minimum lot size shall be 43,560 square feet per unit. (See Department of Health Regulations) 
(b) For enclosed small garden sheds, greenhouses, children playhouses and gazebos, this dimension may be reduced to five feet. 
(c) Above 40 feet—With Fire Department Approval Only. 
(d) With water and sewer service only. 
(e) Where fire proof walls are used, no side yard is required. 
(Ord. No. 2016-11, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12, 4-2-2018) 
4-5. - Impervious Surface Coverage. 
4-5.1. Maximum Coverage. Impervious surface coverage on a development site shall not exceed the maximum coverage amounts provided in Table 4-1 above. 
4-5.2. Calculation. Impervious surface coverage is determined by calculating the total impervious surface area as a percentage of the gross site area. Water bodies are impervious and shall be included as such in the calculation of impervious surface coverage. 
4-5.3. Pervious Pavement. If pervious pavement is proposed for a project, then 50 percent of the area covered with pervious pavement shall be considered as a pervious surface provided it is installed and maintained in accordance with manufacturer's guidelines. 
4-6. - Building Setback Requirements. 
4-6.1. General. No person shall construct or erect a building or other permanent structure with the exception of fences/walls/hedges, sidewalks, pools, terraces, or driveways on any lot or tract for which a setback line has been established, between such a setback line and the property line. 
4-6.2. Exceptions. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, gutters, fireplaces, flower boxes, bay windows, decorative molding and balconies, and front staircases designed complementary to the principal structure, which are part of or attached to the structure, may project no more than 36 inches into a required setback area. Equipment tanks, filters, stairwells, stairways attached post construction, and enclosed floor space are not considered architectural features and must meet principal structure setbacks. 
4-6.3. Address and Front Door. The address of a house or location of the front door shall have no effect on the setback regulations outlined in Table 4-1. 
4-7. - Building Height. 
4-7.1. Building Height. Building height is the vertical distance measured to the highest point of the building roof from the average finished grade across those sides of a building that face a street. 
4-8. - Planned Development Standards. 
4-8.1. Definition. A Planned Development (PD) may be a residential PD, a commercial PD, or a mixed-use PD. A PD shall consist of land under unified control which may be planned and developed as a whole, as a single development or as an approved programmed series of developments by multiple developers. A typical PD will include principal and accessory uses and structures that are substantially related to the character of the development itself and to the surrounding area of which it is a part. 
Unified control, as used above, shall mean that all land to be included within a PD shall be owned or otherwise under the legal control of the person or legal entity which has applied for the PD zoning district. Such person or entity shall be legally capable of providing a commitment to the County that the PD development will comply with all PD documents, plans, standards, and conditions ultimately approved by the Coffee County Commission. 
A PD zoning district shall consist of the approved PD zoning district classification, the PD Concept Site Plan and the PD Final Site Plan, as well as any other plans, drawings, renderings, elevations, maps and documents specifically included as development documents in the approval of the PD by ordinance by the County Commission. The ordinance approving a PD shall be deemed a zoning ordinance. The provisions of the individual PD zoning ordinance shall replace all conflicting development regulations set forth in this Code which would otherwise apply to the development. The PD ordinance shall be recorded in the public records of Coffee County. 
The applicant may proceed with development or any land disturbing activities only after a plat is recorded and after certification by the Zoning Administrator that the building plans and other required documents and information substantially conform to all documents approved by the County Commission as part of the PD ordinance. The applicant must also provide evidence that would bind his successors in title to any commitments made for the approval of the PD. 
4-8.2. Zoning Map. The boundaries of land zoned PD by ordinance of the County Commission shall be indicated as such on the official Zoning Map of the County. 
4-8.3. Location. A PD may be located anywhere in the County. 
4-8.4. Minimum Size. The minimum size of a PD is five acres. 
4-8.5. General Requirements. 
a.  PD standards for circulation, parking, utilities, drainage and other standards shall apply as described in this Code except as specifically modified by the County Commission as part of the PD ordinance. 
b.  Open Space. Not less than 25 percent of the PD shall be open space. Required open space may include all common vegetation and landscape areas. 
c.  Maximum Building Area. Not more than 75 percent of the total development shall be covered by buildings. 
4-9. - Subdivision Standards. 
A subdivision is the cumulative platting of real property into six or more parcels, lots, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land, including all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets for the purpose of conveyance, except as otherwise excepted or modified herein. (See chapter 4, section 4-9.1). 
I. Subdivision Classification Generally. Coffee County shall authorize only four classes of subdivisions: Level 1, Level II, Level III, and Level IV. Each type subdivision varies in its developmental standards and attention must be given by any subdivision applicant that the chosen subdivision developmental classification meets the objectives of the developer. The remainder of this section shall set out the nature and specific requirements for each class of subdivision. 
II. Level I Subdivisions. A Level I subdivision is classified for those developments that will, or may in the future, have more than 25 lots or more or 2,640 cumulative linear feet of roadway as measured down the roadway center line. 
Any subdivision that has more than 25 lots or 2,640 cumulative linear feet of roadway shall be required to comply with the following: 
(1)  Level I subdivisions which fall within this class shall be required to pave all proposed roads consistent with the construction standards set forth in chapter 7 of the Coffee County LDC. 
(2)  The procedure for obtaining subdivision approval shall require adherence to zoning regulations set forth at chapter 10. All other aspects of the Coffee County LDC shall also be adhered to when they apply. 
(3)  The Final subdivision plat shall not be approved until such time as road construction is complete, an Engineer has submitted to the County a Certificate of Compliance and Completion that the project has been constructed in accordance with the approved documents, and all other applicable standards have been met. The County shall only then approve the final plat and thereupon accept the completed dedicated roadway. Until then, no subdivision of property may occur nor shall any building permits be issued. 
III. Level II Subdivisions. A Level II Subdivision is a Multi-Phase subdivision where the First Phase is 25 lots or less and has less than 2,640 cumulative linear feet of roadway. 
Any subdivision that has as its objective to, in phases, develop more than 25 lots and greater than 2,640 cumulative linear feet of roadway, shall select this subclass for its development requirements. The purpose of this sub-class is to permit a developer to initiate Phase I of their subdivision without the initial expense of paving its roads. This process is designed to allow a developer to recover some of its initial development cost before being required to pave roads as required herein. To that end, any subdivision falling into this subclass shall be required to comply with the following: 
(1)  Any subdivision in this subclass shall consist of multiple phases. This class of subdivision shall require the developer to plan for and obtain approval of all phases of the entire subdivision plan as required by chapter 10 of the Coffee County LDC. However, the development process may proceed in discreet phases as provided for herein. 
(2)  The subdivision plan shall permit Phase I to develop 25 or less lots on not more than 2,640 cumulative linear feet of roadway as measured down the roadway centerline without mandatorily paving the roads in Phase I. Phase I roads shall, however, be built to those dirt road construction standards set forth in chapter 7 of the Coffee County LDC. 
(3)  The Final subdivision plat for each phase shall not be approved until such time as road construction is complete, an Engineer has submitted to the County a Certificate of Compliance and Completion, and all other applicable standards have been met. The County shall only then approve the final plat and thereupon accept the completed dedicated roadway. Until then, no subdivision of property may occur nor shall any building permits be issued. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall prevent a developer from paving Phase I road(s) from the inception rather than constructing dirt roads. However, if developer chooses to pave all Phase I roads, they shall comply with the same development standards as required of Level I subdivisions. 
(5)  A developer shall not be allowed to begin a new phase of development without first notifying the Zoning Administrator of the intent to do so. Developer must adhere to the following standards before proceeding with any new phase of development: 
A.  Prior to development of the new phase, developer must pave all unpaved roads initially developed in Phase I. 
B.  Likewise, all roads platted in the new phase of development shall at the same time be paved. 
C.  All roads to be paved shall be built to the same standards as roads in a Level I subdivision. 
D.  The Final subdivision plat shall not be approved until such time as road construction is complete, an Engineer has submitted to the County a Certificate of Compliance and Completion, and all other applicable standards have been met. The County shall only then approve the final plat and thereupon accept the completed dedicated roadway. Until then, no subdivision of property may occur nor shall any building permits be issued. 
IV. Level III Subdivisions. A Level III subdivision is classified for those developments that will have 25 lots or less and not more than 2,640 cumulative linear feet of roadway as measured down the roadway center line. 
Any subdivision that has 25 lots or less and not more than 2,640 cumulative linear feet of roadway shall be required to comply with the following: 
(1)  Level III subdivisions which fall within this class shall be required minimally to construct roads consistent with the construction standards set forth in chapter 7 of the Coffee County LDC which apply to dirt road construction. This Subdivision class may also pave all or part of the road system in the subdivision. Any paved road must also be constructed consistent with the construction standards set for in chapter 7. 
(2)  The procedure for obtaining subdivision approval shall require adherence to zoning regulations set forth at chapter 10. All other aspects of the Coffee County LDC shall also be adhered to when they apply. 
(3)  The Final subdivision plat shall not be approved until such time as road construction is complete, an Engineer has submitted to the County a Certificate of Compliance and Completion, and all other applicable standards have been met. The County shall only then approve the final plat and thereupon accept the completed dedicated roadway. Until then, no subdivision of property may occur nor shall any building permits be issued. 
(4)  This subdivision class shall not at any time be enlarged to exceed the 25 lot maximum or the cumulative linear roadway feet restriction. 
V. Level IV Subdivisions: Rural Large Acre Subdivision (RLAS). A level IV Subdivision is classified for those developments that will consist of the subdivision of large acre tracts of land for the purpose of residential single-family development consistent with this LDC and the supplemental standards set out at chapter 5, section 42. The purpose of the RLAS is to permit the subdivision of large tracts of land with a minimum lot size of ten acres per lot and a maximum lot size of 25 acres per lot. The development of a rural large acreage subdivision shall be one in which a street providing access to lots in the development is not dedicated to the public, but is held in common ownership by the owners of the lots. Private drives and streets, whether dirt or paved, shall be constructed consistent with chapter 7 of this LDC and are not maintained by Coffee County. This development is only permissible in the AG Zoning District. Level IV Subdivisions shall be subject to the following restrictions and/or limitations and otherwise meet all other requirements of this LDC: 
a.  Development Plans, Roads and Common Areas. 
(1)  Any proposed Level IV Subdivision must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for application review and compliance as required by this chapter. 
(2)  Any and all roads to be constructed within the proposed subdivision shall allow for a minimum potential construction footprint of 60 feet. All roads shall be surveyed and platted such that they shall be jointly owned by all property owners in the subdivision or by a legally created homeowner's association that will be charged with the responsibility of the ongoing maintenance of any road system developed by the Developer of the subdivision. Until a homeowner's association is legally created and title to said roads conveyed thereto, Developer shall have the joint responsibility to maintain said roads with any landowners having purchased lots therein. 
(3)  Streets, private drainage and utility easements, drainage structures, ditches, and pipes shall be constructed and maintained in perpetuity by the landowner(s) or by a legally created homeowner association. 
(4)  All roads, ditches, pipes, drainage easements, and utility easements built by Developer shall be maintained in perpetuity at the expense of Developer, the joint landowners, or a legally created homeowner's association consistent with subparagraph (2) above. 
(5)  In addition to the application requirements set forth in this chapter, Developer shall also be responsible for filing with the zoning administrator an affirmative statement declaring which road maintenance option as set forth in V(a)(2) above shall be employed for and/or by the owners of the subdivision. 
(6)  The maintenance requirements for roads and common areas shall be required to run with the property and shall be made a necessary responsibility recorded in the deeds of each owner in said subdivision. 
(7)  Coffee County shall have no maintenance responsibilities for the common areas or the roads developed in a Level IV Subdivision. All roads constructed by Developer within a Level IV Subdivision shall be considered private roads irrespective of whether said roads are gated or not. 
(8)  At the time that Developer sells subdivided lots in a Level IV Subdivision, Developer shall be required to notify purchaser before any closing on said lot that the common areas and road system within a Level IV Subdivision shall not be maintained by Coffee County, that said roads shall be considered private roads owned and maintained by either the landowners in said subdivision or a legally created homeowner's association. Notes to this effect must be shown on the final plat. 
(9)  The owner(s) of the road system in a Level IV Subdivision shall have the responsibility of maintaining their roads at a level which will allow emergency vehicles to access their property to provide those necessary services. Any failure to maintain a Level IV Subdivision road system adequately to permit the delivery of said services, which causes any harm to person or property shall be the sole responsibility of the owners of said road system and/or the inhabitants of said Level IV Subdivision. There shall be no responsibility or liability on the part of the County associated with fully maintained private roads in a Level IV Subdivision. Notes to this effect must be shown on the final plat. 
(10)  All common areas envisioned by this chapter shall be surveyed and platted such that they shall be jointly owned by all property owners in the subdivision or by a legally created homeowner's association that will be charged with the responsibility of the ongoing maintenance of any said common areas. Until a homeowner's association is legally created and title to said common areas is conveyed thereto, Developer shall have the joint responsibility to maintain said common areas with any landowners having purchased lots therein. 
(11)  All common areas built by Developer shall be maintained at the expense Developer, the joint landowners, or a legally created homeowner's association consistent with Paragraph 9. 
b.  Governmental Services. A Level IV Subdivision will not receive the same level of County services as those citizens living on County roads. Citizens living within a Level IV Subdivision shall receive emergency services provided the road system permits adequate access to the affected homeowner. However, County Solid Waste Services, United States Mail Services, and School System Transportation Services shall not be required to travel the private roads of a Level IV Subdivision to provide service. To accommodate these services, a Level IV Subdivision must provide for access in the following manner. 
(1)  Any Level IV Subdivision plan shall provide for an acceptable common area at the entrance of said subdivision adjacent or appurtenant to a County road which allows for a centralized service complex to accommodate solid waste disposal, United States mail receptacles and student pick up and drop off for the Coffee County School System. 
(2)  All citizens living within a Level IV Subdivision shall be required to comply with County Solid Waste Ordinances. To that end, all solid waste receptacles utilized by citizens living within a Level IV Subdivision shall be delivered to a common area approved by the Zoning Administrator and consistent with an acceptable plan of development which will permit any solid waste vendor to access and dispose of said solid waste. The design of this common solid waste area shall be such that each potential receptacle can be easily accessed and disposed of without unduly burdening the solid waste vendor. The design shall be such that all receptacles shall be screened from public view from any reasonable angle, and said screen shall be constructed of solid wood or masonry. This common area must provide for a paved or concreted receptacle and turnaround area. 
(3)  A separate and distinct common area shall be developed which will allow for the construction and placement of mail receptacles as approved by the United States Postal Service. This area or another distinct and separate area may be also designed so as to accommodate the efficient, safe and orderly loading and unloading of bus passengers transported by the Coffee County School System. This common area must provide for a paved or concreted receptacle and turnaround area. 
c.  Gated Level IV Subdivisions. 
(1)  A Level IV Subdivision may be gated as all roads therein are private. 
(2)  The common areas set forth in subsection b. above shall be constructed outside any entrance gate to a Level IV Subdivision. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the homeowners living within a Level IV Subdivision to ensure that all emergency service providers have any necessary code to access all homes within the subdivision. 
d.  Building Requirements. 
(1)  Building requirements for single-family detached residential dwellings shall be the same as permitted under the AG zoning district. 
(2)  Accessory uses as permitted under the AG zoning district. 
VI. Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivisions: Private Road/Gated. A Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision is classified for those developments that will consist of the subdivision of 25 lots or less and not more than 2,640 cumulative linear feet of roadway as measured down the roadway center line for the purpose of residential single-family development consistent with this LDC and the supplemental standards set out at chapter 5, section 42. The development of a Level V Private Road/Gated subdivision shall be one in which a road providing access to lots in the development is not dedicated to the public, but is held in common ownership by the owners of the lots. Private drives and roads, whether dirt or paved, shall be constructed consistent with chapter 7 of this LDC and are not maintained by Coffee County. This development is permissible in the AG, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning District Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivisions shall be subject to the following restrictions and/or limitations and otherwise meet all other requirements of this LDC: 
a.  Development Plans, Roads and Common Areas. 
(1)  Any proposed Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for application review and compliance as required by this chapter. 
(2)  Any and all roads to be constructed within the proposed subdivision shall allow for a minimum potential construction footprint of 60 feet. All roads shall be surveyed and platted such that they shall be jointly owned by all property owners in the subdivision or by a legally created homeowner's association that will be charged with the responsibility of the ongoing maintenance of any road system developed by the developer of the subdivision. Until a homeowner's association is legally created and title to said roads conveyed thereto, developer shall have the joint responsibility to maintain said roads with any landowners having purchased lots therein. 
(3)  Streets, private drainage and utility easements, drainage structures, ditches, and pipes shall be constructed and maintained in perpetuity by the landowner(s) or by a legally created homeowner association. 
(4)  All roads, ditches, pipes, drainage easements, and utility easements built by developer shall be maintained in perpetuity at the expense of developer, the joint landowners, or a legally created homeowner's association consistent with paragraph 2 above. 
(5)  In addition to the application requirements set forth in this chapter, developer shall also be responsible for filing with the zoning administrator an affirmative statement declaring which road maintenance option as set forth in V (a)(2) above shall be employed for and/or by the owners of the subdivision. 
(6)  The maintenance requirements for roads and common areas shall be required to run with the property and shall be made a necessary responsibility recorded in the deeds of each owner in said subdivision. 
(7)  Coffee County shall have no maintenance responsibilities for the common areas or the roads developed in a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision. All roads constructed by developer within a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision shall be considered private roads irrespective of whether said roads are gated or not. 
(8)  At the time that developer sells subdivided lots in a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision, developer shall be required to notify purchaser before any closing on said lot that the common areas and road system within a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision shall not be maintained by Coffee County, that said roads shall be considered private roads owned and maintained by either the landowners in said subdivision or a legally created homeowner's association. Notes to this effect must be shown on the final plat. 
(9)  The owner(s) of the road system in a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision shall have the responsibility of maintaining their roads at a level which will allow emergency vehicles to access their property to provide those necessary services. Any failure to maintain a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision road system adequately to permit the delivery of said services, which causes any harm to person or property shall be the sole responsibility of the owners of said road system and/or the inhabitants of said Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision. There shall be no responsibility or liability on the part of the County associated with fully maintained private roads in a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision. Notes to this effect must be shown on the final plat. 
(10)  All common areas envisioned by this chapter shall be surveyed and platted such that they shall be jointly owned by all property owners in the subdivision or by a legally created homeowner's association that will be charged with the responsibility of the ongoing maintenance of any said common areas. Until a homeowner's association is legally created and title to said common areas is conveyed thereto, developer shall have the joint responsibility to maintain said common areas with any landowners having purchased lots therein. 
(11)  All common areas built by developer shall be maintained at the expense of developer, the joint landowners, or a legally created homeowner's association consistent with paragraph 9. 
b.  Governmental Services. A Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision will not receive the same level of county services as those citizens living on County roads. Citizens living within a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision shall receive emergency services provided the road system permits adequate access to the affected homeowner. However, County Solid Waste Services, United States Mail Services, and School System Transportation Services shall not be required to travel the private roads of a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision to provide service. To accommodate these services, a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision must provide for access in the following manner. 
(1)  Any Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision plan shall provide for an acceptable common area at the entrance of said subdivision adjacent or appurtenant to a County road which allows for a centralized service complex to accommodate solid waste disposal, United States mail receptacles and student pick up and drop off for the Coffee County School System. 
(2)  All citizens living within a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision shall be required to comply with County Solid Waste Ordinances. To that end, all solid waste receptacles utilized by citizens living within a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision shall be delivered to a common area approved by the Zoning Administrator and consistent with an acceptable plan of development which will permit any solid waste vendor to access and dispose of said solid waste. The design of this common solid waste area shall be such that each potential receptacle can be easily accessed and disposed of without unduly burdening the solid waste vendor. The design shall be such that all receptacles shall be screened from public view from any reasonable angle, and said screen shall be constructed of solid wood or masonry. This common area must provide for a paved or concreted receptacle and turnaround area. 
(3)  A separate and distinct common area shall be developed which will allow for the construction and placement of mail receptacles as approved by the United States Postal Service. This area or another distinct and separate area may be also designed so as to accommodate the efficient, safe and orderly loading and unloading of bus passengers transported by the Coffee County School System. This common area must provide for a paved or concreted receptacle and turnaround area. 
c.  Gated Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivisions. 
(1)  A Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision may be gated as all roads therein are private. 
(2)  The common areas set forth in subsection b. above shall be constructed outside any entrance gate to a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the homeowners living within a Level V Private Road/Gated Subdivision to ensure that all emergency service providers have any necessary code to access all homes within the subdivision. 
4-9.1. Exemptions. The following will not be regarded as subdivisions: 
a.  A residential development of five lots or less that is owned by persons related to the fourth degree or that have a business relationship in its broadest sense is prohibited within 2,640 cumulative linear feet of any other residential development of five lots or less that was previously permitted under this exemption. 
(1)  Where located on a public road, the combination or recombination of previously platted lots, where the total number of lots is not increased, and the resulting lots comply with the standards in this Code. 
(2)  The public acquisition or sale of land. 
(3)  Division of property under this section shall not require the developer to comply with the application process set forth in chapter 10 of this Code. However, the owner/developer of the property under this section must provide the zoning administrator with the necessary 911 addresses obtained from E-911 before any building permit is issued. 
b.  Division of Large Acre Unimproved Property. Large tracts of unimproved property may be subdivided without administrative oversight provided that the subdivision is not intended to accommodate any form of residential development and does not establish a new road intended for public use. 
4-9.2. Blocks. 
a.  Non-Residential. Blocks for any use shall be of such length and width as may be suitable for their prospective use, including adequate provision for off-street parking and maneuvering space. 
4-9.3. Easements. 
1.  Easements Required: Permanent easements for County owned utilities and/or drainage shall be dedicated to the County. 
2.  Easement Widths: For County owned utilities and/or drainage, the minimum width of permanent easements shall be a minimum of ten feet. However, additional easement widths may be required by the County where the depth of the utility is excessive or other conditions will cause difficulty in accessing the utility. 
Utilities cannot be placed on County dedicated right-of-way. 
a.  Utility. Utility easements for underground or overhead services shall be located within the platted easement as provided for herein and shall be in accordance to the utility plan approved by the County. See chapter 7, section 7-6(b). 
Wherever public utility easements are planned adjacent to the subdivision tract boundary or phase, they shall be platted within the subdivision or phase thereof. 
b.  Drainage. Drainage easements shall be provided as required by the County after review of the preliminary construction plans and preliminary plat of the subject subdivision. 
4-9.4. Lots. 
a.  Minimum Lot Elevation. The lot area contained within and contiguous to the building walls, for a minimum distance of ten feet measured from all sides of any structure, shall have a minimum elevation of two feet or 24 inches above base flood elevation of streams or canals in the particular area. This minimum elevation shall be subject to the approval by the Coffee County Health Department. 
No change of elevation necessary to meet this requirement will be permitted if the change of elevation would constitute placing fill within a designated Flood Hazard Zone. 
All preliminary and final plats shall clearly delineate identified flood plain areas in conformance with the Coffee County Floodplain Management Ordinance. 
b.  Lot Width and Area Requirements. In no case shall the lot dimensions be less than the minimum requirements of Table 4-1 of this Code. Where the following subdivision standards require greater minimum dimensions than Table 4-1, the requirements of this section shall apply. 
c.  Corner Lots. Corner lots shall be of such size and dimension that will permit the location of buildings so as to conform to the building setback lines as prescribed in this Code. 
d.  Double and Reverse Frontage. Lots having street frontage both to the front and rear shall be prohibited except to provide for the separation of residential development from railroad or major, secondary arterial or collector street right-of-way. Where the aforementioned abuts or runs through any portion of the subdivision, the subdivision plan shall provide for lots backing on the railroad or right-of-way. Those lots shall have a minimum depth adequate to provide for the rear yard setback required by the respective zoning district, plus an additional 30 feet, ten feet of which shall be a planted non-encroachable buffer strip separating the lots from the right-of-way. The buffer zone shall be landscaped with hedges or closely planted small trees to provide a visual screen. The vegetation shall be planted at the time of development. This planted, non-encroachable buffer strip shall be clearly indicated on the Final Plat and proper covenants shall be prepared to ensure this restriction and its perpetual maintenance. 
e.  Building Lines. All setback lines shall be in conformance with this Code. 
f.  Addresses and Property Numbers. Addresses and property numbers shall be assigned to each lot in accordance with a property numbering system set up by Coffee County 911. 
g.  Monuments. Lot corners shall be marked with solid steel rods not less than 5/8 inch in diameter and 24 inches in length and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
4-9.5. Commercial Use Buffer Zones. When a portion of the subdivision is to be devoted to commercial purposes and when the commercial area adjoins residential lots, or when a portion of a proposed subdivision adjoins an area zoned for commercial or industrial uses, a buffer zone not less than 20 feet in width shall be provided. Said buffer strip shall be landscaped with hedges or closely planted small trees so as to provide visual screening. No building or portion thereof may be constructed in said buffer zone, and protective covenants shall be provided to ensure this restriction and the buffer's perpetual maintenance. This buffer zone shall be labeled as such on the final subdivision plat and shall be planted at the time of the commercial subdivision development. 
4-9.6. Streets and Driveway Standards. The street and road system of any subdivision shall give due consideration to the Coffee County Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time to time. 
a.  Access. Every lot of every subdivision shall abut a public or private street consistent with the provisions of this LDC. Where the subdivision does not adjoin a public street, the developer shall provide ingress and egress to a public street. Driveways connecting the public road with adjoining property are the responsibility of the property owner. Prior to driveway construction, approval of any needed drainage pipe under the driveway must be received from the County. See chapter 7, section 7-5(3). 
b.  Alignment and Continuation. Streets within the subdivision shall be so arranged as to provide for the alignment and continuation of or projection of existing and future public streets as much as possible. 
c.  Street Names. The developer shall provide on the subdivision plat the approved name or number of all streets within the subdivision. Streets and roads that are obviously in alignment with and are extensions of existing previously named or numbered streets shall bear that name. The names of all new streets within the subdivision shall be subject to the review and approval of 911, the Zoning Administrator, Fire Department, and County Commission. New street names shall not duplicate or closely resemble the names of streets already in existence within Coffee County. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 1-19-2016; Ord. No. 2016-12, 9-6-2016; Ord. No. 2016-13, 9-6-2016) 
4-10. - Minimum Improvements. 
The developer shall provide all public improvements as required by these regulations. See  chapter 7. 
4-10.1. Water Supply and Sanitary Sewerage. Every lot of a proposed subdivision shall be designed to accommodate adequate water and sanitary facilities, which shall require the approval of the Coffee County Health Department and/or Georgia EPD. 
4-10.2. Street Signs. The developer shall pay for and erect all street signs required for his subdivision at the time of its development. 
Standard street name signs shall be extruded nine six inch blanks with four inch letters. County road signs shall be white on green, and private road signs shall be white on blue. 
4-11. - Installation of Improvements. 
4-11.1 The developer or developer's engineer/surveyor shall notify the County of the commencements, suspension, or resumption of work at least one day prior to the commencement, suspension or resumption of such work. This requirement shall not apply to work suspended due to adverse weather conditions. In the event that the developer or developer's engineer/surveyor fails to comply with this requirement, the County is hereby authorized to take whatever steps may be necessary to insure that work performed complies with the approved engineering plans and specifications, the standards as set forth in this Code, and other applicable ordinance of Coffee County. 
4-11.2 Actual construction of all improvements required by this Code shall be inspected by a competent inspector, approved by the County, and employed by and under the directions of the developer's engineer/surveyor and shall be performed in accordance with this Code. Said inspections shall be adequate in the opinion of the County to assure that all work complies with the approved engineering plans and specifications and this Code. See chapter 10, section 10-23(7). 
4-12. - Acceptance of Completed Minimum Improvements. 
4-12.1 Completion of Improvements. Before the plat is signed by the County, all developers shall be required to complete, in accordance with the County Commission's decision and to the satisfaction of Coffee County, all minimum improvements as required by this Code, specified on the Final Plat, and as approved by County Commission, and to dedicate same to Coffee County. 
4-13. - Parking and Loading Standards. 
4-13.1. Applicability. Parking spaces shall be provided for each permitted use established in accordance with this Code as follows: 
a.  The construction of a new building or new structure; 
b.  The construction of a new addition to an existing building or structure; or 
c.  Changes in use including changes in the intensity of an existing use. 
4-13.2. Time of Completion. Parking areas shall be completed, landscaped and ready for use prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion. 
4-13.3. Calculating Parking Requirements. 
a.  In the event the calculation of the number of required parking spaces results in a fractional space, the number of required spaces is the nearest whole number. 
b.  The number of required parking and loading spaces for a use not specifically listed in this chapter shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on a listed use most similar in parking and loading needs to the unlisted use. 
c.  For properties containing more than one use, the number of required parking spaces is the cumulative number of spaces for all uses, including approved shared parking. 
d.  Gross floor area less storage areas, restrooms, mechanical rooms or any other areas not commonly used by the public shall be used for the calculation of required parking spaces relating to floor area. 
e.  The greatest number of employees, including owners and managers, present on premises at any one time during the largest shift shall be used for the calculation of required parking spaces relating to the number of employees. 
4-13.4. Location of Required Parking Spaces. 
a.  All required parking spaces shall be located on the same real property upon which the principal use is located. The term "same real property" means that the principal use site and the parking site are in the same ownership or in the same leasehold interest. 
b.  If the site of the principal use and the site of required parking are not contiguous, the nearest portion of the parking site shall be located within 250 feet of the front entrance to the principal use as measured by a safe and convenient pedestrian route. Contiguous for this purpose means a common boundary and does not include properties which are separated by a road, alley, or other public right-of-way. 
c.  The owner of the off-site parking site shall relinquish all development rights for said property until such a time that the required parking space is approved and provided elsewhere. 
d.  For a single-family dwelling, a driveway may be used to provide two parking spaces. 
4-13.5. Shared Parking and Joint Use of Facilities. 
a.  The Zoning Administrator may permit the required parking spaces for one use to be shared as required parking spaces by another use upon a finding that: 
b.  The shared parking spaces are in close proximity and readily accessible to the uses served; and 
c.  The uses served by the shared parking spaces have different peak parking demands and operating hours; and 
d.  There will be a reduction in vehicle movements by the users of the shared parking spaces; and 
e.  The design of the parking area in terms of traffic circulation, vehicular and pedestrian access, stormwater management, landscaping, open space preservation and public safety will be improved. 
f.  It shall be the responsibility of an applicant for shared parking approval to provide a description of the uses, a site plan, parking study and other necessary information to permit a finding by the Zoning Administrator regarding the request for shared parking. 
4-13.6. Off-Street Parking Schedule. Off-Street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the minimum standards contained in the following table: 

 
4-13.7. Design Standards for Parking Spaces. 
a.  The minimum design of parking spaces and access ways as they relate to the angle of parking shall be as follows: 

 
4-13.8. Paving of Parking Surfaces. 
a.  All required parking spaces, access ways and loading zones shall be paved and otherwise constructed in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the County. As an alternative to paving, parking spaces and access ways may be provided on stabilized grassed areas for uses requiring only occasional parking or transitory vehicle storage as needed for recreational facilities, vehicle dealerships, churches, assembly halls and flea markets. Transitory vehicle storage shall occur only in the rear of such facility and shall only be used by the specified vehicle dealership for their own saleable vehicles. Paved parking shall be provided, however for all full-time employees of such uses. 
b.  All parking spaces access ways and loading zones shall be maintained in good condition and be free of pot holes, loose or cracked pavement, broken wheel stops, and any other conditions which might be otherwise detrimental to the health or safety of the residents of the County as determined by the County. 
c.  Pervious parking surfaces are permitted when the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Pervious paving materials and other soil stabilization techniques are used in a manner as to assure that parking will remain functional in heavy rains or drought. 
(2)  Pervious paving materials are installed according to manufacturer's specifications, including sub-surface preparation, composition, and density of compaction. 
(3)  Sub-surface soil testing must demonstrate that the manufacturer's specifications will be met to allow for percolation and other stormwater functions. A registered professional engineer shall also make inspections and tests as necessary to certify that construction of the pavement is consistent with the approved plans as well as industry and manufacturer's standards. 
(4)  Pervious parking areas shall allow stormwater to percolate into the ground as designed as part of an overall stormwater management system and in accordance with the approved site plan. 
(5)  Such areas shall be provided with drainage facilities adequate to properly dispose of all surface water run-off. 
(6)  Regular maintenance of pervious parking areas is necessary to ensure long-term integrity of function. Sweeping or other recommended maintenance procedures as per manufacturer's specifications must be implemented. If such areas cease to function in providing adequate parking, drainage or cause sedimentation within the drainage system, then paving to normal design standards will be required. In such an event, any credit given towards pervious surface area for the pervious parking will be revoked and pervious areas shall be installed which are comparable to the area credited or revisions to the stormwater management system shall be made as necessary. 
4-13.9. Off-Street Loading Requirements. In addition to the parking required for non-residential uses, loading spaces shall also be required. All loading spaces shall be located and screened to avoid nuisance impacts to adjacent areas with special consideration for noise. A sufficient number of loading spaces shall be provided to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be loaded or unloaded at any one time. Wheel stops or curbs shall be provided to prevent any vehicle using a loading space from encroaching upon unpaved areas or adjacent property. 

 
Each loading space shall be not less than ten feet in width and 25 feet in length for commercial uses and not less than 12 feet in width and 50 feet in length for industrial uses. 
CHAPTER 5. - SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS 
The uses in this section are listed in alphabetical order. The purpose of these Supplemental Use Standards is to provide more specific standards for certain uses for which site development and design standards are necessary to ensure that they will be compatible with surrounding uses, have minimal impact on the environment, and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the County. 
These standards shall apply to specific uses in all zoning districts and shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator. 
Any use that is regulated by this section, and is authorized in a zoning district shall be developed in conformance with the applicable Supplemental Use Standards. 
(1)  Accessory Uses and Structures. 
(2)  Adult Entertainment Uses. 
(3)  Agricultural and Farm Operations. 
(4)  Amateur Radio Antenna. 
(5)  Amusement Arcade, Commercial Recreation. 
(6)  Animal Shelter and Kennels. Also see Veterinary Services. 
(7)  Automobile, Boat, RV Sales. 
(8)  Bed and Breakfast Lodging. 
(9)  Cemeteries, Human and Pet. 
(10)  Clubs, Lodges and Similar Non-commercial Associations. 
(11)  Communication Tower/Facilities. 
(12)  Commercial Recreation. 
(13)  Continuing Care Retirement Community or Aggregate Congregate Care Living Facility. 
(14)  Day Care/Child Care Centers. 
(15)  Distance Requirements for Alcoholic Beverages. 
(16)  Drive-Through Facilities. 
(17)  Dwelling, Live-Work. 
(18)  Dwelling, Loft. 
(19)  Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex), Three-Family (Triplex) and Four-Family (Quadruplex) in R-3 and R-M Zoning District. 
(20)  Fences, Walls and Hedges. 
(21)  Flea Market. 
(22)  Gasoline Service Station with or without Convenience Store. 
(23)  Golf Courses and Country Clubs. 
(24)  Home Occupation. 
(25)  Ice Vending Machines. 
(26)  Indoor Gun Range. 
(27)  Outdoor Gun Range. 
(28)  Industrialized Buildings (Modular Homes), Residential. 
(29)  Internet Café and Similar Uses relating to Online Gambling. 
(30)  Kennel, Pet Boarding. See Veterinary Services. 
(31)  Landfill, Inert Waste. 
(32)  Landfill, Solid Waste. 
(33)  Livestock in Residential Districts. 
(34)  Manufactured Homes. 
(35)  Manufactured Home Parks. 
(36)  Mobile Food Vendors and Services. 
(37)  Outdoor Storage in Residential and Commercial Districts. 
(38)  Racetracks, Tractor Pulls, Motorcycle Dirt Tracks, ATV Tracks. 
(39)  Recreational Vehicle Park and Campground. 
(40)  Religious Facilities and Accessory Uses. 
(41)  Riding Stables. 
(42)  Rural Large Acre Subdivision. 
(43)  Salvage Yard, Junk Yards. 
(44)  School K—12, Private. 
(45)  Scrap, Waste and Yard Debris Recycling Operation. 
(46)  Shooting Clubs, Private or Public. 
(47)  Small appliance Repair Shop. 
(48)  Temporary Uses (such as Special or Seasonal Events). 
(49)  Utility Substation. 
(50)  Veterinary Services/Animal Hospitals in Residential Districts, Pet Boarding. 
(51)  Surface Mining. 
(Ord. No. 2016-11, 6-20-2016) 

5-1. - Accessory Uses and Structures. 
a.  No accessory uses and structure shall be constructed unless a permitted principal use exists on the parcel, located in full compliance with all standards and requirements of this Code. 
b.  Accessory uses and structures shall not be located in any required front yard and shall only be permitted in side and rear yards, subject to minimum five feet rear setback and eight feet side setbacks from the property line. On corner lots the side setback shall be ten feet. 
c.  There shall not be less than five feet separation between an accessory structure and the principal building, but the separation has to be in compliance with minimum fire code. 
d.  An accessory dwelling unit may be in the same building or separate building from the primary dwelling unit. 
e.  In a residential district the height of an accessory use and structure shall not exceed the height of the principal structure and the footprint of an accessory use and structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the footprint of the principal structure and 35 percent of the maximum permitted building area of the entire lot. 
f.  Accessory uses and structures and detached accessory dwelling units shall be included in all calculations of impervious surface and stormwater run-off. 
g.  An accessory dwelling unit shall have at least one parking space in addition to the required parking space(s) for the primary dwelling unit. 
5-2. - Adult Entertainment Uses. 
a.  Adult Business Premise Regulations. 
1.  All adult materials shall be located and the activities of employees which include the exposure of specified anatomical areas shall take place within the adult business premises. 
2.  No adult materials or activities of employees which include the exposure of specified anatomical areas shall be visible from the exterior of the adult business premises in any way including, but not limited to exterior apertures such as opened doors and unobscured windows. 
3.  No merchandise, advertising or depictions of the activities of an adult business shall be displayed on the exterior of the adult business premises or in any location where they are visible from public right-of-way. 
4.  No adult business shall display a sign: 
i.  Advertising the presentation of any activity prohibited by Georgia law or any applicable County ordinance. 
ii.  Capable of leading a reasonable person to believe that the establishment engages in an activity prohibited by Georgia law or any applicable County ordinance. 
5.  Additional landscaping shall be provided adjacent to public right-of-way and adjacent to private property: 
i.  A landscaped strip at least five feet wide shall be provided along the boundary of adjacent public right-of-way between the right-of-way and all on-site parking areas and other vehicular use areas to consist of one tree every 50 feet or portion thereof and a fence, wall or hedge not less than four feet in height at planting; and 
ii.  An opaque fence, wall or hedge shall be provided along the boundary of adjacent private property of a height of not less than four feet and more than eight feet at planting. 
b.  Distance Requirements. All measurements shall be measured in a straight line between the two closest points of each building or property, whichever is closer: 
1.  No adult business shall commence operation within 1,500 feet of any residential zoning district. 
2.  No adult business shall commence operation within 1,500 feet of any other adult entertainment establishment. 
3.  No adult business shall commence operation within 1,500 feet of any church or school. 
c.  Prohibited Activities. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for an employee of an adult business to engage in specified sexual activities within the adult business premises in the presence of a patron or spectator of the business or for any form of compensation. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for an employee of an adult business to physically touch a patron or spectator of an adult business while simultaneously revealing specified anatomical areas. 
d.  Amortization of Non-conforming Adult Businesses. 
1.  An adult business in violation of the location or distancing requirements of this ordinance at the time of its enactment on July 20, 2015 shall be deemed a non-conforming use which may remain in operation until two years later. No such non-conforming uses shall continue to operate as an adult business after two years later, except in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
2.  If any non-conforming adult business ceases to do business for a continuous period of six months, it shall be deemed abandoned and shall not thereafter re-open except in conformance with these regulations. 
5-3. - Agricultural and Farm Operations. 
a.  Commercial livestock or poultry operations buildings or structures must be at least 200 feet from any property line. 
b.  Concentrated animal feedlot operations are permitted provided all applicable federal and state requirements are met. 
5-4. - Amateur Radio Antenna. 
a.  No such antenna structure, including any support upon which it may be constructed, shall exceed a combined height of 100 feet. 
b.  Amateur radio service antenna structures exceeding 100 feet in height shall be permitted only by the Board of Appeals subject to all variance requirements of this Code. 
c.  Amateur radio service antenna shall be located a distance of at least one-half the height of the tower (antenna) from all property lines. 
5-5. - Amusement Arcade; Amusement Theme Park, Commercial Recreation. 
a.  An outdoor recreation facility consisting of amusement rides, games, water slides, amusement vehicles, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, batting cages, water slides or any similar commercial outdoor recreation shall be limited as follows: 
1.  The minimum lot size shall be five acres. 
2.  The maximum lot size shall be 15 acres. 
3.  All such facilities must be enclosed within an eight foot high fence with unpierced gates that are to be locked except when the facility is open to the public. 
4.  Outdoor activities are limited to the hours from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
5.  A site plan shall be required in accordance with chapter 10 to indicated entrances and exits, type location and height of recreation facilities, buildings and other structures and lights, parking areas, landscaping, buffers and drainage. The site plan shall also illustrate surrounding property uses and the location of the nearest residence. 
6.  Lighting must be designed to direct light downward and away from adjacent properties. 
7.  An environmental acoustical study shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as part of the site plan approval in order to identify and analyzes all sources of noise emanating from the site including outdoor speakers, sound effects or sound systems as well as rides, vehicles, and mechanical equipment. Noise levels shall not exceed 65 decibels, dbA measured at the property lines. 
8.  A 100 feet buffer shall be maintained adjacent to all abutting residentially zoned property. 
5-6. - Animal Shelter and Commercial Kennels. 
Any outside kennel or kennels with access to the outside shall be at least 200 feet from any residential district. 
5-7. - Automobile, Boat, RV Sales (new and pre-owned). 
a.  A ten foot wide landscape buffer shall be required abutting public right-of-way. 
b.  A 15 foot wide landscape buffer shall be required abutting all side and rear property lines. 
c.  All vehicles shall be parked on paved surfaces or approved pervious paving materials. 
d.  All outdoor display areas shall be at least 50 feet from the right-of-way line and no closer than 100 feet from the nearest residence. 
e.  Maintenance, repair, painting and body work must take place within an enclosed building. 
f.  The property shall contain a sales building with a minimum of 500 square feet of heated floor area. 
5-8. - Bed and Breakfast Lodging. 
a.  The Bed and Breakfast must be secondary to the use of the premises for a dwelling. All operators of a Bed and Breakfast Residence must own and occupy the building where said use will occur as their principal residence. 
b.  Only one sign, for the purposes of identification, no advertisement, shall be permitted. The identification sign shall have a maximum of four square feet in sign area and shall not be illuminated. 
c.  The maximum number of guest rooms made available for rent shall be five. 
d.  One off-street parking space shall be provided per guest room and shall meet the requirements of this Code. 
e.  No food preparation or cooking shall be conducted within any bedroom or any other individual rented rooms. Meals shall only be provided to overnight guests and employees of the inn. 
f.  The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character. 
5-9. - Cemeteries, Human and Pet. 
a.  Cemeteries are permitted in AG, Agriculture, C, Commercial and PD, Planned Development zoning district provided they front on an arterial or connector street. 
b.  A cemetery may include one or more of the following: a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments and a columbarium. 
c.  A cemetery may include a chapel when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of the cemetery. 
d.  Registered cemeteries per state law must have a minimum size of ten acres; other cemeteries must have a minimum land area of one acre. 
e.  The minimum setbacks for any structures to the front property line must be 100 feet, to the side and rear property lines must be 100 feet and to any private, community, public water system or any water body, stream or river must be 100 feet. 
f.  Must have a 25-foot planted buffer strip around their entire perimeter except for ingress and egress points. 
g.  Private family cemeteries are permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Private family cemeteries are only permitted in the AG (Agriculture) Zoning district. 
2.  The minimum parcel size is one acre. 
3.  The parcel must be surveyed by a Registered Land Surveyor, platted separately from any other property and properly recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Coffee County. 
4.  A 30-foot dedicated ingress/egress easement from a public road to the parcel must be shown on the plat. The easement will be privately owned and maintained. 
5.  The cemetery must be setback a minimum of 100 feet from any public road or property line. 
6.  The cemetery must be a minimum of 100 feet from any private, community or public water system or any water body, stream or river. 
7.  A chain link fence around the gravesite(s) is required. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02(b), 1-19-2016) 
5-10. - Clubs, Lodges and Similar Non-commercial Associations. 
a.  The serving of food is limited to club members on a non-profit basis; 
b.  Ingress and egress are situated so that the added traffic, lights, noise etc. are not objectionable to the surrounding residences; 
c.  No structures are within 50 feet of an adjacent residential structure; and 
d.  A planted buffer strip is provided and maintained to screen off-street parking areas, trash, service entrance, and other potential offensive features from adjacent residential properties. 
5-11. - Communication Tower/Facility. 
a.  The purpose and intent is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the development and installation of communication towers, antenna support structures, antennas and related facilities. These standards are designed to protect and promote public health, safety and community welfare and the aesthetic quality of the County, while at the same time not unduly restricting development of needed telecommunication facilities nor denying wireless communications suppliers' access to the public switched telephone network. These standards encourage managed development of telecommunication infrastructure. 
b.  All applications shall include a statement of need or necessity, showing that the service cannot be provided through other means, i.e. co-location. 
c.  All applications shall include the intended service area and existing coverage by service providers. 
d.  Telecommunication towers shall comply with applicable Federal Aviation Administration and Federal Communications Commission regulations. Evidence of compliance must be submitted prior to issuance of building permits for construction. 
e.  All certifications required for the construction of telecommunication facilities shall be sealed by a Georgia registered engineer. 
f.  All telecommunication towers, as well as accessory and support structures including guy anchors shall comply with the applicable zoning district setbacks. For guyed towers, applicants should submit certified break-apart calculations in order for the property boundary setbacks of the tower to be determined. If the applicant does not submit break-apart calculations, the minimum setback from all property lines or the nearest inhabited building shall be 150 percent of the height of the tower, but not less than 200 feet. 
g.  A wall or fence no less than ten feet in height from finished grade shall be constructed around each telecommunication tower and ground related support or guy anchors. Access to the tower shall be controlled. 
h.  The County may require, as a condition of approval, the dedication of space on a tower for communications equipment required for public safety. The need for such public use shall be indicated to the applicant prior to formal approval of an application. In the case of co-use with the County, the applicant shall certify that none of the proposed or future users of the tower shall interfere with its use by the County for public safety. 
i.  In addition to the landscaping requirements per chapter 4 of this Code, landscape buffers shall be required around the perimeter fencing of the telecommunication tower and any accessory uses, including guy anchors. Landscape buffers shall be located outside and within ten feet of the required fence and shall include not less than one tree and suitable ground cover for every 20 linear feet of fence. In addition, a hedge shall be installed around the exterior perimeter of the fence. 
j.  A 12-foot wide stabilized access driveway is acceptable to a telecommunication tower, unless the Zoning Administrator determines, based on public safety concerns, that circumstances require paved access. The turn-around area shall be approved by the County, and Fire Chief. 
k.  A minimum of one on-site parking space shall be provided. The parking area shall be paved if the access road is paved. 
l.  Telecommunications towers and accessory structures shall be unoccupied. 
m.  A tower may constitute an accessory use on a lot containing a separate principal use. If the tower constitutes a principal use, then it must be located on a property which meets the minimum lot size requirements of the district in which the tower is located and is large enough to accommodate the tower, accessory structures, landscaping, parking and other required improvements. 
n.  The use of any portion of a tower for signs or advertising is prohibited. 
o.  The following distances shall be measured by a straight line measurement without regard to intervening buildings from the nearest point of the building or unit within a building in which the proposed telecommunications tower is to be located to the nearest point of the lot, use, right-of-way line or district from which the proposed telecommunications tower is to be separated. 
1.  No telecommunications tower shall be constructed within 500 feet of any residential zoning district within the County or within 500 feet of a residential area outside of the County. 
2.  No telecommunications tower shall be constructed within 500 feet of a school. 
p.  An unused tower shall be removed within three months of cessation of all telecommunications uses. 
q.  Existing non-conforming towers may be replaced one time by a tower of equal or lesser height. 
r.  Temporary facilities known as "cells on wheels" shall be allowed for periods up to 30 days during documented states of emergency as declared by the County Commission, and for special events subject to review and approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
5-12. - Commercial Recreation. 
a.  Ingress and egress are situated so that the added traffic, lights, noise etc. are not objectionable to any surrounding residences; 
b.  No structures are within 200 feet of an adjacent residential zoning district. 
5-13. - Continuing Care Retirement Community or Adult Congregate Care Living Facilities. 
a.  The provisions of this section only apply to facilities which provide housing for more than ten persons or which are more than one acre in size. Any adult congregate care facility which is intended to house less than four unrelated persons in a single-family detached dwelling shall be a use by right in all residential zones. 
b.  Standards. 
1.  A site plan drawn to scale, in accordance with chapter 10 of this Code shall be provided. 
2.  The permitted density shall be that of the underlying zoning district. 
3.  Off-street parking shall be provided on a minimum basis of one space per every four occupants and one space for every two employees as determined by the maximum working shift. The County Commission may require the provision of additional parking in the reasonable exercise of its discretion. 
4.  For all facilities, each unit in the facility to be occupied by one person shall be a minimum of 250 square feet; each unit in the facility to be occupied by two persons shall be a minimum of 450 square feet. Additionally, at least 100 square feet of interior common area shall be provided for each unit. 
5.  All facilities shall provide facilities sufficient, as determined by the County Commission, in size to serve meals to the residents and shall provide at least two meals a day to its residents which shall be included in the monthly fee. 
6.  All facilities shall also provide the following amenities or services for its residents: 
i.  An office or examination room for the purpose of housing a qualified and properly licensed nurse or nursing staff. 
ii.  T.V. and game room, library, arts and crafts center or other similar facility to provide leisure activities for facility residents. 
iii.  Laundry facilities for the residents. 
7.  All facilities shall be subject to a 45 foot height maximum. 
8.  All facilities shall be subject to the regulations in the residential zoning districts which pertain to lot coverage and setbacks. 
9.  At least 20 percent of each facility shall be maintained as open space to be either a lawn or landscaped area which can be used for recreation and other leisure activities. 
10.  All signs in conjunction with the facility shall meet the applicable requirements pertaining to the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
11.  Accessory uses shall be limited to those normal and incidental to residential dwelling units, including a small convenience store to provide personal items such as toiletries, magazines, a small selection of groceries, prescriptions. Said facility shall be self-contained within the structure and open only to the residents of the facility. 
12.  Each facility and its units shall be served by one master meter for water, sewer, gas and electric utilities. 
13.  Any plan for a facility must not only establish compliance with the above requirements, but also that such use will be reasonably compatible with the surrounding neighborhood on the basis of the following considerations: 
i.  Ingress and egress to the property and proposed structures on the property with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or other emergency. 
ii.  Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the noise, glare, or odor effects, or property value effects of the proposed facility on adjoining properties and properties in the neighborhood. 
iii.  Refuse and service areas. 
iv.  Utilities with reference to location, availability and compatibility. 
v.  Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions and character. 
vi.  Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, compatibility and harmony with the neighborhood and adjacent properties. 
5-14. - Day Care/Child Care Center. 
a.  In any residential district, the use shall maintain a residential appearance compatible with the neighborhood and not be detrimental to adjacent properties as a result of traffic, noise, light, refuse, parking or other activities. 
b.  The principal and accessory buildings shall meet all yard setback and height requirements of this district. 
c.  The use shall comply with all state day care requirements for standards, licensing and inspections. 
d.  The use must provide at least 200 square feet of outdoor recreation per child. 
e.  The outdoor play area must be enclosed with a six foot high fence. 
f.  The use shall provide paved driveways with drop-off areas and turn-arounds to be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator, so that traffic associated with the use does not impede flow of traffic on adjacent streets. 
5-15. - Distance Requirements for Alcoholic Beverage Sales. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted or issued to any applicant for such license nor shall any person knowingly and intentionally sell or offer to sell, give or distribute: 
a.  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church building; 
b.  Any distilled spirits within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus; 
c.  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds or college campus; 
d.  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the State of Georgia or any county or municipal government therein. 
1.  As used in this subsection, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state, and which are public schools or private schools. 
e.  This section shall not be applicable to sales or transfers by any license holder whose use of his premises for such sale existed before the establishment of the use of the religious facility, school, or public playground; or when the religious facility is located in a storefront in a commercial zoning district as a temporary use. 
f.  Those distance measurement prohibitions stated above shall be measured in the following manner: 
In the nearest traveled pedestrian way from the front door of the structure on the premises for which an alcoholic beverage license is applied for, to the nearest right-of-way line or a sidewalk or street or public way and proceeding to the premises (property line) listed under a. through e. above along such nearest public right-of-way. 
5-16. - Drive-Through Facilities. 
a.  Drive-Through facilities shall not be permitted in residential zoning districts. 
b.  Each stacking space shall be a minimum of 26 feet in length and ten feet in width along the straight portions of the stacking lane. Stacking spaces and stacking lanes shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width along curved segments. 
c.  Stacking lanes shall be delineated from traffic lanes, other stacking lanes and parking areas with striping, curbing, landscaping and the use of alternative paving materials or raised medians. If curbing or a raised median is used, an emergency by-pass or exit shall be provided. 
d.  Entrances to the stacking lane(s) shall be clearly marked and a minimum of 60 feet distance from the side property line. 
e.  Stacking lanes shall be designed to prevent circulation congestion, both on site and on adjacent public streets. The circulation shall separate the drive-through traffic from the circulation on site, not impede or restrict access into or out of parking spaces, and minimize conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular traffic with physical and visual separation of the two. 
f.  Stacking lanes shall not interfere with required loading and trash storage areas and loading or trash operations shall also not interfere with on-site vehicle movement. 
g.  Any outdoor service facility, including menu boards, speakers, etc., shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any residentially zoned district or residentially used property. 
h.  Menu boards shall be a maximum of 24 feet square feet, with a maximum of seven feet in height and shall be screened from the view of any public street or residential properties. 
i.  Standards for drive through facilities. 
1.  A drive-through or walk-through facility shall be designed, constructed and used so as not to interfere with the public use of public ways, streets, alleys or other public areas. The Zoning Administrator shall specifically approve such facility. In making such determination, the type of business, the existing and projected traffic flow of nearby public areas and the nearness of other like facilities shall be considered. 
j.  The minimum number of queuing or stacking spaces required shall be as follows. Variations from these minimums may be allowed by the Zoning Administrator on the basis of a traffic study as provided by the applicant. 

 
*An additional four vehicle queue from the pick-up window to the order box shall be provided. 
k.  Each queue space shall be a minimum of ten feet by 26 feet. Queuing lane dimensions shall be measured from the point indicated in the queue space schedule to the end of the queuing lane. Dimensions of queuing lanes shall be shown on the site plan. 
l.  Each queue lane shall be clearly defined and designed so as to not conflict or interfere with other traffic using the site. A bypass lane with a minimum width of 12 feet shall be provided if a one-way traffic flow is used in the parking lot. The bypass lane shall be clearly designated and distinct from the queuing area. 
5-17. - Dwelling, Live-Work. 
The following standards shall apply to all live-work dwelling units. 
a.  The dwelling unit must be owner occupied. 
b.  Only one business may be operated in each dwelling. 
c.  The business owner shall be the owner of the dwelling unit in which the business is located. 
d.  The business shall be located on the ground floor only and shall have direct entry from the sidewalk along the street frontage. 
e.  No more than 40 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for conducting the business. 
5-18. - Dwelling, Loft. 
a.  Loft dwellings shall be located in mixed use buildings in the C zoning district. 
b.  No loft dwelling shall be located on the ground floor. 
c.  Residential portions of a building shall have at least one entrance/exit to the ground floor that is separate from the entrance/exit used by the occupants of the non-residential portion of the building. 
d.  Each loft dwelling shall have at least 800 square feet of heated/ac living area. 
5-19. - Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex) in R-M Zoning District. 
a.  The following standards are intended to provide for areas of two-family, three-family and four-family development that are consistent in design and in development patterns with typical single-family detached development. 
b.  The two units of a duplex shall share a common roof and a common wall for at least 50 percent of the maximum depth of the building, as measured from the front to the to the rear of the lot and prohibit the separation of the two units by a breezeway, carport, or other open building element; instead of a shared common wall, the two units can share a common floor and ceiling. 
c.  Each dwelling unit shall have access to the street with a concrete driveway or any other alternative material consistent with this Code. 
5-20. - Fences, Walls and Hedges. 
a.  The requirements in this section shall be in addition to and shall supersede in the event of a conflict those contained in the building code, relating to type of construction and materials of walls and fences. 
b.  Any fence or wall, except a chain link fence, in height over eight feet must be designed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or architect. 
c.  Fences and walls shall be constructed of concrete, cement blocks, brick, chain link, wood, ornamental wrought iron, stone, or any alternate material as approved by the Zoning Administrator. Concrete or cement block walls shall be stucco or provided with a textured finish. 
d.  Metal fences shall be of non-corrodible metal or galvanized wire fabric, having a minimum of 11 gauge, mounted on steel or aluminum posts. 
e.  Fences or walls should be generally in harmony and compatible with their surroundings. 
f.  All fences shall be maintained in good repair on both sides in order to remain structurally sound. 
g.  No fence shall be constructed of materials which easily corrode, decay or rust, unless specifically treated to inhibit such corrosion, decay or rust. 
h.  Fences, walls, signs nor landscaping shall be constructed or placed in a manner that creates insufficient sight distance as defined by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
i.  Plans for fences or walls shall be included as a part of the site and/or building plans and shall be erected during or immediately after the erection of the principal building, and in any event prior to the certificate of occupancy of the principal building is issued. 
j.  In no case shall a fence or wall restrict the natural sheet flow of water or impede movement of drainage water from swales, drainage ditches etc. 
k.  All major development projects shall be allowed to install a construction fence with a temporary six-foot chain link fence with obscure fabric that may include graphics depicting the development project, or other visual barrier material around the site prior to the initiation of the construction phase. 
In residential districts: 
l.  For a multi-family development or unit, fences and walls shall be set back a minimum of three feet from any abutting street right-of-way for the purpose of landscape beautification. Landscaping materials shall consist of a hedge and groundcover or other grounded landscape treatment. 
In commercial or industrial districts: 
m.  Fences or walls erected in commercial districts shall be no higher than eight feet. Fences shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any abutting street right-of-way for the purpose of landscape beautification. Landscaping materials shall consist of a hedge and groundcover or other grounded landscape treatment. 
n.  Fences or walls erected in an industrial (W-LI or HI) zoning district shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any abutting street right-of-way for the purpose of landscape beautification. 
5-21. - Flea Market. 
a.  The market must provide adequate off-street parking for its employees, vendors and customers; 
b.  The market must provide adequate restroom facilities located within a structure or building on the grounds; and 
c.  A building permit shall be required for structural interior spaces. 
Recreational vehicles may be permitted as an accessory use at flea markets. Such vehicles shall be self-contained and shall not be connected to any utility except electricity. The length of stay for such vehicles shall be limited to 72 hours. There shall be a maximum of ten vehicles per acre, but no more than 30 vehicles, at any flea market, regardless of the size of the flea market. 
5-22. - Gasoline Service Station with or without Convenience Store. 
a.  Gasoline and other motor fuel stations, excluding principal use signs, but including storage tanks and gas pumps, must be placed not less than 50 feet from any side or rear property lines, except when the side or rear property lines abut a street, in which case the setback shall be that required for such streets. 
b.  All structures, including gas pumps and buildings comply with the setback requirements from the abutting streets, but shall be at a minimum 25 feet from the property line. 
c.  All points of ingress and egress shall be arranged so as to minimize interference with normal street traffic flow. 
d.  No building or structure shall be placed within 100 feet of a residential property line. 
e.  All repair and maintenance, if permitted, shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
f.  All drives, parking, storage and service areas shall be paved and curbed. 
g.  Outside above ground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil and other flammable liquids or gases shall be prohibited. 
h.  The use shall not be combined with any other use or facility to create a truck stop. 
5-23. - Golf Courses and Country Clubs. 
a.  If in a residential district or abutting a residential district, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
2.  Outdoor recreation activities shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
3.  Not outdoor loudspeakers or sound amplification systems shall be permitted. 
4.  No outdoor storage shall be permitted. 
5.  No building, swimming pool, tennis court, ball field or other form of outdoor recreation shall be closer than 50 feet from abutting property zoned for residential use. 
6.  Outdoor lights shall be no more than ten feet in height and not closer than 25 feet from a property line. Outdoor light fixtures shall be cut-off luminaries designed to cast light downward and away from adjacent property. 
7.  Property lines abutting properties used for residential dwellings shall provide a minimum 25 feet continuous vegetative buffer, except where penetrated by a driveway or utility lines. 
5-24. - Home Occupation. 
a.  No person shall be employed other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises plus one additional employee. 
b.  The use of the dwelling unit or an accessory building on the property for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use and shall under no circumstances change the residential character of the dwellings and the property. 
c.  There shall be no outside display or storage of materials or supplies in residential districts. Outside parking of one trade vehicle is permitted. No business vehicles larger than a van, panel truck or one ton pick-up truck are permitted to park overnight on the property. 
d.  No signage of any kind shall be displayed other than what is permitted in chapter 8 of this Code. 
e.  The home occupation shall not constitute a fire hazard to neighboring residences, or adversely affect neighboring property values, or constitute a nuisance or otherwise be detrimental to the neighbors because of excessive traffic, noise or odors. 
f.  A home occupation shall produce no noise, obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes or electrical interference detectable to normal observation outside the dwelling or building. 
g.  No traffic shall be generated by such home businesses in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood and any need for parking generated by the home occupation shall be met off-street and not in the front yard. 
h.  The use can qualify for all local, state and federal licenses, certificates and permits. 
i.  Any violation of these regulations may result in the revocation of any home occupation license, in addition to any other remedy for such violation. 
j.  The issuance of a license to engage in a home occupation in accordance with this ordinance shall not be deemed to be a change in zoning nor an official expression of opinion as to the proper zoning for the particular property. 
5-25. - Ice Vending Machines. 
a.  Ice Vending Machines are permitted in the AG, C and WLI or HI zoning districts. 
b.  The lot shall include a 15 foot landscape buffer around the ice vending machine excluding ingress and egress. 
c.  The Ice Vending Machine shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
d.  Two parking spaces shall be provided, plus one additional ADA accessible parking space. 
5-26. - Indoor Gun Range. 
a.  Indoor Gun Ranges are allowed in C and WLI and HI Zoning Districts. 
b.  The facility must be located along arterial and collector roads. 
c.  A Gun Range shall not be located within a quarter-mile of residential or government structures. 
d.  All operations shall be entirely within an enclosed building which shall be constructed according to the National Rifle Association Sourcebook and must comply with all applicable building codes. 
e.  Sound absorbing material must be used inside the facility to suppress the sounds from the firearms. 
f.  Lead from the range must be recycled and the brass and debris shall be cleaned up daily using special vacuum equipment. 
g.  Parking requirements shall follow the standards for warehousing as outlined in chapter 4 of this Code. 
h.  A noise study shall be submitted demonstrating that gun sounds will not be audible outside of the property range. 
i.  An Indoor Gun Range shall only be used when the proprietor or designee of the site is present. 
5-27. - Outdoor Gun Range. 
a.  Outdoor Gun Ranges are allowed in the "AG, WLI, and HI" Zoning Districts. Gun Ranges are essential services for the community. 
b.  The discharge of firearms shall be conducted only within the range and or bays specifically designated for such use on an approved site plan. 
c.  Firing positions shall be separated a minimum of 500 feet from the boundary of the subject property with any adjacent parcel in separate ownership. 
d.  An impenetrable backstop, a minimum of 20 feet in height, shall be constructed down range of any authorized range or bay, and side berms a minimum of eight feet in height shall be provided along the sidelines. 
e.  The perimeter of the shooting range, including the firearm discharge area and surrounding berms, shall be enclosed by a fence or wall, a minimum of six feet in height to prevent unauthorized access. Warning signs of at least one square foot each shall be attached to the perimeter fence at the rate of once at every corner and at least one for every 100 lineal feet plus one at each entry gate. 
f.  The applicant's range complex design shall be consistent with the NRA Source Book latest edition for the construction of outdoor shooting ranges. To assure the protection of groundwater from lead and other contaminants associated with the discharge of firearms the range shall comply with USEPA's Best Management Practices (http://www.epa.gov/region2/waste/leadshot/). 
g.  The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable state and local regulations and how safety and noise factors have been addressed through the site plan and other special features of the proposed development. 
h.  Shooting range sites are a community asset that once sited and in operation, needs to be protected. To that end is a requirement that properties to be sold within two miles of the range, once the site has been approved, that the seller must disclose of the existence of said shooting range to the prospective buyer. 
5-28. - Industrialized Buildings (Modular Homes) (Residential). 
Industrialized Homes are permitted in the AG, R-2, R-3, R-M, R-P and PD Zoning Districts. 
All industrialized homes must comply with the following regulations for dwelling units: 
a.  The building permit application must be accompanied by the following: 
1.  The serial number of the home as provided by the manufacturer. 
2.  Proof of the identity of the manufacturer. 
3.  Proof of inspection of the home at the date of manufacture, including DCA seal. 
b.  No industrialized home shall be in a state of disrepair at the time of its installation at the intended location within the County. 
c.  All industrialized homes shall receive all applicable inspections necessary to ensure the following: 
1.  External connections to gas, plumbing, electric and any other utility systems shall be constructed and installed in a manner that meets all County building codes. 
2.  Each industrialized home site shall include an approved potable water source and an approved sewage disposal system meeting the requirements of the Coffee County Health Department. 
3.  Steps, landings, porches shall meet the requirement of the International Building Code. 
d.  All industrialized homes shall meet all requirements of the zoning district in which the home is located. 
e.  No industrialized home may be attached to another industrialized home by means of a breezeway, corridor or hallway. Industrialized homes designed to be part of a multi-family structure are prohibited. 
f.  The proposed modular home must be such that it was initially designed and currently suitable solely for single-family use. 
5-29. - Internet Cafes or Similar Use Relating to Simulated Online Gambling. 
a.  Gambling and non-sanctioned lotteries are illegal in the State of Georgia. 
b.  With daily advances in electronic and computer technology, attempts at circumventing state law regarding illegal gaming has evolved from readily apparent methods to more veiled and camouflaged schemes; and 
c.  In recognition of this, the State of Georgia specifically prohibited the use of video poker machines in 2006; 
d.  Since 2006, various programs have been created that allow computers and other electronic machines and devices to conduct a sweepstakes which purportedly entitle participants to have a chance to win various prizes and rewards in return for the purchase of token services or products such as internet service, telephone cards, and office supplies, among other products; and 
e.  Certain companies are advertising on the Internet that these Sweepstakes are legal in the State of Georgia; and 
f.  These websites explain how to evade the gambling laws in states such as Georgia by establishing Sweepstakes Parlors; and 
g.  These business models appear to represent an attempt to circumvent the laws of the State of Georgia that generally prohibit gambling and illegal lotteries; and 
h.  The sale of goods or services to patrons appears to be no more than a subterfuge for promoting gambling on the premises; and 
i.  A number of jurisdictions around the United States either have passed or are contemplating the passage of laws, statutes, or ordinances banning or prohibiting such Sweepstakes Parlors; and 
j.  The County Commission finds that promoting and establishing non-sanctioned lotteries is illegal in the State of Georgia and constitutes commercial gambling; and 
k.  The County Commission finds that requiring participants in a Sweepstakes scheme to pay any tangible consideration to the operator of such business in the form of money or other property or thing of value and/or to purchase any goods, wares, merchandise, services or anything of value from such business to be eligible for a prize further constitutes an illegal lottery; and 
l.  The County Commission further finds that requiring a participant to purchase goods and services, even if the goods and services have an independent value equal to that charged to the participant, is a mere token from of consideration and is illegal; and 
m.  On March 15, 2011, the Hon. Samuel Olens, Attorney General of the State of Georgia, also concluded that such a method of business was illegal; 
n.  The County Commission ordains the following: 
1.  The clauses set forth above represent the legislative findings of the County Commission and the Chairman of the County Commission; 
2.  Any such method of operating a Sweepstakes as described above shall be banned in Coffee County; 
3.  Any and all businesses that plan on utilizing such a Sweepstakes shall be informed of this Ordinance prohibiting the use of same; 
4.  The refusal to abide by the terms of this Ordinance shall be grounds for the denial of any permit the business applicant seeks. 
5-30. - Kennel, Commercial Pet Boarding. 
a.  The lot size shall not be less than two acres. 
b.  Any building or enclosed structures for the housing of animals shall have minimum side and rear setbacks of at least 200 feet from the property lines. 
c.  All areas maintaining animals outside shall be completely enclosed by wall or fences at least six feet in height and shall be located no closer than 200 feet from property lines or street right-of-way. 
5-31. - Landfill, Inert Waste. 
Not permitted. 
5-32. - Landfills, Solid Waste. 
Not permitted. 
5-33. - Livestock in Residential Districts. 
a.  Except as provided below, no animals shall be kept in any residential district except those animals generally recognized as household domestic pets, such as dogs, cats, caged birds etc. In any residential district, only that number of domestic animals which may be safely and humanely maintained within the premises shall be permitted. 
b.  Animals as described below, other than household domestic pets, may be kept provided they are not housed within 100 feet of any property line. 
c.  The property must be at least two acres. 
d.  Hens may be permitted, roosters shall not be allowed, in residential districts. 
e.  The horses are for the private and personal use of the resident and his/her family. 
f.  Manure must be disposed of or composted in a way that does not produce offensive odor. 

 
(Ord. No. 2017-7, 7-3-2017) 
5-34. - Manufactured Homes. 
5-34.1. Definitions. The following words, terms, or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. 
Applicant. Means any person seeking to install a manufactured home in Coffee County. 
Building Inspector. Means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections, or the County building official, or his or her designee, including the Zoning Administrator. 
Certificate of Occupancy. Means a document issued by the Building Inspector certifying that a pre-owned or new manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this Code, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
Install. Means to construct a foundation system to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured homes and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction. Means the unincorporated areas of Coffee County, Georgia. 
Manufactured Home: (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131). A manufactured home, also known as a mobile home, is a detached structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and designed to be used as a single-family dwelling unit, with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured homes are further defined as Class "A", Class "B" or Class "C." 
Class "A" Manufactured Home ("double wide"): A Class "A" Manufactured Home is a manufactured housing unit constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) which meets the following development standards: 
1.  Minimum width of not less than 24 feet. 
2.  Anchored as per manufacturer's recommendation as approved by the Federal Government. 
3.  The perimeter beneath each such home must be enclosed (skirted) with an enclosure as manufactured for such purposes, including but not limited to, stucco-finished concrete block, or metal lath painted, concrete block, brick, or vinyl materials that have been approved by the Code Enforcement Department. 
4.  At each exterior door of the home there shall be a landing (minimum of three feet by four feet) with steps. 
5.  All wheels, axles, transporting lights, and hitch mechanisms removed before being occupied. 
6.  Exterior siding of masonry, wood, stucco, hardboard, or vinyl type siding material. 
7.  A fully functioning, inspected, and approved electrical, water, and sewage system before being occupied. 
8.  Roof constructed of: 
i.  A type commonly used on site constructed residences; 
ii.  A pitch of not less than two feet of rise for each 12 feet of horizontal run; and 
iii.  A boxed roof overhang of four inches. 
9.  Fronted on a public street/road. 
10.  Electrical utilities shall be connected in accordance with electrical utilities requirements, the Coffee County Code requirements, and the manufacturer's specifications, before the home is occupied. 
11.  Manufactured Homes, Class A, are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. 
Class "B" Manufactured Home ("single wide"): A Class "B" Manufactured Home is a manufactured housing unit constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act 42 USC 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) which meets the following development standards. 
a.  Maximum width of less than 24 feet. 
b.  Installed to meet the minimum installation standards adopted by the State of Georgia and the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
c.  The perimeter beneath each such home must be enclosed (skirted) with an enclosure as manufactured for such purposes, including but not limited to, stucco-finished concrete block, or metal lath painted, concrete block, brick, or vinyl materials that have been approved by the Code Enforcement Department. 
d.  At each exterior door of the home there shall be a landing (minimum of three feet by four feet) with steps. 
e.  All wheels, axles, transporting lights, and hitch mechanisms removed before being occupied. 
f.  A permit prior to being connected to electricity by the utility company. 
g.  A fully functioning, inspected, and approved electrical, water, and sewage system before being occupied. 
h.  Front of the home shall face a public street/road. 
i.  Manufactured Homes, Class "B," are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. 
j.  Manufactured Homes, Class "B", are not permitted to be joined, connected or otherwise situated to another Manufactured Home, Class A, B or C, for any purpose. 
k.  Electrical utilities shall be connected in accordance with electrical utilities' requirements, the Coffee County Code requirements, and the manufacturer's specifications, before the home is occupied. 
Class "C" Manufactured Home: A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility so that it is readily transported on its own chassis along streets, which was constructed prior to June 15, 1976 does not meet the standards of the 1976 Act and the Class "B" compatibility criteria herein. 
a.  Class "C" Manufactured Housing must be installed to meet the minimum installation standards adopted by the State of Georgia and the manufacturer's installation instructions, when available. 
b.  The perimeter beneath each such home must be enclosed (skirted) with an enclosure as manufactured for such purposes, including but not limited to, stucco-finished concrete block, or metal lath painted, concrete block, brick, or vinyl materials that have been approved by the Code Enforcement Department. 
c.  At each exterior door of the home, there must be steps, and landing that is a minimum of three feet by four feet in area, constructed to the standards set forth in the International Building Code, Latest Edition as adopted by the State of Georgia. 
d.  All wheels, axles, transporting lights, and hitch mechanisms shall be removed therefrom and from the lot, before the home is occupied. 
e.  Electrical utilities shall be connected in accordance with electrical utilities' requirements, the Code Enforcement requirements, and the manufacturer's specifications, before the home is occupied. 
f.  The home shall have fully functioning, inspected, and approved electrical, water, and sewage system before being occupied. 
g.  The front of the home shall face a street or road. 
h.  Manufactured Homes, Class "C," are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. 
i.  Manufactured Homes, Class "C", are not permitted to be joined, connected or otherwise situated to another Manufactured Home, Class A, B or C, for any purpose. 
Pre-owned manufactured home. means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
5-34.2. Conditions. All manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying that it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards (MHCSS) Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Sections 5401, et seq. (the HUD Code), and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
5-34.3. Permitting, Inspection, Certificate of Occupancy and Fees. A permit shall be required to locate a manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
a.  Permit. To obtain a permit, Applicants shall provide to the Zoning Administrator: 
1.  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by the MHCSS Act and this LDC. 
2.  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the manufactured home providing evidence that the home meets the minimum health and safety standards of section 5-34.4 of this ordinance. 
3.  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (d) of this section. 
b.  Inspection. A relocation permit must be obtained by any individual or business seeking to locate a used manufactured home within Coffee County as provided by this LDC, unless otherwise exempted. Upon receipt of a relocation permit, Applicants may relocate or locate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. Installation must be completed by a State of Georgia Licensed Installer. 
c.  Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall only be issued to the Applicant after such time that the Building Inspector certifies that the requirements of this LDC have been met. 
d.  Fee. The fee for a relocation permit and manufactured home permit is as established by the Board of Commissioners. 
5-34.4. Minimum Health and Safety Standards. 
Commercial or Business Use of Manufactured Homes: 
a.  When otherwise permitted by this LDC, a commercial or business use of a Manufactured Home shall be permitted when the Manufactured Home: 
1.  Is a Class "A " Manufactured Home as defined above; and 
2.  Is used solely for commercial or business purposes and is not also used as a residence, provided the business invites the general public onto the property to conduct business. 
b.  If at the time this ordinance is adopted, a Class "B" or "C" Manufactured Home is being utilized for commercial or business purposes said business shall be allowed to continue said use until one of the following occur: 
1.  The Manufactured Home is determined unsuitable for its declared use, as defined or determined by an ordinance of Coffee County, or by some other legal authority, governmental agency or entity; or 
2.  The Manufactured Home ceases to be used for commercial or business purposes. A commercial or business use shall cease: 
c.  When the Manufactured Home is converted to residential use, if otherwise permitted by an ordinance of Coffee County; or 
d.  When a business has not actively been in continuous existence in that Manufactured Home for a period of time greater than six months as evidenced by a lapse in a business license, lack of power and utility service to the structure or any other competent evidence supporting such a conclusion; or 
e.  When the business owner seeks to relocate the business and the Manufactured Home, and relocation of the Manufactured Home is otherwise forbidden by this ordinance. In that event, the Manufactured Home shall not be allowed to be relocated to the new site. If the business otherwise relocates to another site in another facility, no continued commercial or business use of the Manufactured Home at that location shall be permitted; 
f.  All Manufactured Homes sought to be used for commercial or business purposes shall comply with all other provisions of this ordinance. 
Residential Use of Manufactured Homes: 
a.  Manufactured Homes (Class "A," "B," and "C") to be occupied as residential units shall be restricted to R-M, R-3 and AG Districts, except as otherwise provided by this LDC. 
b.  All Manufactured Homes (Class "A," "B," and "C") within Residential districts shall meet all other requirements of that district. 
c.  If at the time this ordinance is adopted, a Manufactured Home, Class C, is being utilized for residential purposes, the Manufactured Home shall be allowed to continue said use until one of the following occurs: 
1.  When the Manufactured Home is determined unsuitable for its declared use, as defined or determined by an ordinance of Coffee County, or some other legal authority, governmental agency or entity; or 
2.  When a Manufactured Home owner seeks to relocate the Manufactured Home and relocation of the Manufacture Home is otherwise forbidden by this ordinance. In that event, the Manufactured Home shall not be allowed to be relocated to the new site. 
d.  All Manufactured Homes sought to be used for residential purposes shall comply with all other provisions of this ordinance. 
Minimum Facilities Required: All Manufactured Homes to be located, relocated, or purchased within the territorial boundaries of Coffee County, Georgia shall have the following minimum facilities: 
a.  Sanitary Facilities. Every home shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub and/or shower, and toilet all in working condition when properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe shall be in a sanitary working condition free from leaks and obstructions. 
b.  Hot and Cold Water Supply. Every kitchen sink, lavatory, tub and/or shower in a home must be connected to a supply of both cold and hot water. 
c.  Water Heating Facilities. Every home shall have water-heating facilities in safe working condition. 
d.  Heating Facilities. Every home shall have heating facilities in a safe working condition. Where a central heating system is not provided, each home shall be provided with facilities whereby heating appliances may be connected. 
1.  Unvented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited except for heaters listed for unvented use and the total input rating of the unvented heater is less than 30 BTU per hour cubit feet of room area. 
e.  Smoke Detector. Every home shall have the appropriate number of State of Georgia approved smoke detectors, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation and listing. 
f.  Windows. Every habitable room excluding bathrooms, kitchens, and hallways shall have at least one window that can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors. 
g.  Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be opened, or such other devices that will ventilate the room. 
h.  Electrical. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with approved listings, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all unused openings covered with blank covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connections shall be checked for tightness. Panels shall be accessible and meet National Electrical Code (NEC). 
i.  Exterior Wall. The exterior wall of the home shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that may admit rain or moisture in the interior portions of the walls or the occupied spaces of the home. 
j.  Exterior Siding. The exterior siding of the home shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform and neat in appearance. 
k.  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects, which may admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior of the home, and be maintained to prevent this from happening. 
l.  Interior Floors, Walls, and Ceiling. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be in a sound condition and must be maintained to prevent the admittance of rain moisture or the escape of heating and cooling. 
All manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the Building Inspector. 
a.  HUD Code. Every manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code), and shall not be altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
b.  Interior Condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
c.  Exterior Condition. The exterior of all manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
d.  Sanitary Facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least on bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
e.  Heating Systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Un-vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
f.  Electrical Systems. (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are property bonded. 
g.  Hot Water Supply. Each manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
h.  Egress Windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
i.  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
j.  Smoke Detectors. Each manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
5-34.5. Minimum Manufactured Home Standards. 
Location of Manufactured Homes: 
a.  At the discretion of the County Commissioners new Manufactured Housing Parks may be allowed in the R-M Residential District. Manufactured Housing Parks (See section 5-34) and the Manufactured Homes to be placed in housing parks, must comply with all other Coffee County Zoning Ordinances, as well as all other provisions of this LDC. Manufactured Homes may be utilized for residential or commercial purposes as provided herein. 
1.  When said Manufactured Homes are to be placed on individual lots, they must otherwise comply with this LDC. 
b.  Moving or relocating a Manufactured Home from one location in the County to another. 
1.  Anyone wanting to move or relocate a Manufactured Home must first submit an application requesting the same to the Code Enforcement Department. 
2.  At the time that an application for relocation is sought, no Class C Manufactured Home shall be allowed to relocate within the County and no permit for the same shall be issued if said manufactured home is to be used for rental or commercial purposes once it reaches its destination. 
3.  After an application for relocation is completed and prior to relocation, the Manufactured Home at issue must be inspected by Code Enforcement and determined to be suitable for relocation as determined by this LDC. 
4.  No Location Permit to move or relocate a Manufactured Home shall be issued unless the following criteria has been met: 
i.  It meets and passes the inspection process described in this LDC; and, 
ii.  The applicant provides proof that all outstanding property taxes are paid in full at the time of said application; and, 
iii.  The solid waste bill associated with that Manufactured Home, and/or the property upon which it has been or will be placed, is paid in full. 
5.  After a Manufactured Home is relocated, it must be re-inspected prior to connection to utilities. Only if it passes re-inspection shall a Certificate of Occupancy be issued. 
6.  Moving or relocating a Manufactured Home in violation of this section shall subject an owner, a retailer, and/or a Manufactured Home Transporter to a penalty as provided in section 1-12 of the Coffee County Code of Ordinances. 
c.  Relocating a Manufactured Home from outside Coffee County to a location within Coffee County. 
1.  Anyone wanting to relocate a Manufactured Home from outside Coffee County to a location within Coffee County must first execute an application requesting the same at the Code Enforcement Department. 
2.  At the time that an application for relocation is sought, no Class C Manufactured Home shall be allowed to relocate within the County and no permit for the same shall be issued. 
3.  After an application for relocation is completed and prior to relocation, the manufacture home at issue must be inspected by Code Enforcement and determined to be suitable for relocation as determined by this LDC. 
4.  No permit to relocate a manufactured home shall be issued unless it meets and passes the inspection process described in this LDC. 
5.  Inspections of Manufactured Homes arriving from outside the County to be located within the County require an affidavit signed by the applicant that the manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by the MHCSS Act and this LDC. 
6.  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the manufactured home providing evidence that the home meets the minimum health and safety standards of section 5-34.4 of this LDC. 
7.  After a Manufactured Home is relocated, it must be re-inspected prior to connection to utilities. Only if it passes inspection shall a Certificate of Occupancy be issued. 
8.  Moving or relocating a Manufactured Home in violation of this section shall subject an owner, a retailer, and/or a Manufactured Home Transporter to a penalty as provided in section 1-12 of the Coffee County Code of Ordinances. 
d.  Location of Manufactured Homes by retailers after sale: 
1.  New Manufactured Homes. 
i.  When a new Manufactured Home is sold for the first time by a retail vendor, no Pre-Location Inspection shall be required; however, 
ii.  After the Manufactured Home is located on the residential lot, it must be inspected prior to connection to utilities before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued. 
2.  Used Manufactured Homes. 
i.  Manufactured Home retailers will be permitted to move pre-owned Manufactured Homes onto their lots for refurbishing and/or resale but only consistent with the provisions of this LDC. 
ii.  Used Manufactured Home vendors shall not place in inventory for sale any manufactured home that has not first been inspected by Coffee County Code Enforcement and the retailer receives a Location Permit allowing the Manufactured Home to be placed on the retail lot for sale to the general public. This permit shall also allow the Manufactured Home to be transported from the retail lot to the purchaser's destination. 
iii.  After the Manufactured Home is located on the residential lot, it must be reinspected prior to connection to utilities before a Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued. 
3.  Abandoned Manufactured Homes. 
i.  Any Manufactured Home abandoned by its owner or by any Manufactured Home transporter on private property or public right-of-way in Coffee County shall subject the owner and/or transporter to a penalty as provided in section 1-12 of the Coffee County Code of Ordinances. 
ii.  A Manufactured Home shall be considered abandoned: 
a.  If it is left on a public right-of-way for a period of five days or more, and is not otherwise removed from said right-of-way during that time; or 
b.  If it is left on private property for five days without having first obtained a permit. In this event, if the Manufactured Home otherwise would pass inspection and qualify for a Certificate of Occupancy, said permit may be issued, provided the owner pays for the relocation permit as if the Manufactured Home had been properly inspected before relocation, pays a surcharge of $150.00, and otherwise complies with all other applicable provisions affecting location of Manufactured Home. If the Manufactured Home does not pass inspection, the County has an automatic easement onto the real property at issue for purpose of removing and disposing of the same as set out in subsection (c) below. The offending parties shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-12 of the Coffee County Code of Ordinances. 
c.  If a Manufactured Home is so abandoned, the County may take any reasonable steps to remove the Manufactured Home from the private property or right-of-way. The cost associated with said removal shall be chargeable to both the owner and the transporter. In such event, if the sale of the Manufactured Home is necessary to recover said costs, the County may take any and all legal steps to dispose of said Manufactured Home, including issuing a fi fa for said cost and selling the Manufactured Home in the same manner that a Manufactured Home would be sold to recover for any outstanding ad valorem tax. 
5-34.6. Permits. 
Types of permits: 
a.  Manufactured Home Location Permits. A location permit must be obtained by any individual or business seeking to locate a manufactured home within Coffee County as provided by this LDC, unless otherwise exempted. All manufactured homes are subject to an inspection prior to the issuance of a permit unless otherwise exempted. 
b.  Certificate of Occupancys. No Certificate of Occupancy may be issued unless a Manufactured Home passes the inspections described herein. After the Manufactured Home reaches its destination site, is properly set up, and is connected to all necessary utilities, a Certificate of Occupancy must be issued before the Manufactured Home is occupied. 
Minimum requirements for purposes of obtaining a Manufactured Home location permit: The Building Inspector shall inspect all manufactured homes prior to issuing a location permit. The official shall inspect the manufactured home for the following: 
a.  An inspection to evaluate whether the facilities set forth at section 5-33.4 are available, intact, and functioning as required by that section; and 
b.  That the Manufactured Home to be relocated otherwise complies with all of the other provisions of this ordinance. 
Failure to meet any of the requirements of this section shall result in denial of an application for location of a Manufactured Home. 
Minimum requirements for purposes of obtaining a Certificate of Occupancy: The Building Inspector shall inspect all Manufactured Homes prior to residential occupancy. A previously inspected unit shall be required to be re-inspected on being moved to a new location within the County. The Building Inspector shall be granted a final inspection to each home, after set-up, to verify facilities required. Inspections shall include: 
a.  Proper setbacks. 
b.  Sufficient off-street parking. 
c.  Installation of an approved septic tank or an approved sewer system. 
d.  Inspection of electrical wiring. 
e.  Inspection of anchoring and tie-down installations. 
f.  Inspection for proper utilities connections. 
g.  Inspection for proper sewage connections. 
h.  Adherence to all applicable Coffee County Codes. 
i.  Reinspection of the required facilities to ensure that no change in condition or function occurred during transport. 
j.  All Manufactured Homes that are located in Coffee County, and change ownership, but are not relocated must be inspected on site prior to issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. 
k.  Individuals purchasing Manufactured Homes that require repairs must understand that if the home fails inspection, Coffee County will not issue a Certificate of Occupancy. 
Inspection fees: Inspections conducted within the jurisdictional boundaries of Coffee County are subject to a fee established by the Board of Commissioners in the schedule of fees. Should follow up inspections be required, an additional fee must be paid as established in the schedule of fees. 
Revocation of Certificate of Occupancy: All Manufactured Homes within Coffee County shall be subject to inspection at any time. After personal inspection of the manufactured housing unit and upon discovering code violations, the Building Inspector shall notify the owner of the unit in writing of the specific code violations, the corrections, repairs, or changes needed, and the number of days allotted for such. If the cited violations are not corrected within 60 days after receiving written notice of the specific code violations from the Building Inspector and if further inspection reveals that the cited violations have not been corrected, the Certificate of Occupancy may be revoked. Notice of revocation of a Certificate of Occupancy shall be given in writing. 
5-34.7. Enforcement. 
a.  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the Building Inspector has issued a Certificate of Occupancy. 
b.  Owners of manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction. 
5-34.8. Penalties. Failure to remove a manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by a fine of $500.00. Each day any violation under this LDC continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
5-35. - Manufactured Home Park. 
5-35.1. Authorization and permit required. 
a.  Authorization Required. The Coffee County Commission reserves the right to evaluate and make decisions regarding request for the construction of all new manufactured housing parks as to location, compatibility with existing highway systems and traffic patterns, community and safety standards, and neighborhood values. No person(s) shall locate a new manufactured home park or construct, alter, enlarge, or extend an existing manufactured housing park within the unincorporated areas of Coffee County without the express approval and authorization of the Coffee County Commission. 
b.  Permits Required. No person(s) shall located a new manufactured home park or construct, alter, enlarge, or extend an existing manufactured housing park within the unincorporated areas of Coffee County until the plan has been reviewed and approved by the Coffee County Commission. Upon approval, the Zoning Administrator may issue a valid permit providing the plans meet all other necessary requirements. 
c.  Additional Requirements. Owners of all planned new manufactured housing parks or enlargement to existing parks shall be required to notify the nearest branch of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources regarding possible endangered or threatened species within the area and follow any directions given. A letter from the state agency will be required of the owner to insure that this provision has been carried out. 
5-35.2. Application. At least 30 days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Commission: 
a.  An appropriate County application form. 
b.  Ten copies of the preliminary plan of the proposed park. 
c.  A receipt showing that all County ad valorem taxes on the subject property have been paid in full and that no delinquencies exist. 
d.  Any state or federal compliance reviews, along with any special or technical studies as may be deemed necessary by the County. 
e.  The applicant shall submit with the application form review fees that will be assessed at the time of filing according a fee schedule determined from time to time by the County Commission and available in the Zoning Administrator's Office. 
The plans are deemed submitted when submitted to the Zoning Administrator. Upon action or recommendations made by the Planning Commission, the plan will be forwarded to the Board of Commissioners for final action. The Board of Commissioners will render action within 30 days, provided that new special or technical studies are determined not to be needed to review the application. 
5-35.3. Manufactured Home Park Plan Specifications. 
3.1. Information Required. A Manufactured Home Park plan layout shall be drawn to a minimum scale of one inch = 100 feet and three sets of the site plan must be submitted 30 working days prior to the next meeting of the Planning Commission and shall show the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant. 
b.  Name and address of the landholder. 
c.  Location (vicinity map) and legal description of the housing park. 
d.  Scale of the map, North and South direction arrows. 
e.  Areas and dimensions of the tract of land. 
f.  Number, location, and size of all manufactured home lots or stands. 
g.  Location, width, and areas of roadways, driveways, and walks. 
h.  Location of service buildings and any other proposed structures. 
i.  Location of parking spaces. 
j.  Location and acreage of recreational land. 
k.  Gross Density. 
l.  Location of any wetlands involved. 
5-35.4. Procedure for Plan Approval. Before acting on the manufactured home park site plans, the Planning Commission may request reports from concerned persons and agencies such as highway engineers, public utilities, school boards, and health department officials. The Planning Commission will send a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners. 
The Board of Commissioners shall review and either approve or disapprove the plans. Approval or disapproval of the final site plans shall be noted on all seven prints and attested by the signature of the County Commission Chairman. One print shall be returned to the applicant, one retained by the County Commission, and one retained by the Coffee County Building Official. 
Upon approval of the final site plan by the County Commission, application may be made to the Building Inspector for a construction permit. One set of construction plans shall be submitted to the Building Inspector and contain the following information: 
a.  Approved final site plan with signatures. 
b.  Location of all utility lines, water lines, and, if applicable, all sewage disposal lines. 
c.  Location and details of the lighting and electrical systems within the proposed park. 
The Building Inspector shall issue a permit for construction if: 
1.  An inspection of the site demonstrates the actual conditions within the park meet the conditions upon which the site plans were approved. 
2.  The actual site meets the requirements of these regulations. 
3.  The housing park meets the standards of the local and state health departments. 
5-35.5. Inspection. The Building Inspector is authorized to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with the conditions on the Board of Commissioners approved plat and these regulations. The Building Inspector shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property subject to this LDC to inspect conditions for enforcement purposes. 
The building official may request inspections from the Health Department as to compliance of their regulations and Health Department shall have the same entry and inspection powers as provided the Building Inspectors. The Health Department officials upon finding violations that threaten public health or safety shall notify the Building Inspectors of such violations and the requirements for correction. The Building Inspector may then proceed with enforcement under the provisions of these regulations. 
5-35.6. Manufactured Home Park License Fees. All owners and/or operators of manufactured home parks as herein defined shall be required to pay the annual business license tax as prescribed by resolution. 
5-35.7. Revocation of Permits. Any permit for a manufactured home park may be revoked then it is found to be in violation of these regulations. The Building Official shall give written notice to the permitted of violations of these regulations. If after 60 days further inspection reveals such violations have not been corrected, the Building Official shall give the permitted written notice of suspension of the permit and the permitted shall then cease operation and/or construction of the manufactured housing park. 
5-35.8. Manufactured Home Park Size. A Manufactured Housing Park shall have a minimum size of five acres in an area including buffer strips, streets, non-habitable and habitable areas free from stagnant pools of water and any EPA designated wetlands. A housing park in existence prior to the date of approval this LDC may contain less than five acres in total size. 
5-35.9. Density. For computing density, only habitable, non-buffer, and non-wetland areas may be used in computing the density of units within a manufactured home park. 
Lot size for all manufactured homes (Class "A" (double wide), Class "B" (single wide), and Class "C" (single wide)) shall consist of a minimum of 16,500 square feet for each home. Maximum allowed density of manufactured homes per acre shall be 2.6 total units per acre provided adequate water and sewer accommodations are available as required by Coffee County Health Dept. and/or Georgia EPD. 
5-35.10. Manufactured Home Lots. Minimum lot size for each Class "A" ("double wide), Class "B" (single wide), and Class "C" (single wide) manufactured home unit shall be 16,500 square feet. Each space or lot shall be at least 70 feet wide and clearly defined. 
5-35.11. Site Improvement Requirements. 
a.  Conditions of soil, ground water level, drainage, topography, and flooding susceptibility shall not create hazards to the health and safety of the public or to surrounding property. 
b.  Exposed ground surfaces in all parks shall be protected with either vegetation or a solid surface to prevent soil erosions, dust, and mud. 
c.  The ground surface shall be adequately graded and drained. 
d.  Manufactured homes shall have an open space separating distance from each other of at least 30 feet. 
e.  No part of the permanent manufactured home stand, excluding driveways and/or carports shall be within 30 feet of the lot and/or property line. 
5-35.12. Required Recreational Areas. All parks designed for 20 or more home lots shall have and shall maintain one or more recreational areas. The size of the recreational area shall be based upon a minimal of 100 square feet for each planned home. No single outdoor recreation area shall contain less than 2,000 square feet. Such recreation area shall be conveniently located, accessible to all occupants of the park, free of traffic hazards, and maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. 
5-35.13. Setback and Buffer Strips. 
a.  Along Rear and Side Property Lines. All community exterior boundaries not adjacent to a public street shall be provided with a ten-foot minimum building line. 
b.  Along Abutting Community Streets. There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between the manufactured home and any abutting community streets. 
c.  Buffer Zone. Surrounding the park (excepting ingress and egress points) there shall be a planted buffer zone of at least 20 feet upon which buildings, signs, and other structures shall not be permitted and which shall be permanently maintained with trees and shrubbery at a height of no less than six feet in height. 
5-35.14. Street System. All manufactured housing park road, street, and infrastructure development requirements shall conform to and be identical to those governing street and road improvements for subdivisions as provided for in chapter 4 of this Code. 
This amendment shall apply to the development of any new manufactured housing park and shall affect and be applicable to the expansion of an existing manufactured housing park as provided for in section 5-35.14.1 below. 
5-35.14.1. If an existing manufactured housing park is to be expanded, all road, street, and infrastructure development requirements shall conform to and be identical to those governing street and road improvements for subdivisions as provided for at section 5-35.14 above. Likewise, any existing road or street in said manufactured housing park which is used for ingress and egress to access the proposed expansion must also be brought up to the same standards as the expansion and thus must also conform to and comply with the road, street, and infrastructure requirements as provided for at section 5-35.14 above. 
5-35.15. Lighting. Each manufactured housing park shall have street lighting throughout the park. 
5-35.16. Identification. Individual Unit Identification: Each lot, space, or stand shall be clearly numbered and identified externally in such a way that the number can be easily identified from the nearest street or driveway. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches in height. Numbers shall be placed near the front door of the unit or on a permanent marker in the front lawn. 
Identification of the Manufacturing Housing Park. Each park shall have a large, clearly visible, permanent sign of a minimum size of four by eight feet at either the park entrance or at the front of the park facing the main highway which clearly states the following: 
a.  Name of the Park. 
b.  E-911 address of the Park. 
c.  Number of lots within the Park. 
d.  Telephone number to be called regarding the Park. 
5-35.17. Water supply. All public or community water utilities, including sewage shall be subject to local approval by the Board of Commissioners upon submission of appropriate plans and drawings. All such plans and drawings for water or sewer utilities shall be submitted with appropriate certification by a professional engineer along with documentation of preliminary or final approval from the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, as required. If no approval from the Environmental Protection Division is required, then the applicant shall submit "as-built" drawings identifying the proposed placement of any utilities within or upon public rights-of-way, easements or properties. 
5-35.18. Sewage disposal. An adequate and sewage system shall be provided and maintained in the manufactured housing park with a sewer connection to each housing unit. The Health Department shall approve all sewage system and/or septic tank types and installation. The park owner shall properly maintain sewer distribution lines and/or septic tanks in good working order. 
5-35.19. Electrical distribution. 
a.  General. Each park shall contain an electrical wiring system in accordance with the Electrical Code of the State of Georgia and Coffee County. 
b.  Specific. Each housing unit shall have a fully functioning, inspected, and approved electrical system before being occupied. The housing unit shall have electrical utilities installed by a licensed electrician in accordance with the electric utility company's requirements, the Coffee County Code requirements, and the manufacturer's specifications. Prior to being hooked up to electricity, it shall be the obligation, duty, and legal responsibility by the owner, occupant, and the utility company to ensure there is a valid current County permit for the unit. 
5-35.20. Refuse handling. 
a.  General. Refuse (solid waste, garbage) shall be handled in the manner prescribed in the most recent Coffee County Solid Waste Regulations in that each housing unit within the housing park shall be provided with a garbage can. 
b.  Specific. Each housing unit within the housing park shall be provided with a garbage can as provided by the Coffee County Solid Waste Ordinance. It shall be the obligation and duty of each manufactured housing park owner to promptly notify the solid waste authority and/or the Coffee County Commission of the arrivals of all new occupants to the housing park and all vacating (permanent departures) occupants from the housing park. Failure to do so, or failure to do so in a timely manner, shall be assumed to be deliberate noncompliance on the part of the park owner. 
5-35.21. Front entrance. 
a.  Individual Unit. All home units shall have a front entrance that is clearly marked. Each unit shall have a clearly visible address number or lot number that can be readily seen from the driveway or street. 
b.  Park Entrance. The front (primary) entrance to the housing park shall be clearly marked and shall have a large, clearly visible, permanent sign at the park entrance or at the front of the park as stated above. 
5-35.22. Landscaping. 
a.  General. Spaces between individual housing units and spaces between housing units and internal roads or driveways shall consist of planted or seeded grass or other planted vegetation. Such spaces shall be landscaped in such a way to be visually pleasing and provide safety for the occupants. A minimum of one tree shall be provided at each manufactured home stand. 
b.  Each Manufactured Housing Lot. Each housing unit shall be landscaped with a border of bushes, shrubs and/or plants beginning not more than three feet from the foundation of the housing unit. Each housing unit shall be completely enclosed and under skirted with painted metal lath, vinyl material, or other suitable material. 
c.  Abandoned Objects. Abandoned, inoperable, or unlicensed automobiles, appliances, etc. shall not be allowed. 
5-35.23. Additional Requirements. It shall be the responsibility and obligation of the park owner to ensure that: 
a.  All dogs within the park shall be securely contained in a pen. 
b.  Discharging firearms shall not be permitted inside the park. 
c.  All noise is kept within a normal, non-nuisance level. 
d.  All complaints from surrounding residences or from park occupants are addressed and/or corrected in a timely manner. 
5-35.24. Vacant Units. Vacant manufactured housing units and units in storage that are not used for occupancy shall be required to meet the same zoning and setback requirements as manufactured housing units used for occupancy. 
5-35.25. Breezeways, Corridors or Hallways. No manufactured home may be attached to another manufactured home by abutting one manufactured home to another or by means of a breezeway, corridor or hallway. 
5-36. - Mobile Vendors and Services. 
a.  Mobile vendors, including mobile food vendors, (a mobile food dispensing vehicle that sells prepared food products) and mobile units that sell agricultural produce may be permitted, subject to the approval of a Mobile Vendor Permit by the Zoning Administrator and the presentation of written permission from the property owner on whose property the mobile vendor is to be located. All mobile vending businesses shall be subject to the following criteria: 
1.  A mobile vending business shall be treated and permitted as a home occupation and subject to the regulations of a home occupation. 
2.  All business activities associated with the operation of the mobile vending business are to be conducted away from the home. 
b.  A minimum of three parking spaces shall be required for the use of the mobile vendor. 
c.  No mobile vendor shall operate in the following areas: 
1.  Within ten feet from the right-of-way of any public street or roadway. 
2.  Within a required landscape buffer or improvement setback. 
3.  Within ten feet of any street intersection or cross walk. 
4.  Within ten feet of any driveway or other curb cut access, loading zone or bus stop. 
5.  In any area within 15 feet of a building entrance. 
6.  On the median strip of a divided roadway. 
7.  In front of display windows of a fixed location business. 
8.  Within ten feet of a fire hydrant or fire escape. 
9.  Within ten feet of any parking space or access ramp designated for persons with disabilities. 
d.  No vending cart or stand, or any other item related to the operation of a mobile vendor use shall be located on any County sidewalk or other public way during non-vending hours. Nor shall any vehicle be parked, stored or left overnight other than in a lawful parking space. 
e.  Vendors shall keep the sidewalks, roadways and other spaces adjacent to their vending sites or locations clean and free of paper, peelings, and refuse of any kind generated from their business. All trash or debris accumulating within 25 feet of any vending stand shall be collected by the vendor and deposited in a trash container provided by the vendor. The trash container shall be emptied regularly and marked as being for litter. 
f.  Mobile Vendors may not do any of the following: 
1.  Obstruct pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic flow. 
2.  Obstruct traffic signals or regulatory signs. 
3.  Obstruct adequate access to emergency and sanitation vehicles. 
4.  Interfere with access to abutting properties. 
5.  Sound any device that produces a loud noise or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier, or similar device to attract public attention. 
5-37. - Outdoor Storage in Residential and Commercial Districts. 
a.  In all commercial zoning districts, and except as noted below, all business activities shall be in a completely enclosed structure. 
b.  Exceptions to the regulation shall be for the display of motor vehicles, marine craft, aircraft, recreational vehicles, manufactured homes, farm and construction equipment and vehicles, farm and garden supplies, stone products, and any other product designed for outdoor use. 
c.  An outdoor storage area may not be located in any required off-street parking area, required off-street loading area, required landscape area, designated environmental protection area, or any adjacent public right-of-way. 
d.  An outdoor storage area may be located adjacent to a structure but shall not be located in the front yard setback area. 
e.  An outdoor storage area shall be kept neat and orderly and shall not be permitted to take on the characteristics of a junk yard. 
f.  An outdoor storage area shall be visually screened from adjacent uses by a privacy fence, or a masonry wall or a chain-link fence with green or black slats. In the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, an opaque landscape buffer may be used instead of a wall or fence provided the area is visually screened from adjacent property as effectively as though a fence or wall were used. 
g.  The screening used shall not be less than six feet in height. Access through the fence or wall shall be limited through opaque gates that shall be closed when not in use. 
h.  Outdoor eating areas are permitted as an accessory to any permitted eating establishment in any commercial district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The outdoor eating area does not occupy an area greater than 50 percent of the building area of the business to which the eating area is accessory; 
2.  The outdoor eating area is not located in any required parking area, service area, landscape area, and drainage area; 
3.  If the outdoor eating area is located along, or astride a sidewalk or other pedestrian accessway, a minimum of five foot unobstructed passage shall be maintained through h the outdoor eating area; 
4.  All outdoor eating areas shall be designed and located in such a manner as to prevent them from becoming a nuisance to any adjacent property or use. All outdoor eating areas shall be located so that there is no adverse noise, lighting, trash or other negative impacts onto any adjacent property or use; 
5.  All outdoor eating areas shall be treated for parking computations as if they were fully enclosed. 
5-38. - Racetracks, Tractor Pulls, Motorcycle Dirt Tracks, ATV Tracks. 
a.  All Racetracks, Tractor Pulls, Motorcycle Dirt Tracks and ATV Tracks must meet all applicable State Fire Marshal Licensing Requirements. 
b.  The property shall contain a minimum of ten acres and be located on an Arterial or Connector Street. 
c.  Parking must be provided as required in chapter 4 of this Code. 
d.  Adequate restroom facilities located within a structure or building on the grounds must be provided. 
5-39. - Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds. 
a.  No new Recreational Vehicle Park and Campground may be located in any zoning district other than Agriculture (AG) and Commercial (C). 
b.  A Recreational Vehicle Park shall be permitted only on tracts of land consisting of a minimum of eight acres and having a minimum frontage of at least 120 feet on a paved public road. 
c.  The maximum number of recreational vehicle lots shall not exceed 14 lots per gross acre. 
d.  The minimum dimensions for any lot in any Recreational Vehicle Park developed after July 20, 2015, or any additions to any existing Recreational Vehicle Park made after July 20, 2015 shall be 40 feet wide by 70 feet long. 
e.  The minimum building setbacks for any lot in any Recreational Vehicle Park developed after July 20, 2015 any additions to any existing Recreational Vehicle Park made after July 20, 2015 shall be as follows: 

 
f.  The coverage by accessory buildings in the Recreational Vehicle Park shall be no greater than one percent of the total acreage of the park. 
g.  Each lot shall provide a stabilized vehicular parking pad, measuring no less than 10 × 20 feet; the pad shall be composed of shell, marl, paving or stone screenings. Exposed ground surfaces in every space not protected by the vehicular parking pad shall be protected with vegetative growth such as ground cover or shrubbery that is capable of preventing soil erosion and the creation of dust. 
h.  At least 20 percent of the gross site area shall be set aside and developed as open space, recreation space and buffering between recreational vehicle spaces. Such areas may provide recreation opportunities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, picnic areas, playgrounds, playing fields. Open space shall not include streets, parking lots, lease or rental lots, buildings, right-of-way or sites for water and sewer treatment. Up to 50 percent of the required open space may be used for stormwater retention areas. 
i.  There shall be a landscape buffer around all Recreational Vehicle Parks of at least 25 feet in width. Landscaping in this area shall conform to the requirements of this Code. 
j.  All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient, paved vehicular access from a paved road to each lot. 
k.  All streets internal to the park shall have a minimum right-of-way of 60 feet, and shall be paved to County specifications. 
l.  Park entrance paving shall be at least 36 feet wide. 
m.  No entrance or exit from a park shall be permitted through a residential district. 
n.  In addition to those generally permitted accessory uses, a Recreational Vehicle Park may also provide for the following: 
1.  One permanent residence, intended for occupation by the manager of the park; and 
2.  In parks with 100 or more lots, a retail and personal service establishment, intended exclusively for the use of the occupants of the on-site recreational vehicles and travel trailers. 
o.  All Recreational Vehicle Parks shall undergo Site Plan Review. 
p.  All Recreational Vehicle Parks shall be required to be served by centralized water and sewer services. 
5-40. - Religious Facilities and Related Uses. 
When located in a residential district, the following standards shall be met: 
a.  The property shall contain at least two acres and be located on an arterial or connector street. 
b.  A 50 feet vegetative landscape buffer to adjacent residential zoning or residential uses is required. 
c.  Driveways and parking areas must be set back a minimum of 25 feet from side property lines. 
d.  The scale, intensity and operation of the use shall not generate unreasonable noise, traffic, congestion or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous residential properties. 
e.  Any buildings or structures shall be harmonious with the surrounding character of the residential neighborhood. 
f.  Permitted related uses in addition to customary accessory uses include a chapel, library, administrative offices including storage areas, educational facilities, day care facilities, fellowship hall, related kitchen and dining area, ornamental garden, and outdoor recreational facilities occupying less than 10,000 square feet. 
g.  Outdoor activities shall be limited to the hours from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
h.  Retail and commercial sales uses shall be prohibited as accessory uses to a religious facility that is located in a residential zoning district. 
i.  Schools, K—12, in addition shall meet the standards as listed in this section under Schools, K—12, Private. 
5-41. - Riding Stables. 
a.  The keeping of horses and use of stables shall be limited to property within a subdivision or on lots having a minimum lot area of five acres. 
b.  The entire parcel shall be fenced. 
c.  The maximum number of adult horses shall be two per acre. 
d.  Any structure or building to house the horses must be located a minimum of 200 feet from the property line. 
5-42. - Rural Large Acreage Subdivision. 
a.  Animals and Livestock: 
(1)  No commercial kennel, poultry operation, poultry house, feed lot, or similar structure of business shall be permitted in RLAS. 
(2)  Animals and livestock kept or raised for the personal enjoyment of the landowner shall be permitted. However, where animals and livestock are kept, their environment and surroundings must be maintained in a manner that reasonably ensures the health and safety of the same. 
(3)  Any accessory structure or building constructed to provide lodging for animals, livestock, feed, or any associated purpose must be constructed 200 feet from any property line. 
b.  Other Businesses: No commercial manufacturing, assembling, disassembling, storage, processing, or other similar commercial enterprise shall be permitted. 
5-43. - Salvage Yard, Junk Yard, Scrap, Waste, Land Clearing and Yard Trash. 
a.  The yard must be a minimum of five acres with a maximum slope of five percent. 
b.  The yard shall be located no closer than 300 feet to a residential zoning district or closer than 100 feet to a commercial district boundary line. 
c.  The property on which the collection activity is taking place shall be surrounded by a fence, wall or vegetative screening at least six feet in height. Such fence or wall shall be of similar composition, construction, and color throughout and shall be constructed without openings except for one entrance and one exit. The entrance and exit shall be equipped with unpierced gates which shall be closed and securely locked outside of business hours. In no case shall the fence be less than a height necessary to screen effectively all storage and other operations from view. 
d.  The yard is to be located no closer than 300 feet from the right-of-way of any arterial roadway. 
e.  Junked or wrecked vehicles shall not be stacked higher than any screening required by subsection c above. Under no circumstances shall vehicles be stacked higher than 14 feet. 
f.  All sides of each individual stockpile areas shall be accessible by fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be a minimum of one and one-half times the height of the pile, but in no case shall the fire lane be less than 20 feet wide. 
g.  The total site that may be covered with debris storage areas shall not exceed 60 percent of the site. 
i.  The base area on which the stockpiles are located, and the access aisles between the stock piles, must be constructed of either a concrete surface, asphalt surface, or other clean all weather stabilized surface that is acceptable to the County. 
j.  Every recycling, scrap, waste and salvage/junkyard operation authorized under this section, shall establish a cash security fund, bond or provide the County with an irrevocable letter of credit based on the schedule below, to secure the cost of removing of all accumulated debris and materials from the site if it has been determined by the County Commission, following a duly noticed public hearing, that the recycling, scrap, waste or salvage/junkyard operation has been abandoned or operations have ceased for a period in excess of six months or the permit has been revoked for any reason. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to any recycling, scrap, waste or salvage/junkyard operation operated by any unit of local government within the County. 

 
5-44. - Schools, K—12, Private. 
a.  This use shall be located with direct access to an arterial or connector street. 
b.  The minimum lot size shall be as follows: 
1.  Elementary School: Two acres, plus one acre for each 100 student capacity; 
2.  Middle School: Three acres, plus one acre for each 100 student capacity; 
3.  High School: Five acres, plus one acre for each 100 student capacity. 
c.  A 50 foot landscape buffer is required adjacent to residential zoning districts or residential uses. 
d.  Driveways and parking areas must be set back 25 feet from side property lines. 
e.  The scale, intensity and operation of the use shall not generate unreasonable noise, light, traffic, congestion or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous residential properties. 
f.  Any buildings or structures shall be harmonious with the surrounding character of the residential neighborhood. 
g.  Permitted accessory uses in addition to customary accessory uses include a chapel, library, administrative offices, educational facilities, fellowship hall, related kitchen and dining area, ornamental garden, and outdoor recreational facilities occupying less than 10,000 square feet. 
h.  No signage shall be permitted for accessory uses or facilities. 
[i.  Reserved.] 
j.  Recreational facilities with associated outdoor lights shall be located at least 300 feet from property lines with adjacent residential properties and uses. 
k.  Retail and commercial sales uses shall be prohibited as accessory uses to a private school that is located in a residential zoning district. 
5-45. - Scrap and Waste Recycling Operations. 
a.  The collection operations shall be limited to the acceptance of glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, metal cans, non-ferrous materials and yard waste. 
b.  The property on which the collection activity is to take place, shall be at least one acre and not more than ten acres in total area. 
c.  The property on which the collection activity is taking place shall be surrounded by a fence, wall or vegetative screening eight feet in height. Such fence or wall shall be of similar composition, construction, and color throughout and shall be constructed without openings except or one entrance and one exit. The entrance and exit shall be equipped with unpierced gates which shall be closed and securely locked outside of business hours. 
d.  The reprocessing of the collected material into any other product, by-product or other use or form is not allowed, unless the reprocessing is allowed in conjunction with manufacturing of a new product or material as would otherwise be permitted in WLI (Warehouse Light Industrial) or H-I (Heavy Industrial) zoning districts. 
e.  No junked vehicle or any other junk or scrap shall be located for storage, dismantling or any other purpose. 
f.  All sides of each individual stockpile areas shall be accessible by fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be a minimum of one and one-half times the height of the pile, but in no case shall the fire lane be less than 20 feet wide. 
g.  The total site that may be covered with debris storage areas shall not exceed 60 percent of the site. 
h.  The base area on which the stockpiles are located, and the access aisles between the stock piles, must be constructed of either a concrete surface, asphalt surface, or other clean all weather stabilized surface that is acceptable to the County. 
i.  Every recycling, scrap, waste and salvage/junkyard operation authorized under this section, shall establish a cash security fund, bond or provide the County with an irrevocable letter of credit based on the schedule below, to secure the cost of removing of all accumulated debris and materials from the site if it has been determined by the County Commission, following a duly noticed public hearing, that the recycling, scrap, waste or salvage/junkyard operation has been abandoned or operations have ceased for a period in excess of six months or the permit has been revoked for any reason. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to and recycling, scrap, waste or salvage/junkyard operation operated by any unit of local government within the County. 

 
5-46. - Shooting Clubs, Private or Public. 
a.  Shooting Clubs, private or public, are allowed in the AG, Zoning District. 
b.  The discharge of firearms shall be conducted only within the range and or bays specifically designated for such use on an approved site plan. 
c.  Firing positions shall be separated a minimum of 500 feet from the boundary of the subject property with any adjacent parcel in separate ownership. 
d.  An impenetrable backstop, a minimum of 20 feet in height, shall be constructed down range of any authorized range or bay, and side berms a minimum of eight feet in height shall be provided along the sidelines. 
e.  The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable state and local regulations and how safety and noise factors have been addressed through the site plan and other special features of the proposed development. 
5-47. - Small Appliance or Equipment Repair Shop. 
a.  All repair and maintenance shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
b.  An outdoor storage area may be located adjacent to a structure but shall not be located in the front yard setback area. 
c.  An outdoor storage area shall be kept neat and orderly and shall not be permitted to take on the characteristics of a junk yard. 
d.  An outdoor storage area shall be visually screened from adjacent uses by a fence, or a masonry wall or a chain-link fence with green or black slats. In the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, an opaque landscape buffer may be used instead of a wall or fence provided the area is visually screened from adjacent property as effectively as though a fence or wall were used. 
e.  The screening used shall not be less than six feet in height. Access through the fence or wall shall be limited through opaque gates that shall be closed when not in use. 
5-48. - Temporary Uses, including Special Events and Structures. 
a.  Temporary Uses are permitted in any zoning district subject to the following standards, provided that all temporary uses shall meet the dimensional and parking requirements for the zoning district in which the use is located. 
b.  Permitted Temporary Uses. 
1.  Construction offices, which may also be used for security purposes, and equipment sheds in which erection, addition, relocation or structural relocation is taking place provided that such use shall be limited to the period of actual construction. 
2.  Manufactured Homes may be used as construction offices in any district in which erection, addition, relocation, or structural relocation is taking place provided that such use shall be limited for the period of actual construction, tie down permits shall be obtained; all such manufactured homes shall comply with applicable regulations; and the manufactured home in which the security employee lives shall not remain after the period of actual construction. 
3.  Religious Facilities in existing structures in C (Commercial) zoning districts. Such use shall be limited to the worship activities of the named applicant for the temporary use permit including educational programs conducted in conjunction with the worship service, but shall not include child care programs conducted independently from the worship service or the establishment of schools. 
4.  Temporary On-Site Real Estate Offices. Included as part of site plan approval, specific authorizations may be granted permitting the installation or construction of a temporary on—site sales office prior to the issuance of any building permits for the primary portions of a development project. All on-site sales offices shall be constructed in accordance with applicable County regulations shall be required to obtain all necessary permit approvals, including but not limited to Stormwater management permits, driveway permits and all required building and public health permits. All temporary on-site sales offices shall be removed from the development site upon the completion of the last phase or unit of the approved development. 
5.  Special vehicle and boat sales events on sites not approved for the permanent display vehicle and boat sales may be approved by the Zoning Administrator provided that these events shall be conducted on property having a C (Commercial) or WLI or HI (Light Industrial or Heavy Industrial) designation or on property approved and designated by the County as special events sites. Such events shall be conducted on property with existing, permanent and permitted driveways and access points. The event shall have a duration of four or fewer consecutive days and shall be conducted by one or more dealers having a valid local business license. Sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance with applicable Health Department regulations. Used Motor Vehicle Dealers must have a Temporary site permit issued by the Georgia State Board of Used Motor Vehicle Dealers before the County issues a local occupational license. 
6.  Temporary RV Hunting Camps. 
a.  A "hunting camp unit" is defined as any temporary domicile, excluding mobile or manufactured housing. Examples include, but are not limited to: RV's, travel trailers, sheds, tents, shacks, buses and vans. Occupancy is limited to 120 continuous days 
b.  Sanitary facilities shall conform to County and state health regulations. Each hunting camp shall have one "porta-toilet" per every five hunting camp units (RV, travel trailer, tent, or shack). 
c.  All units must be self-contained or generator powered. 
d.  All structures and activity areas shall be located at least 300 feet from all property lines. 
e.  Activities shall not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic, or historic feature. 
f.  Outside storage and game processing areas shall be appropriately screened from view on all sides. 
g.  All parking and camping structures shall be screened by forest or landscape at a minimum distance of 300 feet from property boundary lines or public roads and rights-of-way. If this cannot be accomplished by natural means year round, then this will be accomplished by a six-foot privacy fence constructed from pressure treated material and located a distance of not less than 300 feet from property line and/or public roads and rights-of-way. 
[h.  Reserved.] 
[i.  Reserved.] 
j.  For the purpose of zeroing, sighting, and target practice, appropriate earth berms and mounds shall be constructed so as to prohibit projectiles from leaving the firing range. No zeroing, sighting, or target practice shall occur after sunset. 
k.  Hunting camps must have 911 designation numbers at road entrance. Numbers must be visible from the road. 
l.  All camps must be accessible for zoning, code enforcement and tax assessing purposes. 
5-49. - Utility Substation. 
a.  Structures shall be placed no less than 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  Structures are to be enclosed by a solid or chain-link fence or wall at least six feet in height above finished grade. 
c.  The lot shall be suitably landscaped, including a buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the front, side and rear property lines; planted with one tree for every 30 feet and a continuous hedge or shrubs that will grow eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
5-50. - Veterinary Services/Animal Hospitals/Kennels, Pet Boarding. 
a.  Any structure used as an animal hospital or veterinary clinic shall be located and its activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property line in any residential district. 
b.  Medical treatment or care shall be practiced only within an enclosed building or structure. 
c.  Kennel or boarding operations incidental to the principal use shall be permitted only within an enclosed building or structure located at least 100 feet from the property line of any residential zoning district. Sound proofing of the building is required. 
d.  Outdoor runs are permitted provide they are 300 feet from any residential zoning district. Drains shall to be connected to an approved sanitary facility. Odor control and pest control are required. 
e.  All kennels must be licensed by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
5-51. - Surface Mining. 
Surface mining is permitted in agricultural zoning district with the following conditions: 
1.  A surface mining permit issued by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources is required prior to any surface mining. 
2.  No surface mining is permitted within 200 feet of any adjoining property line. 
3.  No buildings shall be built or placed within 100 feet of any adjoining property line. 
(Ord. No. 2016-11, 6-20-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-11, adopted June 20, 2016, set out provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as § 5-51. 
CHAPTER 6. - PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND RESOURCES 
The provisions set forth in chapter 6 are intended to protect the natural features and natural resources within Coffee County, and to implement policies in the Comprehensive plan. The natural features and natural resources included in chapter 6 are groundwater recharge areas and river corridors. 

6-1. - Groundwater Recharge Area District. 
6-1.1 Purpose. In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within Coffee County and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that Coffee County and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. 
Groundwater resources are contained within underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earth's surface capable of containing or producing water from a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
6-2. - Definitions. 
Aquifer. means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Drastic. means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. 
Pollution Susceptibility. means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. 
Pollution Susceptibility Map. means the relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. (Georgia Department of Natural Resources Hydrologic Atlas 20: Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia.) 
Recharge Area. means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant Recharge Areas. means those areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). 
6-3. - Establishment of the Groundwater Recharge Area Protection District. 
The Groundwater Recharge Area District is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of Coffee County, Georgia that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance. 
6-4. - Determination of Pollution Susceptibility. 
Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance. 
6-5. - Protection Criteria. 
1.  No construction may proceed on a building or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank unless the Coffee County Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resource for On-Site Sewage Management (hereinafter DHR Manual), and sections b. and c. below. 
2.  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. 
a.  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
b.  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
c.  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
3.  New manufactured home parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. 
a.  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
b.  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
c.  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
4.  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; or a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10-7cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service. 
5.  New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a volume of 660 gallons or more, shall be double-walled or have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
6.  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
7.  Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
6-6. - Exemptions. 
Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this ordinance is exempt from the minimum lot size requirements contained in sections 6-5(2) and 6-5(3) of this ordinance. 
CHAPTER 7. - BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR ROADS, STREETS AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 

7-1. - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and laws enacted pursuant thereto. 
7-2. - Purpose, Intent and Application. 
It is the intent of this chapter to apply to and provide guidance for the development of lands within Coffee County, Georgia, whether the developments involve the subdivision of land or the construction of buildings and/or other improvements on a single parcel. Any land development activity must first comply with this Code. These regulations are intended to serve the following purposes. 
a.  To protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare. 
b.  Encourage economically sound and orderly land development in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and other policies and objectives of the County. 
c.  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new developments and to redevelopments in conformance with public improvement policies of the County. 
d.  To assure adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments and in redevelopments. 
7-3. - General Provisions. 
a.  Zoning Ordinance. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions required under this section and those contained in other ordinances or regulations of Coffee County, the most restrictive, as determined by Coffee County, shall apply. 
b.  Required Public Improvements. Every developer of lands within the jurisdiction of this Code shall provide the public improvements included in this Code, in accordance with this Code and other pertinent ordinances, codes, and regulations of the County. These public improvements together with associated rights-of-way, easements, and other lands shall be provided at no cost to the County and shall be dedicated or otherwise transferred, as required, to the public in perpetuity and without covenant or reservation. 
c.  Other Permits. Nothing in this Code shall impose any obligation on the County to obtain or assist in obtaining permits, approvals, and/or clearances from other local, state or Federal agencies having jurisdiction over elements of a project. It is solely the developer's responsibility to obtain all such required permits, approvals, and/or clearances. The developer shall furnish the Zoning Administrator with copies of all such permits, approvals and/or clearances before authorization to proceed with development. 
7-4. - Street Improvement Standards. 
Public Streets, whether abutting or internal, existing or new, shall be constructed or improved under those circumstances and to the standards as established in this section. Roadway improvements shall be in accordance with the following street classification system: 
a.  Arterial. These roadways provide mobility so traffic can move from one place to another quickly and safely. 
b.  Collector. These roadways link arterials and local roads and perform some duties of each. 
c.  Local. These roadways provide access to homes, businesses and other property. 
7-5. - Right-of-Way Requirements. 
a.  Minimum Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths: 
i.  The minimum widths for public rights-of-way or private street ingress/egress easements and pavements shall be as shown in "Table of Minimum Right-of-Way and Lane Widths." See Standard Drawings for detailed dimensions. 
ii.  Minimum widths of right-of-way and lanes shall be as shown in the "Table of Right-of-Way and Lane Widths." 

 
7-6. - Clear Zone Requirements. 
a.  All new roads/streets shall meet ASHTO requirements. 
7-7. - Access Management. 
Applicability: Except for development projects consisting of single-family dwelling units that are not part of a larger common development, the following standards shall apply. These standards shall apply unless a more restrictive standard is required by the GDOT. See chapter 4, section 4-9.6(a). 
Standards: 
a.  Separation of Access Points: 
i.  Proposed driveways along state or federal highways shall be permitted by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
ii.  Corner lot access shall be from the street with the lowest traffic count and shall be located as far from the intersection as reasonably possible to reduce turning movement conflicts and to promote proper traffic circulation. 
b.  Emergency Access: All public streets, private and residential drives shall be designed and maintained so as to provide safe and convenient access for emergency vehicles, as required by the County. New developments with restricted access, such as gated subdivisions must receive a variance from this requirement based on review and approval by Coffee County or its designee. 
c.  Traffic-Calming Measures: Street layout and configuration within residential areas/developments should include a series of relatively short interconnected roadways in lieu of longer straight roads, to discourage excessive speeds. Additional traffic-calming measures may be required by the County. Any specific measures employed shall be approved by the County. 
The separation of access points on any street or road shall be determined by the established speed limit of the street or road, with the following minimum spacing requirements as provided in "Table of Minimum Driveway Spacing." 

 
(a)  Single-Family residential subdivisions are exempt from the minimum driveway spacing requirement. 
d.  The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway or roadway to the centerline of the nearest adjacent driveway or roadway. For un-divided highways, driveways and roadways located on the opposite side of the road from the development shall be included. It is desired that new driveways and roadways be aligned directly across and in line with existing driveways and roadways when possible. 
e.  Driveways shall be located so that the radius return is a minimum of four feet from a property line that intersects the right-of-way line. 
f.  The County Road Department may reduce the required separation distance of access points where the minimum required distance proves impractical or if the site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation system for vehicles and pedestrians. 
g.  The requirements of this section are not intended to eliminate all access to a parcel of land that was legally subdivided prior to the enactment of this section. 
7-8. - Permits Required. 
a.  No driveway shall be constructed abutting a County-maintained road or street until all applicable driveway permits have been approved and issued by the County. For driveways that abut a state or federal highway, all applicable permits shall be obtained from the GDOT prior to construction. See chapter 10, section 10-29(c). 
7-9. - Deceleration Lanes. 
Minimum Requirements for Right Turn Deceleration Lanes. Right turn deceleration lanes will be required and shall be constructed at no cost to the County if the daily site generated Right Turn Volumes (RTV) based on ITE Trip Generation or other approved method meet or exceed the values shown in Table 7-9.1 below: 

 
Deceleration lanes shall be constructed to the dimensions shown in Table 7-5.5. Width of deceleration lanes shall be 12 feet minimum. 

 
When a new deceleration lane required by this section is proposed to begin or end within 50 feet of an existing deceleration lane, driveway or street intersection, then the new deceleration lane shall be extended as needed to provide a safe, continuous connection with adjacent or nearby deceleration lanes, driveways and intersections. 
7-10. - Minimum Requirements for Left Turn Lanes. 
Left lanes will be required and shall be constructed at no cost to the County if the daily site generated Right Turn Volumes (RTV) based on ITE Trip Generation or other approved method meet or exceed the values shown in Table 7-10.1 below: 

 
In most cases, it is necessary to widen the existing roadway to introduce the left turn lane. It is preferred that the roadway be widened six feet each direction so that an equal shift in traffic is maintained for both directions. If widening of the roadway in both directions is not feasible, then widening the full 12 feet along the project side of the highway will be permitted. Where required, left turn lanes shall be constructed per Table 7-10.2. 

 

Any additional right-of-way required for the construction and maintenance of right turn deceleration lanes or left turn lanes shall be dedicated in fee simple to the County. 
7-11. - Requirements for New Streets and Improvement of Existing Streets. 
a.  All new streets proposed to be constructed in a subdivision or other development shall be designed and constructed to the minimum standards contained in these Regulations, in accordance with the classification of streets. For any development which abuts a State or Federal highway, improvements to the roadway and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access from the state highway shall comply with the standards and requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation. A permit for the proposed access or improvements shall be required to have been approved by the GDOT and incorporated into the construction drawings for the project prior to issuance of a development permit by the County. 
b.  The Developer shall be responsible for the relocation and/or modifications of public and/or private utilities as necessitated by the required street improvements. 
c.  Substandard Streets. 
i.  If a substandard street (dirt or gravel road or inadequate width of pavement or right-of-way) provides a means of access to a development, the street shall be upgraded to the street classification standard required by this Article, contemporaneous with the subdivision development. These improvements shall extend from the entrance of the development to the nearest standard road of an equivalent or higher classification, along the route of primary access. 
ii.  The upgrading of substandard streets used for access will not be required if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The development consists of a single one- or two-family residence, not part of a larger common development, on an existing recorded lot within the County. 
d.  Permanent Dead-end Streets: New streets shall connect at both ends to existing or proposed streets unless the County Engineer determines that unique parcel configuration or terrain makes a fully connected street pattern infeasible or unsafe. 
i.  When necessary, streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall provide a cul-de-sac turnaround and may be no more than 2,640 ft. in length including the cul-de-sac, unless otherwise approved by the County Engineer. 
ii.  The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the center of the cul-de-sac to the center of the intersection with another street. 
iii.  Culs-de-sac shall have a 50 foot radius for residential streets and 75 foot radius for non-residential streets and shall conform to the standard drawings. 
7-12. - Street Intersection. 
a.  Angle of Intersections: Intersections of two public streets shall form an angle that is 90 degrees if possible but in no case shall be less than 80 or more than 100 degrees, unless otherwise approved by the County Engineer. 
b.  Intersection Radius: Intersections within residential subdivisions shall be constructed with a minimum edge of pavement radius of 35 feet to accommodate school buses. Industrial and commercial areas, and any other area where truck traffic has the potential to account for more than ten percent of the total traffic, intersections shall be constructed with a minimum edge of pavement radius of 75 feet. All other intersections shall be constructed with a minimum edge of pavement radius of 50 feet. 
c.  Intersection Sight Distance (Sight Triangles): 
i.  Intersections shall be designed with adequate sight distance for all proposed intersections. Where necessary, back slopes shall be flattened and horizontal or vertical curves lengthened to provide the minimum required sight distance. The placement or establishment of signs, buildings, fencing, plantings, etc. which have to potential to obstruct the required line of sign are not allowed within the sight triangle unless approved by the County Engineer. 
ii.  The minimum intersection sight distance from the approaching street shall be calculated in accordance with the latest edition of AASHTO "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets." 
7-13. - Geometric Design Standards. 
a.  All streets and roadways shall be designed in accordance with the AASHTO Standards, as provided in "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," latest edition and any amendments thereto. 
b.  Street Centerline Grades: 
i.  Street or road grades exceeding ten percent for a minor collector and 12 percent for local streets are prohibited, unless otherwise approved by the County Engineer. The County Engineer may grant limited exceptions on maximum grades, based on conclusive evidence that shows a lesser grade is impractical due to topographic or site specific limitations. 
ii.  The minimum centerline grade for street or roadway with curb and gutter shall not be less than 0.5 percent. Streets with roadside ditches should be limited to a minimum of 0.03 percent. 
iii.  The maximum centerline grade across any cul-de-sac turnaround shall be two percent. 
c.  Crown Slope: Unless super-elevated, all streets and roadways, except alleys, shall be designed and constructed with a crown slope of one-fourth inch per foot (two percent), to provide for the adequate drainage of surface water from the street centerline to the gutter or roadside ditch. 
d.  Super-elevation: The design of arterial and major collector roadways may require the super-elevation of the travel surface on horizontal curves in accordance with AASHTO Standards. The design and horizontal alignment of minor collectors and local streets serving subdivision areas should avoid the use of super-elevation where possible. In all instances, super-elevation rates shall not exceed four percent without prior approval from the County Engineer. Under no circumstance is a curved street of any classification to be reverse super-elevated. 
e.  Pavement Design: Pavement sections shall be constructed in accordance with the standards in the "Table of Standard Pavement sections." Set out below, as well as the typical paved road section, rural dirt road section and curb and gutter section set forth at Appendix A at the end of this chapter. 
Editor's note— Appendix A, referenced above, is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the County offices. 
7-14. - Base and Pavement Minimum Requirements. 
a.  Roadway Sectional Composition. 
i.  The applicable standard shall be based on functional classification. See latest edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) Standard Specifications for the Construction of Roads and Bridges for specifications of referenced asphaltic concrete types. For all street classifications, before asphalt pavement is placed, a bituminous prime shall be applied to the base material in accordance with GDOT specifications. Application rate shall be a minimum of 0.15 gallons and a maximum of 0.20 gallons per square yard. 
b.  Roadways shall be constructed with cross sections according to the following requirements at a minimum. The County will consider alternate designs provided that a suitable pavement design is provided that accommodates the heaviest and maximum traffic counts expected for a particular development. 
1.  Local Streets. 
i.  1.5" - 12.5 mm Asphalt SuperPave (165 lbs./sq. yd.) top course; 
ii.  8" - Graded aggregate base (GAB); or 
6" - Soil cement (Soil cement shall be mixed in place). 
Base shall be compacted to at least 98 percent maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM 0698. 
2.  Collector Streets (for residential and commercial developments). 
Asphalt Pavement: 
i.  1.5" - 12.5 mm Asphalt SuperPave (165 lbs./sq. yd.) (top course); 
ii.  2" - 19 mm Asphalt SuperPave (220 lb./sq. yd.) (binder); 
iii.  8" - Graded aggregate base (GAB); or 
iv.  6" - Soil cement (Soil cement shall be mixed in place); 
v.  Base shall be compacted to at least 98 percent maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM 0698; 
vi.  Graded aggregate base may include crushed concrete, limerock or granite; 
vii.  For soil cement, a mix design by a licensed Geotechnical Engineer in the state of Georgia must be submitted to the County Engineer for approval. 
3.  Arterial Roads (including industrial roads). 
Asphalt Pavement: 
i.  1.5" - 12.5 mm Asphalt SuperPave (165 lbs./sq. yd.) (top course). 
ii.  2" - 19 mm Asphalt SuperPave (220 lb./sq. yd.) (binder). 
iii.  3" - Asphaltic base 25mm (330 lb./sy) Asphalt SuperPave. 
iv.  8" - Graded aggregate base (GAB); or 
v.  6" - Soil cement (Soil cement shall be mixed in place). 
vi.  Base shall be compacted to at least 98 percent maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM 0698. 
vii.  Graded aggregate base may include crushed concrete, limerock or granite. 
viii.  For soil cement, a mix design by a licensed Geotechnical Engineer in the state of Georgia must be submitted to the County Engineer for approval. 
4.  Commercial Development. 
Heavy Duty Asphalt Pavement: 
i.  1.5"- 12.5 mm Asphalt SuperPave (165 lbs./sq. yd.) (top course). 
ii.  2"- 19 mm Asphalt SuperPave (220 lbs./sq. yd.) (binder). 
iii.  8"- Graded aggregate base (GAB); or 
iv.  6"- Soil Cement (Soil cement shall be mixed in place). 
v.  Base shall be compacted to at least 98 percent maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM D698. 
vi.  Graded aggregate base may include crushed concrete, limerock or granite. 
vii.  For soil cement, a mix design by a licensed Geotechnical Engineer in the state of Georgia must be submitted to the County Engineer for approval. 
Light Duty Asphalt Pavement: 
i.  1.5" - 12.5 mm Asphalt SuperPave (165 lbs./sq. yd.) (top course). 
ii.  8" - Graded aggregate base (GAB); or 
iii.  6" - Soil Cement (Soil cement shall be mixed in place). 
iv.  Base shall be compacted to at least 98 percent maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM D698. 
v.  Graded aggregate base may include crushed concrete, limerock or granite. 
vi.  For soil cement, a mix design by a licensed Geotechnical Engineer in the state of Georgia must be submitted to the County Engineer for approval. 
5.  Industrial Development. 
Heavy Duty Asphalt Pavement: 
i.  1.5" - 12.5 mm Asphalt SuperPave (165 lbs./sq. yd.) (top course). 
ii.  2" - 19 mm Asphalt SuperPave (220 lb./sq. yd.) (binder). 
iii.  3" - Asphaltic base 25mm (330 lb./sy) Asphalt SuperPave. 
iv.  8" - Graded aggregate base (GAB); or 
v.  6" - Soil cement (Soil cement shall be mixed in place). 
vi.  Base shall be compacted to at least 98 percent maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM D698. 
vii.  Graded aggregate base may include crushed concrete, limerock or granite. 
viii.  For soil cement, a mix design by a licensed Geotechnical Engineer in the state of Georgia must be submitted to the County Engineer for approval. 
7-15. - Street Construction Standards and Specifications. 
Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for street construction shall conform to the latest edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications - Construction of Transportation Systems including all amendments. 
a.  Erosion and Sedimentation Control: All BMP devices and practices shall be installed, maintained, and/or performed in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, current edition. 
b.  Clearing and Grubbing: Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be first cleared and grubbed of all trees, stumps, roots, brush, debris and other objectionable materials per GDOT Clearing and Grubbing Specifications. Combustible material generated from clearing and grubbing operations may be burned only when authorized and permitted by the Coffee County Fire Chief. 
c.  Rough Grading: Conduct street earthwork construction in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification Sections 205 - Roadway Excavation and 208 - Embankments. 
i.  For purposes of these Regulations, the maximum density of soil material shall be determined by ASTM D 698 (Standard Proctor) test procedures. 
d.  Final Grading and Subgrade Preparation: 
i.  Perform sub grade construction in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification Section 209 - Subgrade Construction. 
ii.  The developer shall provide quality control testing during earthwork and subgrade construction as necessary to assure the entire earthwork, including all fill layers and subgrades, meet the minimum requirements of these Regulations. The minimum quality control testing to be provided consists of the following: 
a.  Moisture - density relationship curve for each type soil encountered. 
b.  One in-place density test (ASTM D 1556 or other recognized method) per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of subgrade or base to be paved. 
c.  One in-place density test (ASTM D1556 or other recognized method) per 1,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof of fill placed. 
iii.  Earthwork which falls below specified minimum quality control limits shall be removed, reconstructed and retested until compliance with specified requirements is achieved. 
iv.  After completing street earthwork operations and before beginning street base construction, the Developer shall file a copy of the quality control test results demonstrating compliance with these requirements with the County. At any time during the construction process, representatives of the County may request to review and the Developer shall provide quality control test results. 
e.  Post-Construction Stabilization of Disturbed Areas: When earthwork and paving are complete, the Developer shall seed with permanent grassing and stabilize all disturbed areas including roadway shoulders which are not covered by paving or other improvements. It shall be the Developer's responsibility to maintain grassed areas by watering, fertilizing, weeding, mowing, trimming, regrading and replanting as required to establish a smooth, acceptable stand of grass free of eroded or bare areas. Grassed areas will be considered acceptable when a viable stand of permanent grass covers at least 90 percent of the total area with no bare spots exceeding one square foot and the ground surface is fully stabilized against erosion. Grassing operations shall meet the technical requirements of Georgia DOT Specification Section 700 - Grassing for Planting Zone 4. 
f.  Base and Pavement Quality Control Testing Required: 
i.  Base construction which falls below specified minimum quality control limits as defined in GDOT's Standard Specifications for Construction of Transportation Systems shall be removed and reconstructed or mitigated if allowed by and in accordance with GDOT Specifications. Corrected areas shall be retested until compliance is achieved. The minimum quality control testing to be provided consists of the following: 
a.  Moisture-density relationship curve for each base material used on project. 
b.  For soil cement base, conduct mix design to determine Portland cement content (percent of dry weight of the soil) to achieve a minimum compressive strength of 300 psi at seven days when testing in accordance with ASTM D 1632 and D 1633. 
c.  One in-place density test (ASTM D 1556 or other method acceptable to the County per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of base. 
d.  One thickness measurement normal to base surface per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of base. 
e.  One surface tolerance measurement using a 15 foot straight edge per 250 square yards or fraction thereof of base. 
f.  One asphalt extraction (ASTM D 2172) and aggregate gradation analysis (ASTM C 136) per 2,400 square yards or fraction thereof of surface course and per 2,400 square yards or fraction thereof of binder course (if any). Obtain samples for extraction and gradation tests in accordance with ASTM D 979. 7) One density and compacted thickness measurement per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of each course placed. Density determined to be made in accordance with ASTM D 1188. Remove not less than three-inch diameter nor larger than 12-inch square test specimens. Repair test specimen holes with concrete. 
g.  Asphalt paving is subject to visual and straight edge inspection during and after construction operations until final acceptance. Inspect the base, intermediate, and surface course surfaces with the straight edge to detect irregularities. Pavements with irregularities that exceed one-fourth of an inch over ten feet are subject to rejection. 
ii.  Base construction which falls below specified minimum quality control limits shall be removed and replaced or remediated in accordance with GDOT specifications. 
iii.  After completing construction, the Developer shall file a copy of the quality control test results demonstrating compliance with these Regulations with the County. At any time during the construction process, representatives of the County may request to review and the Developer shall provide quality control test results. 
g.  Use of Non-specified Base or Paving Materials or Systems: In the event the Developer desires to utilize base or paving materials or systems not included in these Regulations, the Developer shall provide an engineering study prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer comparing the proposed material or system to the appropriate system which is included in these Regulations. The engineering study will include a pavement structural design based on the AASHTO "Guide for Design of Pavement Structures" and suggested specifications for the materials and construction of the proposed system. The County will treat the Developer's request through the appeals process described elsewhere in this Code. 
7-16. - Traffic Control Devices. 
a.  Traffic control devices consisting of street name signs, traffic control signs, traffic markings and traffic signals shall be provided by the Developer as appropriate to serve each development. All traffic control devices and installation thereof shall conform to the Federal Highway Administration "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices". 
i.  For residential developments, minimum traffic control devices shall consist of street name signs at each street intersection, stop or yield signs at each intersection, one speed limit sign per block, school or pedestrian crossing signs where appropriate, and pavement markings to include, at a minimum, centerline striping, edge of pavement striping, stop bars, raised pavement markers (turtles), words, directional arrows and chevrons (hatches). All pavement markings except centerline striping and edge of pavement striping shall be thermoplastic. Stop bars shall be a minimum of 24 inches, and words, chevrons, and directional arrow dimensions shall be in accordance with GDOT Standards. 
ii.  Minimum traffic control devices for non-residential developments shall be in accordance with the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Additionally, appropriate other signs and signals shall be provided by the Developer. 
7-17. - Street Improvement Plans. 
a.  Plans Required: Street improvement plans for all new streets, street widening and existing street upgrades shall be prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer. Three original prints of the plans shall be submitted to the County for review and comment. An electronic copy (in PDF format) is also required. Within 30 days of submittal of the plans, the County will either approve the plans or make comment on items requiring changes and/or additional information. When not approved, the cycle of plan submittal and review will be repeated until the plans are approved by the County. 
b.  Required Information: All plans shall consist of not less than the following: 
i.  Existing ground elevations shall be measured and shown on the plans in a manner that accurately depicts field conditions. Contours shall be generated at one foot intervals for slopes between one to three percent and at two-foot intervals for slopes exceeding three percent if necessary for clarity. For areas sloped at less than one percent, existing spot elevations and/or contours at a 0.5 foot interval shall be shown as necessary to depict field conditions. Accuracy of contour elevations shown on the drawings shall not differ from actual field elevations by more than one-half of the contour interval utilized at any location. 
ii.  Existing facilities and features within and adjacent to rights-of-way which affect or could be affected by street improvement construction. Items include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, buildings, parking lots, driveways, fences, tree lines, and railroads. 
iii.  All drainage ways, lakes, streams, creeks, channels, wetlands, and man-made drainage structures. 
iv.  All existing utilities and appurtenances within and adjacent to rights-of-way which affect or could be affected by street improvement construction. Items include, but are not limited to, sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and street lights. The utility type, size, depth, material and location in relation to street improvements should be indicated. 
v.  All existing and proposed property lines, rights-of-way, and easements shall be shown for the project area and areas abutting the property. Land lot and land district lines shall also be shown. 
vi.  Limits of proposed construction. 
vii.  Proposed road improvements, including but not limited to, centerline alignment, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, pavements, driveways, wheel chair ramps, traffic control devices, and street lights (if any). 
viii.  Profiles of proposed centerlines with new finished grade elevations at intervals not exceeding 50 feet. 
ix.  Horizontal and vertical street geometry for horizontal and vertical curvature shall include street centerline angles of deflection, radii, degree of curvature, design speed, tangent lengths, arc lengths, bearings, centerline grades, and lengths of vertical curves. Stations for all points of curve, points of tangency, points of intersection, both horizontal and vertical, should be shown. 
x.  Benchmarks for vertical control. 
xi.  Name of the development, names, addresses and telephone numbers of Developer and Developer's engineer, engineer's seal, north arrow, scale, and date. 
c.  Plans shall conform to the following standards: 
i.  Where specific design guidance is not given in these regulations or other County regulations, rules, or ordinances the AASHTO publication "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets", latest edition shall be followed. 
ii.  All elevations shall be based on and tied to U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey mean sea level datum. 
iii.  Plan drawings shall be at a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet. In developed or congested areas, the County may require a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or less to be utilized. 
iv.  For profile drawings, the horizontal scale shall be the same as that used for associated plan drawings. The vertical scale shall be at least one inch equals ten feet. A one inch equals five feet vertical scale is often necessary to properly depict grade changes in flat areas. 
v.  The desired drawing size is 18 inches by 24 inches. In no case shall drawings be larger than 30 inches by 42 inches nor smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches. 
7-18. - Utilities. 
All authorized public utilities must be installed by a Georgia Licensed Underground Utility Contractor who must meet minimum bonding and insurance requirements as determined by the County. A note to this effect shall be shown on the construction plans. 
a.  Placement of Utilities. 
i.  All authorized public and private underground or overhead utilities shall be located within an easement designated for such use. Private underground utilities such as lawn sprinkler systems, septic tanks and drain fields, exterior lighting systems, and heating and cooling piping are not permitted within public street rights-of-way or adjacent easements reserved for other public utilities. 
ii.  Underground utilities crossing public roads and right-of-way shall be installed with a minimum 42 inches of cover at all locations, including the bottom of ditches. Crossing utility mains shall not be installed within ten feet of a cross drainage structure and shall provide a minimum of 24 inches of clearance when crossing any longitudinal drainage structures. Utility service laterals shall be installed with a minimum of 24 inches of cover. 
iii.  Utility crossings installed concurrently with roadway construction or at unpaved roadways shall be installed by open trench. Trench compaction shall be performed according to DOT specification to prevent settlement of the roadway. The locations of utility crossings at unpaved roadways shall be identified with a permanent sign posted at the right-of-way line indicating a buried utility crossing. 
iv.  Utility installations that require crossing an existing paved roadway shall be performed by directional bore or other trenchless method. Cutting of paved roadways is not allowed. Utility mains four inches and smaller are not required to be cased. Utility mains larger than four inches shall be cased for a distance extending ten feet beyond the edges of pavement. 
v.  As-built drawings illustrating the location, depth, size, materials, and any other appurtenances installed by the developer shall be submitted to the County upon completion of construction activities. 
7-19. - Stormwater Drainage. 
a.  The subdivider shall provide adequate stormwater drainage in accordance with these regulations. The subdivider/developer shall also provide for adequate drainage for springs or other ground water drainage. 
b.  The drainage system for a subdivision, commercial or industrial development shall be designed in accordance with sound engineering principles and procedures such that all developable parcels included in the subdivision plat are positively drained without negative impacts on neighboring parcels. 
c.  The drainage system shall be designed to accommodate drainage from adjacent lands which naturally drain to or through the lands being subdivided. The drainage system shall be designed to not affect the natural drainage onto adjacent lands (no net increase in pre-development flows from the entire drainage basin). 
d.  Drainage facilities that are designed to handle flowing water (i.e. culverts, weirs, etc.) shall be hydraulically designed to function when subjected to the maximum flow rate that can be expected to occur no more often than once in 25 years. 
e.  Drainage facilities that are designed to handle water accumulations (e.g. retention ponds with no overflow provisions) shall be designed to accommodate the maximum water level that can be expected to occur no more often than once in every 100 years. Necessary drainage facilities including, but not limited to, culverts, rights-of-way, and easements, shall be dedicated to the Coffee County, at no expense to the County, and at the option of the County. Areas required for maintenance shall be cleared of all vegetation which would interfere with the maintenance of the facility. 
7-20. - Wetlands. 
Jurisdictional wetlands shall be delineated on the Preliminary Plat. 
All preliminary plats delineating wetlands shall have on the preliminary plat the note "No fill or work shall occur within jurisdictional wetlands without a prior permit from the US Army Corp of Engineers". The acquisition of permits shall be the responsibility of the owners/developers. 
All minimum lot areas per designated zoning district requirements shall be calculated upland of all wetland boundaries within or contiguous to the property. 
7-21. - Administration and Enforcement. 
This Code shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by the Zoning Administrator. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to maintain an accurate and up-to-date compilation of this Code, including Appendices, and all amendments, and to publish said compilation and make it available to the public for a fee set by the County Commission. 
In any case in which activities are undertaken in violation of this Code, not in compliance with the provisions of a permit issued by the County, or without authorization of a permit which would otherwise be required, the Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to order that all unauthorized or improper work be stopped, direct correction of deficiencies, or take any other legal or administrative action appropriate to the severity of the violation and degree of threat to the public health, safety and welfare. The stop work order shall be posted on the property and delivered or mailed to the Developer. 
7-22. - Variances. 
Requests of for variances to requirements of this chapter shall be submitted in a form as prescribed by the Zoning Administrator along with such fee as shall be established by the County Commission. 
The Zoning Administrator shall coordinate the review of each variance request by all other affected County departments and shall summarize such comments and/or recommendations as may be received in a report to the Board of Zoning Appeals for final action in their normal course of business. 
In granting variances and modifications, the Board of Zoning Appeals may require such conditions as will secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
7-23. - Penalties for Violations. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Code shall be upon conviction punished for each offense according to section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of Coffee County, Georgia. 
Each day such violations continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the County from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
CHAPTER 9. - BOARDS AND AGENCIES 

9-1. - Generally. 
The departments, committees, boards, and Commissions described in chapter 9 are established for the purpose of implementing the provisions of the LDC. The departments, committees, boards, and Commissions described in this chapter shall have the powers and duties described necessary to achieve the purpose of this LDC. 
9-2. - Douglas-Coffee County Planning Commission. 
The City of Douglas-Coffee County Planning Commission is an established body whose structure, authority and responsibility has been fully set out herein. 
9-3. - Membership. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members. Four of the members shall be residents or business owners of the City of Douglas, appointed by the Board of Commissioners of the city; and three of the members shall be residents of Coffee County, appointed by the Board of Commissioners of the County. The terms of the members shall be for four years. 
(b)  Any vacancy in County appointed membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Board of Commissioners, which shall also have the authority to remove any County-appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
9-4. - Organization; rules; staff; finances. 
The Planning Commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The Planning Commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the City or the County. The Planning Commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the Planning Commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the Planning Commission shall be a public record. The Planning Commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state Planning Commission and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the Planning Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing authorities of the City and the County. 
9-5. - Powers and duties. 
From and after the time when the Planning Commission shall have organized and selected its officers, and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, the Planning Commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
a.  Authority, Officers, and Meetings. 
1.  The Planning Commission shall be an advisory board to the County Commission and to the County administration in performing the duties and responsibilities as described in Subsection c. below. 
2.  The Planning Commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chair from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Planning Commission and other meetings and public hearings called by the Commission. The Chairperson shall call special meetings when required, transmit reports, plans and recommendations to the appropriate governing authority, and in general act as spokesperson for the Planning Commission. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall act as chair. 
3.  The regular meeting shall be held on the 3rd Thursday of each month at 6:00 p.m. at a place designated by the Planning Commission. 
4.  A quorum shall consist of four members. 
5.  The order of business at all meetings shall generally be as follows: 
i.  Call to order; 
ii.  Invocation; 
iii.  Roll Call; 
iv.  Approve minutes of previous meetings; 
v.  Reports of Committees and Staff; 
vi.  Old Business; 
vii.  New Business; 
viii.  Adjournment. 
6.  All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be open to the Public in compliance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act of 1999 and all records of the Planning Commission shall be public records. 
b.  Duties and Responsibilities. The Planning Commission shall: 
1.  Make recommendations to the County Commission regarding proposed amendments to the Joint Coffee County - City of Douglas Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Make Recommendations to the County Commission regarding proposed amendments to the text of the Coffee County Land Development Code; 
3.  Make recommendations to the County Commission regarding proposed amendments to the Character Area Maps of the Joint Coffee County - City of Douglas Comprehensive Plan; 
4.  Make recommendations to the County Commission regarding proposed amendments to the County Zoning Map in the form of zoning and rezoning; 
5.  Make recommendations to the County regarding proposed annexations into the City; 
6.  Consider and make recommendations regarding the proposed consistency of proposed developments with the various elements of the Joint Coffee County - City of Douglas Comprehensive Plan and the County Land Development Code. Properly submitted requests to the Planning Commission which have not received an official action from the Planning Commission within 60 days of the Planning Commission meeting at which the application was heard, shall be considered forwarded to the County Commission with a recommendation of approval; 
7.  Conduct such public hearings as may be required to gather information necessary for the preparation, establishment and maintenance of the comprehensive plan; 
8.  Make other recommendations to the County Commission and County administrative staff upon the request of either regarding zoning in the County and the regulation thereof by the County; 
9.  Conduct such hearings as may be necessary to perform the foregoing duties and responsibilities; 
10.  Have no more than three unexcused absences within a year. The Chair and City Staff shall be notified of the cause of absence. Failure to comply will result in a recommendation by the Planning Commission to the proper governing authority that the seat be vacated; 
11.  Changes may be made to the By-Laws by the affirmative vote of a majority of four members. 
9-6. - Board of Zoning Appeals. 
a.  Membership/Residency. The Board of Appeals shall consist of three regular members, and two alternate members, appointed by the County Commission. The members shall serve for overlapping terms of three years. The Chair shall be elected by the Board from its membership. The Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance for the conduct of its affairs. 
Members shall have been continuous residents, property owners or business owners within the County for not less than six months prior to appointment. 
b.  Appeals, Hearings, and Notice. It is the intention of this chapter that all questions arising in connection with the interpretation and enforcement of this Code shall first be presented to the Zoning Administrator, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Appeals only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator, and that from the decision of the Board of Appeals, recourse shall be to the courts as provided by the law. 
The procedures that govern any appeal sought by an aggrieved party are set out at chapter 10, section 10-24, of this LDC. 
c.  Duties and Responsibilities. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
Appeals: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or other staff in the enforcement of this Code. 
Variances: To authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases, a variance from the terms of this Code as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, vowing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Code will in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this Code shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
Criteria for Granting Variances: Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Board of Appeals that: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
2.  The application of this Code to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
3.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
4.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this Code, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited in a given district by this Code. 
Other Duties: To decide on other matters where a decision of the Board of Appeals may be specifically required by the provisions of this Code. In exercising these powers, the Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The Board, in the execution of the duties for which appointed, may subpoena witnesses and in case of contempt may certify such fact to the Superior Court. 
d.  Certiorari from Decisions. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals shall have the right of certiorari to the Superior Court within 30 days after the decision of the Board. 
CHAPTER 10. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

10-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter sets forth the procedures for receiving, reviewing, and rendering decisions on applications for development, including all residential and nonresidential development and planned developments, as well as applications for rezoning, and all types of permits. This chapter also sets forth the requirements for appealing decisions and enforcement. It is the County's intent that the procedures and requirements set forth in this LDC shall be followed in order to seek approval for any development. 
10-2. - Approvals Required. 
a.  No person shall develop any property within Coffee County without first obtaining an approved subdivision plat, an approved development plan, approved improvements construction plans, and permits to perform such activities. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of a development plan or subdivision plat shall conform to the specifications of such approved plat or plan. 
b.  The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to, exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been accepted by the Board of Commissioners and properly recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Coffee County is prohibited. Any transaction to convey land effectuated in this manner shall prohibit the owner of said lot or parcel from obtaining a building permit for said property until such time as the subdivision plan and associated development documents have been properly approved pursuant to the terms of LDC. 
c.  A building permit or a sign permit in case of a sign, is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving, demolition, or alteration of any building or structure except for farm accessory buildings which are exempted. No building or sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this LDC; however, permits issued before the adoption of this LDC shall remain valid according to the requirements in place at the time of issuance. 
d.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity without first obtaining a permit from the Zoning Administrator to perform such activity. No land disturbing permit shall be issued except in conformity with the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance of Coffee County and any applicable provisions of this LDC. 
10-3. - Exceptions. 
The following situations are exempt from the requirement to obtain an approved development plan prior to the issuance of required permits: 
(1)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development; 
(2)  Accessory structures, provided applicable permits are obtained; 
(3)  Farm-related development on a bona fide farm; 
(4)  Development activity necessary to implement a valid site plan on which the start of construction took place prior to the adoption of this Code and has continued in good faith. Compliance with the development standards in this Code is not required if in conflict with the previously approved plan; 
(5)  The construction or alteration of a one- or two-family dwelling on a lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this Code. Compliance with the development standards in this Code is not required if in conflict with the previously approved plat; 
(6)  The alteration of an existing building or structure so long as no change is made to its gross floor area or its use. 
10-4. - Expiration of Approvals. 
(1)  Preliminary Plats. Preliminary approval grants the developer a maximum time of 18 months within which he shall submit his improvement plan and final plat for approval unless a time extension is granted before the expiration of the 18 month period. If such time extension is granted, it shall be for not more than 12 additional months. Failure to submit improvement plans and final plat within this time period, including extension if any, shall invalidate preliminary plat approval and require resubmission of preliminary plat. 
(2)  Improvement Plan Approvals. Improvement plan approvals are valid for 24 months. If the subdivision is sold prior to completion and final platting, a mandatory review by the DRC shall be required. 
(3)  Building Permit. Any building permit shall become void if the work involved has not begun within six months after the date of issuance of the permit or if the work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the work of development is commenced; provided that extensions of time and periods not exceeding six months each may be allowed in writing by the Administrator. 
(4)  Land Disturbing Permit. If construction described in a land-disturbing permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance of the permit, the permit shall expire. If construction described in a land disturbing permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six months after the date that work ceased. 
(5)  Extensions. The time period for which a permit is valid may be extended for up to six months where an application for such extension is filed and such extension has been granted in writing by the Zoning Administrator. 
10-5. - Requirements Regarding Developments of Regional Impact (DRI). 
The Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act, has established criteria for the identification of certain large-scale developments, which have the potential to cause land use impacts beyond the boundaries of the respective local government where a project might be proposed. These developments, known as Developments of Regional Impact (DRIs), shall be submitted, based on established DCA standards, procedures, and format, to the Southern Georgia Regional Commission (SGRC) for review and recommendation prior to issuance of any local building or development permit, or rezoning, whichever occurs first. As such, these requirements establish an official delay in the local permitting and/or review process to allow for compliance with these requirements. 
10-6. - Fees Required. 
All applications shall be accompanied by payment of application fees, as set forth in the Fee Schedule adopted by the Board of Commissioners. An application shall not be complete until all required fees are paid. 
10-7. - Withdrawal of Applications. 
An application for development may be withdrawn at any time. There shall be no refund of any applicable fees unless such refund is approved by the County Administrator. 
10-8. - Pre-Application Conference. 
a.  A pre-application conference is a meeting between an applicant and the Zoning Administrator for the purposes of: 
(1)  Exchanging information on the potential development of a site; 
(2)  Providing information on permissible uses of the site proposed for development; 
(3)  Development suitability based on the following existing road condition designation criteria. The latest edition of the Road Condition Map as approved by the Board of Commissioners is adopted by reference. 
i.  Red = Restricted development subject to changes which would make development suitable based on meeting specific road construction improvement criteria as determined by the County and all other requirements of this LDC. 
ii.  Yellow = Limited development subject to meeting specific road construction improvement criteria as determined by the County and all other requirements of this LDC. 
iii.  Green = Development subject to meeting all other requirements of this LDC. 
(4)  Providing information to an applicant regarding the design standards set forth in this LDC that are applicable to a potential application; 
(5)  Providing information to an applicant regarding standards of regional, state, or federal agencies that may be applicable to a potential application; 
(6)  Determining the need and requirements for supporting plans, documents, and studies; 
(7)  Providing information to an applicant regarding infrastructure requirements and the construction of required improvements; and 
(8)  Providing information to an applicant regarding the appropriate procedures and schedules for receiving and reviewing applications and rendering decisions regarding a potential application. 
(9)  Providing information regarding the purpose for rezoning. 
b.  Prior to the submission of an application for rezoning, a subdivision plat, site development plan, or improvement plan, an applicant shall submit a request for a pre-application conference. 
c.  A pre-application conference shall be held not more than two weeks following the date of submission of the request for such conference. 
d.  An application must be submitted within six months following the pre-application conference. 
e.  The pre-application conference shall include the members of the DRC and other agencies at discretion of the Zoning Administrator. 
f.  The Zoning Administrator and other affected County agencies will review all data submitted and advise the applicant of significant items which should be considered prior to submittal of their proposal. 
g.  It is the intent of the Board of Commissioners that all requirements be identified during the pre-application conference. However, no person may rely upon any comment concerning a proposed development, or any expression of any nature about the proposal, made by a participant at the pre-application conference, as a representation or implication that the proposal will be ultimately approved or rejected in any form. 
h.  A prospective applicant may bring members of his project team, such as, but not limited to, the project engineer, land planner, architect, surveyor, or other person who will assist in the preparation of an application. A prospective applicant may provide an informal sketch plan to aid in the discussion. However, such an informal sketch plan shall not be reviewed in any way for compliance with the standards and requirements of this LDC, and shall be used only as an aid to the conduct of the pre-application conference. 
10-9. - Submittal Requirements, Generally. 
This section applies to all development in Coffee County. There may be Additional requirements herein. 
a.  Submittal Requirements for all Applications. The following information shall be provided on an application form provided by Coffee County: 
(1)  Proof of ownership in the form of the current deed recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Coffee County. A completed application shall be signed by all owners of the property subject of the application. 
(2)  When the applicant is a representative of the property owner, a notarized statement authorizing the representative to act as an agent of the property owner with regard to the application and associated procedures. 
(3)  A property survey conducted no more than seven years prior to the filing of the application, containing boundaries and, land area. A legal description shall be provided. A determination on whether any portion of the property is within a High Susceptibility area as defined in chapter 6. Where two or more parcels are included within a proposed development, the survey shall show all parcels that are part of the proposed development, including all phases. The survey shall be prepared and sealed by a surveyor actively licensed in the State of Georgia. 
(4)  A vicinity map indicating the location of the site proposed for development. 
(5)  Payment of applicable fees. 
(6)  Proof of payment of property taxes on the subject property. 
(7)  A digital copy of all plats, site plans, and/or other drawings, except for infrastructure and utility plans, must be submitted in Adobe Acrobat (.pdf) format. 
(8)  Other information to support the application as specified in this chapter and as may be required by the Zoning Administrator. 
(9)  All drawings, including maps, concept plans, site development plans, and preliminary and final subdivision plats, shall conform to the following standards: 
i.  All drawings shall contain the dates of preparation and the dates of any revisions. 
ii.  The desired drawing size is 24 inches by 36 inches. In no case shall drawings be larger than 30 inches by 42 inches nor smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches. 
iii.  All drawings shall contain a graphic and written scale and a north arrow with a notation referencing the bearings to magnetic north, astronomical north or grid north. 
iv.  All drawings shall contain the name, address, and telephone number of the preparer(s). 
v.  Drawings for development proposed in phases shall contain all required information for the total site, for each phase, and shall depict phase lines on the drawings. 
vi.  All drawings shall contain the seal of the licensed professional preparing the drawings and computations. 
(10)  Required support data and plans. Specific plats and site plans submitted with applications shall be required to be accompanied by the required supporting data and plans as described below. 
i.  Water bodies on the site or adjacent to the site, such as, but not limited to streams and lakes, should be indicated on all plans. 
(11)  Development proposed within a groundwater recharge area protection district or river corridor protection district shall contain the following information: 
i.  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
ii.  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
iii.  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
iv.  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of any protected river corridor within one mile. 
v.  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 50 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet and no greater than one foot slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
vi.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
vii.  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(12)  All applications shall include the following information: current and proposed zoning, current and proposed use, adjacent uses, locations of public improvements and utilities, proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas, and locations of existing or proposed streets. 
(13)  Whenever a development contains a floodplain or floodway, a plan shall be provided demonstrating compliance with the requirements of chapter 34, Floods, of the Coffee County Code of Ordinances. 
10-10. - Submittal Requirements for Subdivision Plats. 
a.  Preliminary Plats. 
(1)  Title block and north arrow. The plat will show the name of the proposed subdivision, its location, the name, address and registration number of the surveyor preparing the plat and the date of the plat. A north arrow shall be included with a notation referencing the bearings to magnetic north or astronomical north. 
(2)  General layout. The plat shall show information as to the proposed street layout and widths, layout of lots with a notation as to the minimum size and width of lots and proposed open space if any. Any lands to be dedicated will be clearly identified. The plat shall be drawn to scale. Scale, total acreage of the site and total number of lots created shall be indicated. Lot and block identification and building setback lines shall also be indicated. 
(3)  Topography. The plat shall show existing and proposed contour lines in a manner that accurately depicts existing and proposed conditions. Contours shall be generated at one foot intervals for slopes between one—three percent and at two-foot intervals for slopes exceed three percent if necessary for clarity. For areas sloped at less than one percent spot elevations and/or contours at 0.5 foot interval shall be shown as necessary. All existing contour lines shall be dashed line type and all proposed contour lines shall be solid line type. All contours and spot elevations shall be based on mean seal level (MSL). Prominent drainage features such as lakes, depressions, streams, and floodplain areas which could affect the design of the subdivision shall be shown. Normal pool and top of dam elevations of existing lakes shall also be shown. 
(4)  Existing features. The plat shall show the locations of existing and platted property lines with land owner names, streets and their rights-of-way, railroads and their rights-of-way, public and private rights-of-way, sanitary sewer and size, water mains and size, bridges, culverts, storm drainage and size, easements, parks and other public open spaces, land lot and land district lines, city limits lines, and names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. Groups of trees and wetland areas shall also be indicated. 
(5)  Location map. The plat shall include a small scale map of sufficient clarity so that the location of the proposed subdivision can be readily determined. 
(6)  Water and sewer. A statement from the developer shall be submitted with the preliminary plat which will describe the method by which sanitary sewer and water facilities will be provided. 
(7)  Future tract plan. In cases where a subdivision is to be developed in stages with additional plats being filed with the governing authority at a later date, the filing of the initial plat will be accompanied by a future tract plan, a reasonably accurate plat in sketch form of the entire tract which will show the future street system and topography for the entire tract. 
(8)  Wetlands. Approximate location of wetlands boundaries shall be delineated on the preliminary plat. All preliminary plats delineating wetlands shall have on the face of said preliminary plat the note: 
"No fill or work shall be permitted within jurisdictional wetlands without a prior permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers." 
b.  Final Plats. Filing the final plat with the Administrator shall include the following: 
(1)  An application containing: 
i.  The name and address, phone number and e-mail address of the persons developing the subdivision and his agent(s), 
ii.  Zoning of the property to be subdivided, 
iii.  Whether or not the subdivision will be developed in phases, 
iv.  Plans for serving the proposed subdivision with sewer and water facilities, 
v.  A complete list of deviations, if any, from the approved preliminary plat, 
vi.  A copy of the agreement for providing the necessary water and sewer facilities, 
(2)  Sheet design. The final plat shall conform to all of the items listed under the preliminary plat and the requirements thereof, as set forth in this LDC and shall be drawn in black ink. 
(3)  The final plat shall be drawn to scale. If necessary, more than one sheet may be used as long as a key map is provided to relate each sheet to the entire platted area. 
(4)  Surveyor certificate. The following certificate shall be entered on the face of the plat. Placement of this certificate may vary as necessary: 
I certify that all measurements are correct and were prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision; the field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in ________ feet and an angular error of per ________ angle point, and was adjusted using ________ rule; the plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in ________ feet; monument and pin locations are correctly shown by the symbols _________ and the pins are_________ (type of metallic material and length). 
Signed ____________________________________ (Seal) (Date) _________________ 
Surveyor, Georgia Registration No: ____________________ 
(5)  The surveyor must certify whether or not the property is located in a special flood hazard zone and indicate the informational source and flood hazard zone of the property. If the property is located within a flood hazard zone, then the limits of the flood hazard zone must be shown. 
(6)  Proposed lots located in any flood zone shall be delineated on the plat and shall require a certificate of elevation to insure future construction meets applicable ordinances regarding the floodplain. 
(7)  Any identified wetlands must be indicated on the final plat, and proof of compliance with any U.S. Army Corp of Engineers requirements for wetlands must be submitted prior to recording of the final plat. 
(8)  Owner certificate. The following certificate shall be entered on the face of the plat. Placement of this certificate may vary as necessary: 
We, the undersigned owner(s) of the subdivision, hereby offer to dedicate and/or reserve for public use the rights-of-way, easements and other public areas as designated on this plat. 

 
(9)  Approvals. Final plats are approved by the Coffee County Board of Commissioners. The following spaces shall be provided in the form listed below for approval. Chairman of the Board of Commissioners shall sign and date in the specified location on the plat upon approval by the Commission. Placement on plat may vary: 
Approved by Coffee County Commission, Coffee County, Georgia 
Date _____________ Signed ____________________________________  Chairman 
(10)  Surveying data. The final plat shall contain the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line and boundary line whether curved or straight. A note will be made on the plat as to whether curved or straight. A note will be made on the plat as to whether curved dimensions are arc or chord distances. Easement lines (and width), land lot and land district lines will be shown. 
(11)  The final plat shall also identify each tract within the proposed subdivision by block and lot number. 
(12)  All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals to the nearest 1/100 of a foot, and all angles shall be shown to the nearest second. The error of closure shall not exceed one in 10,000, or as defined by the technical standards required by O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, of the Law Governing the Practice of Professional Engineering and Surveying, as amended. The final plat shall have a note listing the following: 
Total Acres _________ 
Total Lots  _________ 
(13)  Monuments. The final plat shall show the accurate location, material and description of all monuments. A permanent master bench mark shall be established within or adjacent to the site by transfer of levels, not less than third order accuracy, from the nearest approved bench mark of known mean sea level (M.S.L.) elevation showing its location on the final plat and recording its elevation on the final plat to the nearest 1/100 of a foot. 
(14)  Easements. In addition to the requirements for the preliminary plat the final plat shall show the location and width of all public utility easements and drainage easements where required. 
c.  See section 10-12 for submittal requirements for Infrastructure and utility plans. 
d.  See section 10-15 for procedures for approval of subdivision plats. 
10-11. - Submittal Requirements for Site Development Plans. 
a.  An optional development plan may be submitted to save the applicant time and eliminate any unnecessary financial expenditures which result from changes in site development identified after the submission of fully engineered architectural plans to the Code Enforcement. Development plans, in the form of at least a one page Site plan, may be submitted for all non-residential development. An application for site development plan approval shall contain all of the applicable information set forth in section 10-1 and may be required to contain the following additional information: 
(1)  A site development plan that demonstrates compliance with all design standards required for development in the zoning district in which the use is proposed. Such standards are set forth in chapter 4. 
b.  Where a Planned Development is proposed, a site development plan shall be provided that demonstrates compliance with the standards set forth in chapter 4, section 4-8. 
c.  When a proposed development contains one or more uses that are subject to supplemental standards, a site development plan shall be provided that demonstrates compliance with all design standards for the specified use or uses, as set forth in chapter 4. 
d.  All site development plans shall contain details for proposed Accessory uses and shall demonstrate compliance with the standards for such uses. 
e.  The following specific information shall be provided: 
(1)  Proposed density (both gross and net). 
(2)  Location of all buildings and structures, showing setback lines, building orientation, and building height. 
(3)  For mixed use projects, drawing notes shall include a table summarizing the total amount of development in each use, the percentage of the total site, net density of proposed residential development. 
(4)  The location of all utility lines, utility easements, access easements and other easements. 
10-12. - Submittal Requirements for Infrastructure and Utility Plans. 
a.  Infrastructure and Utility plans. The plans for the required public improvements shall be prepared for approval by the Zoning Administrator prior to the construction and only after approval of the preliminary plat. Such improvement plans shall show the proposed locations, sizes, types, grades and general design features of each improvement and shall be based on reliable field data. 
(1)  The improvement construction drawing shall be submitted on white background prints. The sheet size shall be a minimum 11 inches by 17 inches unless another size is approved by the Zoning Administrator. The drawing shall be include the following information: 
i.  Construction plans. The developer shall provide the plan and profile of each proposed street indicating the existing ground surface elevation and proposed street centerline grade. Design shall be in accordance with good engineering practices. 
ii.  Street-typical sections. A typical section of each proposed street shall be submitted, showing the width of the street and the width of rights-of-way. 
iii.  Water supply, sanitation systems, utility systems and storm water drainage. The plan and profile of proposed sanitation, storm drainage or other drainage systems, with grade and sizes indicated are required. Floodplain areas shall be indicated on the plan. Stormwater drainage shall be consistent with applicable ordinances of the governing authority and other applicable governmental agencies. Water and sewer systems shall be approved by the County Engineer and all relevant state agencies. 
iv.  Utility service agreement. A developer's agreement for utilities service shall be required before final improvement plan approval is granted. 
v.  As-built drawings. The designing surveyor or engineer shall submit to the Administrator two sets of white background prints of certified as-built drawings prior to recording of the final plat. 
b.  Plans for infrastructure, utilities, and other improvements shall be submitted, after an approved preliminary plat has been obtained, demonstrating compliance with the requirements of chapter 7 and other engineering and construction standards of Coffee County. 
c.  Following approval of the Preliminary Plat, the developer shall request approval of the improvement plans by the County Engineer. Said developer can begin installation of the minimum improvements, including grading, paving, installation of utilities, etc., upon approval of the improvement plans. In all cases, sedimentation control devices, retention, detention or sedimentation ponds shall be first in order of construction. 
d.  Improvements required and/or regulated by these regulations shall be constructed in accordance with approved engineering plans and specifications, the standards, requirements and regulations set forth in these regulations, and other applicable ordinances of the County. 
e.  Construction of improvements required or regulated by these regulations shall not commence until the County Engineer has approved in writing engineering plans and specifications for said improvements. 
f.  If, in the course of construction, the developer wishes to modify the size, type, quality, quantity and/or location of any or all of the improvements required or regulated by these regulations, the developer's engineer/surveyor shall submit a written change request to the County Engineer for review and written approval prior to proceeding with installation of the modified improvement. 
g.  Tests required by these regulations shall be performed solely by independent testing laboratories, the developer's engineer/surveyor or qualified personnel employed by the developer's engineer/surveyor, and shall be performed at the developer's expense. The developer's engineer/surveyor shall direct that the results of required tests be mailed or delivered to the County Engineer immediately on completion. All test results must be clearly indicated as to the project and the exact location of the sample and that no test results be withheld from the County Engineer. 
h.  Acceptance. Upon written notification of completion of Minimum Improvements, the County Engineer shall within 30 days after such notice accept or reject, in writing, the completed improvements stating the deficiencies, if any. 
(1)  The required minimum improvements shall not be accepted unless they conform to these regulations and officially adopted County specifications. 
(2)  Upon completion of construction of improvements required and/or regulated by this chapter, the developer's engineer/surveyor shall deliver all required test data not previously forwarded to the County Engineer to the County Engineer. 
(3)  The County Engineer is authorized to reject any construction which fails to conform to the approved plans and specifications and this chapter. 
(4)  The County shall bill the developer the County's cost for any subsequent inspections necessitated by the developer's failure to construct improvements in accordance with approved plans and specifications and this chapter. Said costs shall be based on a schedule of fees established as two and one-half times the inspector's hourly rate. 
10-13. - Determination of Completeness. 
a.  All applications shall be complete before acceptance for review and decision- making. A determination of completeness is a determination that all required documents and plans have been submitted in sufficient number, and that all fees have been paid. A determination of completeness is not a determination of compliance with substantive standards and criteria. The DRC shall meet within ten days of receipt of an application to evaluate the same. 
b.  The Zoning Administrator shall thereafter determine, within 15 days of receipt of an application, whether the application is complete. 
c.  If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not complete, he shall notify the applicant identifying the deficiencies. The applicant shall have 30 days from the date of notice to correct the deficiencies. Until the applicant corrects the deficiencies, no further action shall be taken for processing the application. If the applicant fails to correct the deficiencies within the 30 day period, the application shall be deemed withdrawn. 
d.  If the Administrator determines that the application is complete, the application shall be processed for review and action in accordance with the procedural requirements set forth in this chapter. 
10-14. - Submittal Requirements for Planning Commission, Board of Commissioners and Board of Appeals Action. 
For applications to be submitted to the Planning Commission, Board of Appeals, or Board of Commissioners, the Zoning Administrator shall review the application and all supporting materials and provide a report regarding compliance of the application with applicable standards and criteria. The Zoning Administrator shall provide an analysis and recommendation regarding the following: 
a.  Consistency of the application with the Comprehensive plan; 
b.  Compliance of the application with the application requirements and development standards set forth in the LDC; 
c.  For rezoning applications, an analysis and recommendation regarding the following: 
In ruling on any application for a zoning map amendment, the Planning Commission and the County Commission shall act in the best interest of the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the County. In doing so, the Planning Commission in its consideration of and recommendations concerning a petition requesting a zoning map amendment, and the County Commission in its consideration and final decision concerning a petition requesting a zoning map amendment, will consider the following factors as they may be relevant to the application: 
(1)  The existing land uses and zoning classifications of nearby property; 
(2)  The suitability of the subject property for the purposes authorized under the current zoning; 
(3)  The extent to which the proposed land use change on the subject property represents a fair balance between the rights of private property and the health, safety, and general welfare of the public; 
(4)  The relative gain to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; 
(5)  Whether the subject property has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(6)  Whether the proposed zoning will be a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(7)  Whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent and nearby property; 
(8)  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
(9)  The possible increase or overloading of public facilities including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and streets; 
(10)  The possible impact on the environment, including but not limited to, loss of natural vegetation, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality and water quality; 
(11)  Whether the proposed change will be a deterrent to the value or improvement or development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations; 
(12)  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing regulations; 
(13)  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area; 
(14)  The possible effects of the proposed change on the character of a zoning district, a particular piece of property, neighborhood, a particular area, or the community; 
(15)  The relation that the proposed change bears to the purpose of the overall zoning scheme, with due consideration given to whether or not the proposed change will help carry out the purposes of this ordinance; 
(16)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property that give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
d.  For applications to the Board of Appeals, an analysis regarding the following: 
(1)  The history of the adoption of the regulation involved with the proposed variance or proposed appeal; and 
(2)  The enforcement of the regulation involved with the proposed variance or proposed appeal. 
e.  For preliminary and final subdivision plats, see section 10-10 for a complete description of procedures. 
f.  The Zoning Administrator shall transmit a report to the applicant. The applicant shall have 30 days to correct any deficiencies noted in the report and submit revised or additional documents. Upon receipt of the materials provided by the applicant to correct any deficiencies, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a revised compliance report. 
g.  For matters subject to final approval by the Zoning Administrator, the compliance report shall be filed with the application as support for approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application by the Zoning Administrator. 
h.  For matters subject to final approval by the Board of Appeals or Board of Commissioners, a report will be forwarded together with supporting materials for review, recommendation, and final action by the designated entity. 
10-15. - Procedures for Approval of Subdivision Plats. 
a.  The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator and DRC. If the plat is disapproved, the Zoning Administrator must provide a written statement of reasons for disapproval within ten days of the time of submittal. Where a proposed subdivision includes or abuts on any part of a state highway system, a plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the Georgia Department of Transportation as required by O.C.G.A. § 32-6-151. 
b.  The preliminary plat shall then be reviewed by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall forward a recommendation to the County Commission. 
c.  The County Commission shall review the preliminary plat. Upon approval, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant to proceed with preparation of the improvement plans and final plat. 
d.  Approved preliminary plats are valid for one year only from date of approval. If final plat or construction drawings have not been submitted within this period, preliminary plat approval becomes invalid and must be resubmitted and must comply with the development standards in effect at the time of the resubmission. 
e.  The developer shall submit infrastructure and utility plans as required by section 10-12 and final plat as required by section 10-10(c) to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall have authority to reject the proposed final plat if he finds that it does not conform to the approved preliminary plat or this LDC. If the plat is rejected, the Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant with a written statement specifying all the respects in which it does not conform. After review, the Zoning Administrator shall submit the plans to the Planning Commission. 
f.  The Planning Commission shall review the infrastructure and utility plans and final plat and forward a recommendation to the County Commission. 
g.  The final plat shall be deemed filed with the County when it has been determined to be complete and has been approved by the Board of Commissioners. 
h.  The approval of a final plat shall not constitute an acceptance by the County of any street, easement or other designation for which the County would have ownership or maintenance responsibility shown upon the plat. 
i.  Upon satisfactory compliance with these regulations and after approval by the County Commission, the final plat will be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator to retain until such time that all required minimum improvements have been completed. At such time the Zoning Administrator shall forward the as-built plans with proposed dedicated roads to the County Commission for approval and acceptance of any street, easement or other designation for which the County would have ownership or maintenance responsibility shown upon the plat. Upon approval the as-built plans will be released for recording. 
j.  Acceptance of Infrastructure. Acceptance for maintenance of infrastructure by Coffee County occurs upon approval of said plat and infrastructure by the Coffee County Board of Commissioners by majority vote and recording of said vote in the official minutes. The developer retains responsibility for the maintenance and safety of the development until such acceptance. 
10-16. - Submittal Requirements for Rezoning Applications. 
a.  In addition to the application materials specified in section 10-15, applications for amendment to the Coffee County Zoning Map shall include the following: 
(1)  The area of the land proposed to be reclassified, stated in square feet if less than one acre, and in acres if one acre or more. 
(2)  The application file number, date of application, and action taken on all prior applications filed for the reclassification of the whole or part of the land proposed to be reclassified. 
(3)  A statement of intent, describing the specific nature of the request, a detailed justification for the request, and a statement demonstrating compliance of the request with the Greater Coffee Comprehensive plan. 
(4)  The community or area in which the land proposed to be reclassified is located, the street address, the Tax Map-Parcel number(s), and the location with respect to the nearby public roads in common use. 
b.  Campaign contributions. If applicant has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the applicant's application, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to any member of the governing authority, it shall be the duty of the applicant and the attorney representing the applicant to disclose the following in the application: 
(1)  The name of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution or gift was made; 
(2)  The dollar amount of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application; and 
(3)  An enumeration and description of each gift having a value of $250.00 or more made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the zoning amendment. 
(4)  In the event that no such gift or contribution were made, the application shall affirmatively so state. 
c.  A conceptual development plan may be submitted with an application for rezoning. A conceptual development plan shall demonstrate the ability of the proposed use(s) to be located on the site in compliance with the standards of this LDC. The conceptual development plan shall be of sufficient detail to bind the applicant to the features depicted on the conceptual development plan, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Project name. 
(2)  Vicinity map showing zoning districts and existing land use within 500 feet of the boundaries of the site. 
(3)  Total area in acres and square feet. 
(4)  Current and proposed zoning classification, together with a summary of the applicable development standards for the proposed zoning district. A Planned Development (PD) shall include drawing notes detailing the proposed standards for site design and development for the PD zoning district. 
(5)  Natural features, including topography at ten foot intervals, surface drainage, surface waters, flood plains, watershed areas, groundwater recharge areas, general location of wetlands, and the general location of wooded areas. 
(6)  General location of existing and proposed roads and utility rights-of-way or easements. 
(7)  Location of existing property lines within the development site, if applicable. 
(8)  General location of existing and proposed development by type of use. 
(9)  Proposed residential density and dwelling unit types, if applicable. 
(10)  General plan for the provision of utilities and infrastructure. 
(11)  A report or letter from the Board of Health indicating the ability of the site to be developed with septic systems, if no public sewer is available. 
d.  An application for rezoning to a Warehouse-Light Industrial, W-LI or Heavy Industrial, H-I, zoning district shall provide the following additional information: 
A written description of the proposed designed to inform the County, in detail, about all aspects of the proposed operation and its anticipated impact on the community. The description must also include information regarding minerals, processes (including steps to minimize adverse community impact), products, by-products, wastes and any additional information necessary for the County to fully understand the proposal. The description shall also include a listing of all federal, state and local approvals and permits, if any, that will be required by the proposed use and the status of all requests for such approvals or permits. Further, this report must address the immediate and anticipated future impacts, if any, of the proposed use on each of the following specific concerns: 
(1)  Noise; 
(2)  Odor; 
(3)  Water quality (surface and sewer); 
(4)  Smoke and particulate matter, noxious and/or hazardous fumes; 
(5)  Vibrations; 
(6)  Hazardous materials (ignitable, corrosive, explosive, toxic); 
(7)  Radiation; 
(8)  Lighting and glare; 
(9)  Fire hazards; 
(10)  Impact on local traffic and/or streets; 
(11)  Adequate provision to reduce any adverse environmental impacts of the proposed use to an acceptable level; 
(12)  Vehicular traffic and pedestrian movement on adjacent streets will not be substantially hindered or endangered; and 
(13)  Any other concerns identified by the County or applicant as pertinent to the proposed use. 
10-17. - Submittal Requirements for Amendments to the Land Development Code. 
a.  Applications for amendment of this LDC shall be made in the form of proposals for amendments of the text, standards, and other criteria. Proposals to amend the Coffee County Zoning Map shall meet the requirements set forth in section 10-16. 
b.  In addition to the application requirements set forth in section 10-16, the following information shall be provided: 
(1)  Identification of the specific provision proposed for amendment; 
(2)  The proposed modifications in a strikethrough and underline format; 
(3)  A detailed explanation of the rationale and justification for the requested amendment; and 
(4)  A detailed explanation of the potential impacts of the modification on the development of Coffee County. 
10-18. - Notice Requirements for Zoning Decisions. 
a.  Zoning Decisions. 
(1)  At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of hearing, notice shall be published within a newspaper of general circulation in the County stating the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
(2)  If the zoning decision is for the rezoning of property and the rezoning is initiated by a party other than the County, then: 
i.  The published notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and 
ii.  A sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the hearing containing the nature of the request and the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
iii.  Property owners that are adjacent to the subject property, to include those across all right-of-way, shall be notified by first class mail. The mail shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, the proposed zoning classification of the property and the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
10-19. - Procedures for Conducting Public Hearings. 
The following rules of procedure shall govern public hearings pertaining to rezoning and amendments to this LDC. 
a.  Public hearing procedure. All public hearings shall be placed on the appropriate body's agenda under a section entitled "Public Hearings". The Chair or their designee shall officially declare the public hearing open and shall announce that the written public hearing procedures and a copy of Georgia's Conflict of Interest Law are available to the attending public as a handout or are posted for public review. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing a copy of the public hearing procedures and a copy of Georgia's Conflict of Interest Law as handouts and/or postings. 
b.  Announcement of matter for consideration. 
(1)  The Zoning Administrator shall announce the matter for consideration. 
(2)  The Chair shall then call for acknowledgement of a potential conflict of interest by any members of the body. 
c.  Report of Administrator. The Zoning Administrator will then report the recommendation of the Planning Commission. 
d.  Public hearings records standards. 
(1)  The clerk shall mechanically record the proceedings of all public hearings. 
(2)  If requested by any party, verbatim transcripts of the public hearing can be prepared, but only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party, who must arrange at his expense for a certified court reporter to record and transcribe the hearing and furnish the original of the transcript to the appropriate body for its records. 
(3)  The record of the public hearing and all evidence (e.g., maps, drawings, traffic studies, etc.) submitted at the public hearing shall be noted as such and shall become a permanent part of the particular project file. 
e.  Public comments shall be heard in an orderly fashion. Comments and testimony shall be provided in the following order: 
(1)  The applicant or applicant's agent; 
(2)  Citizens speaking in favor of the proposal or request; 
(3)  Citizens speaking in opposition to the proposal or request; and 
(4)  Rebuttal. 
f.  Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. 
g.  Each person who appears shall identify himself by name and address; if the person is the applicant, he shall state whether he is the owner of the property or agent for owner. 
h.  Each applicant or other interested party who submits documents at the hearing shall identify each document. Each document submitted shall be made a part of the official record of the hearing. 
i.  Time periods for testimony. Where there are a large number of citizens wishing to testify at a given hearing, the Chair may invoke reasonable time limitations on both the proponents and opponents of a request. In such cases, these time limits shall apply to both sides of an issue equally, such minimum time period to be no less than ten minutes per side. The Chair of the body hearing the request or proposal may otherwise limit discussion. The Chair of the body hearing the request or proposal may allow additional time in the Chair's discretion. 
j.  Citizens shall address their comments to the body as a whole. Individual attacks or cross examination of members, County employees or other citizens will be ruled out of order. 
k.  The body hearing the request or proposal retains the privilege to ask any questions of the Administrator, other staff, or persons who have spoken on the matter. 
l.  After all citizen comments have been received, all further discussion of the specific application is reserved for the body hearing the request or proposal. The Chair or his/her designee shall then declare the public hearing closed and no further public comment will be entertained. 
m.  The body hearing the request or proposal may table the public hearing where additional information is necessary in order to render a decision. The continuation shall be to a specific time and date. Where an application is remanded to the Planning Commission for consideration of additional conditions, it shall be heard by the Planning Commission on their next available meeting date. 
n.  In the case of tabling of a matter, no further public comments will be entertained upon further consideration of the matter. 
o.  At the conclusion of the hearing by the body hearing the request or proposal, the Chair shall announce the decision. The Administrator or his/her designee shall notify an applicant in writing of the decision. The written notification shall be made a part of the record. 
10-20. - Procedures for Action by the Board of Commissioners. 
a.  Action by the Board of Commissioners regarding rezoning applications or amendments to LDC text shall be taken at an advertised public hearing, and shall be based on the following information: 
(1)  The supporting documentation; 
(2)  The Zoning Administrator report and recommendation; 
(3)  The recommendation of the Planning Commission; 
(4)  The protection of the public health, safety, morality, and general welfare of Coffee County against the unrestricted use of property, and any other factors relevant to balancing the above stated public interest; 
(5)  Testimony during the public hearing; and 
b.  In order to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare to Coffee County and the residents thereof against the unrestricted use of property, the following standards, and any other factors relevant to balancing the above stated public interest, shall be considered by the governing authority in making any zoning decision: The following standards for exercising zoning powers: 
(1)  The existing land uses and zoning classifications of nearby property; 
(2)  The suitability of the subject property for the purposes authorized under the current zoning; 
(3)  The extent to which the proposed land use change on the subject property represents a fair balance between the rights of private property and the health, safety, and general welfare of the public; 
(4)  The relative gain to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; 
(5)  Whether the subject property has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(6)  Whether the proposed zoning will be a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(7)  Whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent and nearby property; 
(8)  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
(9)  The possible increase or overloading of public facilities including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and streets; 
(10)  The possible impact on the environment, including but not limited to, loss of natural vegetation, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality and water quality; 
(11)  Whether the proposed change will be a deterrent to the value or improvement or development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations; 
(12)  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing regulations; 
(13)  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area; 
(14)  The possible effects of the proposed change on the character of a zoning district, a particular piece of property, neighborhood, a particular area, or the community; 
(15)  The relation that the proposed change bears to the purpose of the overall zoning scheme, with due consideration given to whether or not the proposed change will help carry out the purposes of this ordinance; 
(16)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property that give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
c.  In certain cases where it is deemed that a proposed zoning district would allow uses that are too intensive to mix compatibly with the surrounding area, the Board of Commissioners may, upon recommendation by the Zoning Administrator and the Planning Commission, or on its own initiative, apply certain conditions to a rezoning request in order to allow the proposed use while protecting the neighbors from the potential negative effects of the proposed zoning and preserving the purpose and intent of this LDC. Subsequent development and use of the property shall be subject to the conditions approved by the Board of Commissioners. 
d.  Such conditions may be adopted as deemed necessary to protect neighboring properties and to lessen any potentially adverse effects of the zoning change, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Setback requirements from any lot line; 
(2)  Specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading, or storage areas; 
(3)  Restrictions on land use activities otherwise permissible; 
(4)  Maximum building dimensions and height; 
(5)  Landscaping or planted area which shall include the location, type, and maintenance of plant materials within a designated buffer area; 
(6)  Fences, walls, earth berms, or other landscape buffer provisions or protective measures; 
(7)  Preservation of existing trees and vegetation; 
(8)  Special conditions to eliminate or reduce undesirable views, light, glare, dust, or odor; 
(9)  Hours of operation; and 
(10)  Architectural details to be compatible with existing buildings in the area. 
e.  A rezoning approved with conditions shall list in writing those conditions adopted by the Board of Commissioners and shall include a requirement for adherence to a conceptual development plan, if any, submitted to accompany the application. The applicant or any successor in title shall construct only those uses and only in such a manner as identified in writing or upon the concept plan. 
f.  A letter of credit may be required to ensure compliance with the conditions of approval. The amount of the letter of credit shall be as determined by the County. 
g.  Prior to a final vote being taken upon any application for an amendment to the Coffee County Zoning Map for which such conditions shall be imposed, such conditions shall be announced at the public hearing and made a part of the motion to approve. If the applicant finds such conditions to be unacceptable, it may, at the time, withdraw the application. Such withdrawal shall not enable the applicant to refile the same zoning map amendment for the same property until one year has elapsed from the date of withdrawal. 
h.  Any amendment, which is adopted with conditions, shall be indicated on the Coffee County Zoning Map. The property shall be indicated on the Coffee County Zoning Map with the suffix (c) to indicate that the property has been rezoned with conditions. Such conditions shall remain imposed upon the property until removed or modified by the Board of Commissioners. 
i.  Action by the Board of Commissioners regarding proposed amendments to the LDC text shall be taken at an advertised public hearing, and shall be based on the following information: 
(1)  The Zoning Administrator compliance report and recommendation; 
(2)  The recommendation of the Planning Commission; 
(3)  The application and supporting documentation. 
10-21. - Resubmittal of Denied Rezoning Applications. 
No application for a zoning change affecting the same parcel of property (under same Tax I.D. and/or under same ownership) or part thereof shall be accepted by the Zoning Administrator until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the rezoning request by the governing authority. 
10-22. - Submittal Requirements for Post Approval Amendments to PD Development Plans, Conceptual Development Plans, Development Plans, and Zoning Conditions. 
a.  Modifications to conceptual development plans, approved development plans, and zoning conditions, not under the authority of the Zoning Administrator, may include any increases to allowable uses, maximum density, maximum intensity, or decreases in any compatibility requirements attached to the zoning approval as conditions of approval. In addition, the application shall contain a statement outlining the details of the amendment requested, the situation giving rise to the need for an amendment, and accompanied by plans fully describing the nature and extent of the amendment. 
10-23. - Administrative Variance. 
The Zoning Administrator is hereby granted the power and authority to vary the Land Development Code for the County, only as provided in this section. Generally, this procedure is to provide for an efficient and effective review and approval process for certain minor aspects of development in the County. Pursuant to the following, the Zoning Administrator may review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny: 
a.  Yard Setbacks. Any yard setback variance request which does not exceed 110 percent of the code requirement (for example: where a rear yard setback is 15 feet and the variance request does not exceed 1.5 feet of relief for a reduction to a 13.5 foot setback). 
b.  Fences, Walls and Hedges. Any variance request for a fence, wall or hedge height or location, or other buffer screening matter. 
c.  Other Minor Code Variances and Minor Site Plan Amendments. Any other minor technical or land use code variance or any minor site plan revision or amendment for items including, but not limited to, signage, landscape, lighting, parking, driveways; and a change of use from one permitted use to another permitted use. 
A minor code variance or site plan revision is one in which the requested change: 
(1)  Does not increase or enlarge the density, intensity of use, foot print, or any dimension of the overall plan by more than five percent; and 
(2)  Does not increase or enlarge the exterior foot print of commercial, industrial or multi-family residential buildings (five or more units) by more than 1,000 square feet of building; or more than 1,000 square feet of additional impervious area is requested; or 
(3)  Does not increase or enlarge the foot print of single-family or small multi-family (four or fewer dwelling units) buildings by more than 360 square foot of building, or nor more than 360 square foot of additional impervious area is requested; and 
(4)  Where the scope and intent of any variance approved by the Board of Appeals, or scope and intent of any site plan previously approved by the County Commission is not violated. 
d.  County Commission Intent. By adopting this section, the County Commission intends that the Zoning Administrator shall use the provisions of this chapter of this Code as a guide. Because the nature of the variances permitted are minor, the strict adherence to the hardship requirements shall not pertain to a variance granted by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall be free to use reasonableness, as well as an awareness of community needs and aesthetics as a basis for all decisions. 
10-24. - Appeals of Administrative Actions. 
a.  Applicability. 
(1)  Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be filed by any person aggrieved by any written interpretation of the Zoning Administrator or designated administrative official, based on or made in the enforcement of the LDC. A person shall be considered aggrieved if: 
i.  Said person or said person's property was the subject of the action appealed from; or 
ii.  Said person has a substantial interest in the action appealed from that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
(2)  Such appeals shall be filed no later than 15 days after the date of written notification of the action appealed from. Notice shall be established by evidence of personal service of the adverse decision on applicant or by certified mail, return receipt. If certified mail properly addressed to applicant is returned unclaimed, the applicant shall be deemed to have received notice on the first postal service attempt to deliver the same. The time for an appeal shall begin to run on the day of notice as described above. 
An appeal shall be filed with the County and shall include the following: 
i.  A completed application form, provided by the County and accompanied by fees as established by the County Commission; 
ii.  Written documentation specifying the alleged errors in the approval, denial, interpretation, or decision of the Zoning Administrator; 
iii.  Citation of the section(s) of the LDC pertaining to the action; and 
iv.  A statement of the specific relief requested by the party appealing. 
b.  Notice of Hearings. 
(1)  The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time not to exceed 45 days of the day the appeal is transferred to the board. 
The Board of Appeals shall be a quasi-judicial board of the County and shall accordingly perform the duties and responsibilities as set out at chapter 9, section 9-6(c). At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
c.  Stay of Proceedings. 
(1)  An appeal to the Board of Appeals stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by an order of the Superior Court of Coffee County or any other Court with appropriate jurisdiction. 
d.  Action on Appeals. 
(1)  The appellant, and any public agency or private individual shall be entitled to present evidence on matters before the Board of Appeals. 
(2)  The Board of Appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator. The Board of Appeals may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to carry out the decisions of the Board of Appeals. 
e.  Appeals from the Board of Appeals. 
(1)  General. Any person who appeared before the Board of Appeals who is aggrieved by any decision of the Board, may present to the Court of Competent Jurisdiction a petition of issuance of a writ of certiorari, duly verified, setting forth that such a decision is illegal in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition may also be filed by the County Commission upon a finding that the decision of the Board is illegal. A petition for a writ of certiorari shall be filed in the manner and within the time provided by the Georgia Appellate Rules. 
10-25. - Procedures for Issuance of Permits. 
a.  Land-Disturbing Permit. 
(1)  See ES&P Control Ordinance chapter of Code of Ordinances. 
b.  Building Permit. 
(1)  A building permit or a sign permit in case of a sign, is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving, demolition, or alteration of any building or structure or sign. except for farm accessory buildings which are exempted. 
(2)  Applicant for a building permit must provide the following: 
i.  Owner of property. 
ii.  911 issued address. 
iii  Proof of paid property taxes. 
iv.  Proof of current Solid Waste Account. 
v.  Names, addresses and state license numbers of general contractor and electrical, air conditioning and plumbing contractors. 
c.  Driveway Permit. Any person seeking to construct or reconstruct any curb cut or driveway on any County maintained public road in the County shall submit a permit application to the Code Enforcement Department accompanied by a non-refundable application fee as established by the County Commission. 
(1)  Application. Any person seeking a driveway permit shall submit the original and one copy of an application to the Code Enforcement Department. The application shall include the following information: 
i.  Name and address of the owner of the property on which the driveway is proposed to be located. 
ii.  Except for one- and two-family residences, a set of detailed plans for the proposed driveway or curb cut. 
iii.  Except for one- and two-family residences, estimated cost of construction/alteration. 
iv.  Approval from Georgia Department of Transportation, if applicable. 
v.  All other information deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement Department for the reasonable review of the proposed driveway connection. 
(2)  Procedure for Review. 
i.  Within five working days after the application has been submitted, the Zoning Administrator and Road Department shall review the application and determine if it is complete. 
ii.  If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not complete, he shall notify the applicant in writing specifying the deficiencies. The applicant may resubmit the application correcting the deficiencies within 30 days of the notification without paying an additional application fee. 
iii.  Within 15 working days after the Zoning Administrator has determined that an application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application based on the standards in chapter 7 of this Code. Notification of the decision shall be made to the applicant and filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  Approval. 
i.  Following approval of an application, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a driveway permit which shall take effect on the date issued. 
(4)  Curb cuts, driveways and culverts constructed without driveway permit. 
i.  The Road Department shall notify the Zoning Administrator of the existence of any curb cut, driveway or culvert on any County maintained public road, which was constructed after July 20, 2015, without the approval of the Road Department and which the Road Department has specifically found to be detrimental or injurious to surrounding property, substantially increases traffic and/or endangers the public safety. 
ii.  Upon receipt of such notification, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the owner of the curb cut, driveway or culvert by certified mail of the finding of fact and that the curb cut, driveway or culvert must be brought into compliance with the requirements of this Code within 30 days of receipt of the notice. The notice shall specifically identify the nature of the violation. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be required. If the violation is not corrected within 30 days, the Zoning Administrator may initiate code enforcement action. 
10-25. - Enforcement and Penalties. 
a.  Enforcement. 
(1)  General Remedies. In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of these regulations, the Zoning Administrator or any adjacent or neighboring property owner or occupant who would be damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use, or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land. 
b.  Enforcement Authority. 
(1)  Upon determination by the Zoning Administrator that reasonable grounds exist to believe that there exists any violation of any provision of this LDC or the building permit, the Zoning Administrator shall be entitled to take any, all or any combination of the following actions, or to cause such actions to be taken, as the Zoning Administrator in his sole discretion shall determine to be appropriate: 
(2)  Give written notice to the applicant, owner, developer, contractor and/or other appropriate persons of the existence of such violations, the nature and extent of the violations, the actions necessary to correct the violations, and the time limit within which remedial actions must be taken; 
(3)  Suspend or revoke any or all building permits and land-disturbing permits issued; 
(4)  Issue stop work orders in connection with any or all construction, work or other activity then being conducted upon the lot pursuant to any building or construction license, permit, or any land-disturbing permit which has been issued; 
(5)  Institute proceedings to effectuate remedy of the circumstances giving rise to the violations; and 
(6)  Take such other actions as are appropriate under the circumstances in order to obtain compliance with the provisions of this LDC consistent with applicable law and available resources of the governing authority. 
c.  Stay of Enforcement. Filing of an appeal of determination of Zoning Administrator to the Board of Appeals or filing of an application for rezoning with the governing authority will automatically stay enforcement until the appeal or rezoning question is resolved. 
d.  Penalties. After the issuance of a valid citation, any person who is convicted of knowingly violating a stop work order or any other directive issued by the Zoning Administrator or fails to comply therewith, shall, be penalized by the imposition of a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per day. Each day shall be a separate violation. 
10-26. - Responsibilities for Final Action. 
Table 10-13.1 on the next page identifies the types of applications and the entity that is responsible for the final decision regarding the application. 

 
CHAPTER 11. - HARDSHIP RELIEF 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide mechanisms for obtaining relief from the provisions of this Code, where hardship would otherwise occur. This chapter addresses hardship that would be caused if nonconforming development were required to immediately come into compliance with this Code. 

11-1. - Nonconforming Lots, Structures, and Uses. 
a.  Within the zoning districts established by this LDC there may exist lots, structures, or uses of land which were lawfully established before this LDC was adopted but which do not comply with the requirements set forth in this LDC. 
b.  It is the intent of section 11-1 to allow these nonconformities to continue until they are removed or discontinued. It is further the intent of this section that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
c.  Nonconforming uses are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses in the district where the nonconforming use is located. 
d.  A legal nonconforming lot of record in any district may be used for development, provided all required setbacks can be met. 
e.  Nothing in section 11-1 shall be construed to prevent the ordinary and routine maintenance and repair of nonconforming structures or structures which contain nonconforming uses provided that: 
i.  Repairs do not exceed 20 percent of the current fair market value of the nonconforming portion of the structure during any period of 12 consecutive months; and 
f.  A structure damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its fair market value at time of destruction shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this LDC. 
g.  Fair market value, where required, shall be determined by reference to current statutory provisions pertaining to the valuation of real property for ad valorem tax purposes. 
h.  A structure that is damaged to an extent less than 50 percent of the fair market value may be restored and occupied as before the damage, provided the following standards are met: 
i.  Restoration shall be commenced within six calendar months from the date damages were incurred. 
ii.  If reconstruction is not commenced within six months, the reconstruction and use of the land or structure shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this LDC. 
i.  A structure that is damaged to an extent greater than 50 percent of the fair market value may be restored and occupied as before the damage, if all three of the following conditions are met: 
i.  The existing use or structure is destroyed by accident or act of God; and 
ii.  Neighboring land owners within a 300 feet radius support the rebuilding to prior state; and 
iii.  Such rebuilding does not pose a serious health or safety threat to the public. 
j.  A nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use that is declared by the Zoning Administrator to be physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
11-2. - Continuation of existing Nonconforming Lots, Structures, and Uses. 
a.  A lawful use of a building or land existing on July 20, 2015, may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of this Code, and such use may be extended throughout the building. If such a use is discontinued for a continuous period of not less than six months (180 days), every future use of such building or land shall be in conformance with the provisions of this Code. 
b.  For the purpose of this chapter, a use shall be deemed discontinued if all activities related to such use have ceased for a continuous period of not less than six months (180 days). The determination that a used has ceased shall be made by the Zoning Administrator, who shall consider, among other things, the consumption of utility services at the property, the existence and maintenance of any required business licenses, and advertising to the public of any activities on the property. 
c.  Such nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures shall not be enlarged, expanded, moved or otherwise altered in any manner except in conformance with this Code. 
d.  Variances lawfully authorized and granted prior to the effective date of this Code shall continue to be utilized provided the terms and conditions of that authorization are followed. 
e.  Reversions and changes. 
i.  Any nonconforming use, structure, building or nonconforming lot of record that is changed to a conforming state shall not be permitted to revert back to a nonconforming situation. 
ii.  Any nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 2002 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2002 Code, as updated through June 7, 2010, which are included herein. Sections of the 2002 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 2002 Code, as updated through June 7, 2010, which are included herein. This tables contains some ordinances which precede June 7, 2010, but which were never included in the 2002 Code, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since June 7, 2010, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within these Related Laws and this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia State Law. 

 