THE CODE OF THE CITY OF FRANKLIN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2013 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ 
Adopted February 6, 2014 
____________ 

OFFICIALS  of the  CITY OF  FRANKLIN, GEORGIA  AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Joel Rogers 
Mayor 
____________ 
Willie Almond, Jr. 
Kevin Hayes 
Alane Nelms 
Shane Manders 
Cliff Jiles 
City Council 
____________ 
David Mecklin 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kevin Hannah 
Police Chief 
____________ 
Myra Braswell 
City Clerk 
____________ 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Franklin, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1998 Code, as updated by ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and city council through the ordinance adopted July 7, 2012. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1998 Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim C. Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Shelly Hayes, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Myra Braswell, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City of Franklin readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Franklin, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Franklin, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Franklin, Georgia. 2013. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FRANKLIN HEREBY ORDAIN: 
Section 1. The publication entitled "The Code of the City of Franklin, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation in 2013, consisting of Chapters 1 through 40, each inclusive, is hereby adopted. 
Section 2. Any ordinances included in the version of the Franklin Code adopted in 1998 and not included in or recognized and continued in force by reference in the version of the Code adopted by this Ordinance are hereby repealed with the exception of the Ordinances contained in Section 3, below. 
Section 3. The following are specifically not repealed by the enactment of the Franklin Code adopted by this Ordinance: 
a) The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Franklin; 
b) The Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance; 
c)  Any other similar or related land use ordinances adopted by and placed in effect by the City of Franklin; 
d) Any grants of franchises by the City of Franklin; and 
e)  Other ordinances intentionally not included in or that have been intentionally removed from the codification of this or prior versions of the Franklin Code. 
Section 4. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 5. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or any combination thereof. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offence, and with respect to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 6. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same as part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 7. Ordinances adopted after December 31, 2013 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective upon approval of the Mayor and Council of the City of Franklin. 

 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
To provide a new Charter for the City of Franklin; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, method of filling vacancies, compensation, qualifications, prohibitions, and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for organization and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for the office of mayor and certain duties and powers relative to the office of mayor; to provide for administrative responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, a city clerk, a city treasurer, and other personnel; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof; to provide for practices and procedures; to provide for taxation and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for accounting and budgeting; to provide for purchases; to provide for the sale of property; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for eminent domain; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal a specific act; to repeal conflicting laws, and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Franklin, Georgia, as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly, 1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1022), p. 4515. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the title, enactment date, severability, repealer, transitional language, ratification date, publication date or effective date of the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. The same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text has been used as it appears in the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Franklin in Heard County is reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Franklin." References in this Charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Franklin. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk of the city and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Franklin, Georgia." Photographic typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the mayor shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
Sec. 1.12. - Municipal powers. 
(a)	This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)	The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. Said powers shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)	Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation or ordinances enacted under this paragraph; 
(3)	Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city; 
(4)	Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of building and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)	Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)	Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)	Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governments and entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)	Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)	Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)	Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefitting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)	General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)	Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)	Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation within the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)	Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)	Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)	Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)	Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)	Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)	Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)	Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers, and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21)	Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)	Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)	Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(24)	Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(25)	Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)	Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter by enacted; 
(27)	Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)	Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)	Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and the standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the public service commission; 
(30)	Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)	Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)	Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporation limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)	Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge; and to impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)	Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)	Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxing or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)	Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvement; 
(37)	Ad valorem taxes. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)	Other taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)	Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)	Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)	Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
(a)	The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. 
(b)	The mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless he shall have been a resident of this city for 12 months immediately preceding the election of mayor or councilmembers; each such person shall continue to reside within the city during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. No person's name shall be listed as a candidate on the ballot for election for either mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file a written notice with the clerk of said city that he desires his name to be placed on said ballot as a candidate either for mayor or councilmember. No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file above said notice within the time provided for [under state law]. 
Sec. 2.11. - Elections. 
(a)	At any election, all persons who are qualified under the constitution and laws of Georgia to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia and who are bona fide residents of said city shall be eligible to qualify as voters in the election. 
(b)	All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with [state law]. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations its deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under [state law]. 
(c)	The mayor and councilmembers who are in office on the effective date of this Act shall serve until the expiration of the term of office to which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)	For the purpose of electing members of the council, the City of Franklin shall consist of one election district with five numbered posts. Each person seeking election shall designate the post for which he seeks election. 
(e)	On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1988, and on such day every four years thereafter, or on such other day as may be provided by general law, there shall be elected a mayor and five councilmembers. The terms of the offices shall begin at the time of taking the oath of office as provided in section 3.11 of this Charter. 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)	(1)	The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)	Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with [under state law]. 
Sec. 2.13. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Sec. 2.14. - Election by plurality. 
The candidate receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipal home rule charter to provide for nomination or election of candidate to public office by a plurality of votes cast, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-501. 
Sec. 2.15. - Compensation and expenses. 
(a)	For the period beginning July 1, 2009, and ending December 31, 2009, the mayor shall be compensated in the amount of $500.00 per month, and each councilmember shall be compensated in the amount of $100.00 per month. Such compensation shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the general funds of the city. 
(b)	On and after January 1, 2010, the mayor and councilmembers shall not receive any compensation under subsection (a) of this section and shall receive compensation and expenses for their services, if any, as provided by ordinance and in accordance with chapter 35 of title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 2.16. - Prohibitions. 
(a)	No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)	Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of this judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(2)	Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(3)	Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others; 
(4)	Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)	Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)	Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he has a financial interest. 
(b)	Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who has any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)	No elected official, appointed officer, or employees of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)	Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)	Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective city office or other city employment during the term for which he was elected. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person holding employment on the effective date of this Act. 
Sec. 2.17. - Removal of officers. 
(a)	The mayor, a councilmember, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)	Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)	Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)	Failure at any time to possess any qualification of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)	Knowingly violating section 2.16 or any other express prohibition of this Charter; 
(5)	Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)	Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by state law. 
(b)	Removal of any officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)	By the vote of four councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Heard County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)	By an order of the Superior Court of Heard County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Franklin. 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT, GENERAL AUTHORITY, AND ORDINANCES 

Sec. 3.10. - General power and authority. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by article I of this Charter. 
Sec. 3.11. - Organization. 
(a)	The city council shall hold an organizational meeting at the first regular meeting in January following an election; provided, however, that the organizational meeting for the city council members elected in 1988 shall be the first regular meeting in February, 1989, and the mayor and council members in office at the time of adoption of this Charter shall continue in office until that date. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of the office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(b)	By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tem. During the absence or disability of the mayor for cause, the mayor pro tem, or in his absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmembers chosen by the council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. When presiding at a meeting during the absence or disability of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall not lose his or her right to vote, but shall be entitled to vote on any matter before the council. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2009(01), § 1) 
Sec. 3.12. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.13. - Meetings. 
(a)	The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)	Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)	All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
Sec. 3.14. - Procedures. 
(a)	The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(b)	All committees and committee chairmen and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 3.15. - Voting. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)	In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Sec. 3.16. - Ordinances. 
(a)	Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Franklin hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)	An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in section 3.18. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 3.17. - Effect of ordinances. 
Acts of city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.18. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or the councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance shall not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance shall also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 3.19. - Codes. 
(a)	The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)	The requirements of subsection (b) of section 3.16 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulation, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)	A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 3.20 of this Charter. 
(b)	Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 3.20. - Codification of ordinances. 
(a)	The clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)	The city shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and shall contain such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Franklin, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)	The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the code. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 3.21. - Chief executive officer; delegation of powers. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this Charter, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act. The mayor shall have the authority to delegate any one or more executive or administrative powers to a person or persons employed by the city and qualified in management and administration. 
Sec. 3.22. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)	See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)	Appoint and remove, for cause, with confirmation of appointment or removal by the council, all officers, department heads, and employees of the city except as otherwise provided in this Charter; 
(3)	Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(4)	Prepare and submit to the council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; 
(5)	Submit to the council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city and from time to time such other information as the city council may request; 
(6)	Preside over all meetings of the city council; 
(7)	Call special meetings of the city council as provided for in section 3.13; 
(8)	Participate in the discussion of all matters brought before the city council and vote on such matters only in the case of a tie vote; 
(9)	Recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient; 
(10)	Approve or disapprove ordinances as provided in section 3.23; 
(11)	Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever he deems it expedient; 
(12)	Sign as a matter of course all written contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; and 
(13)	Perform such other duties as may be required by general state law, this Charter, or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.23. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. 
(a)	Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented by the city clerk to the mayor within three days after its adoption. 
(b)	The mayor shall within ten days of receipt of an ordinance return it to the city clerk with or without his approval, or with his disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law on the 15th day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council through the city clerk a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(c)	Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city clerk to the city council at its next meeting and should the city council then or at its next general meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of the entire council, it shall become law. 
(d)	The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the council as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 4.10. - Department heads. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all non-elective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)	All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)	There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency. 
(e)	All directors under the supervision of the mayor shall be nominated by the mayor with confirmation of appointment by the city council. The mayor may suspend or remove directors under his supervision but such suspension or removal shall not be effective for ten calendar days following the mayor's giving written notice of such action and the reason therefor to the director involved and to the city council. The director involved may appeal to the city council which, after a hearing, may override the mayor's action by a vote of four councilmembers. 
Sec. 4.11. - Boards. 
(a)	The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)	All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except; where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)	The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)	Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)	Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)	No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)	Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of four members of the city council. 
(h)	Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, an ordinance of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 4.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney who shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall have actively practiced law for at least one year. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the council as directed, shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city attorney. 
Sec. 4.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this Charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 4.14. - Treasurer. 
The city council shall appoint a city treasurer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes to the city. The city treasurer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. The treasurer and city clerk may be the same person. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules and regulations. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)	The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)	The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and applications of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)	Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)	Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)	Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE V. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 5.10. - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court to be known as the municipal court of the City of Franklin. 
Sec. 5.11. - Judges. 
(a)	The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)	No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)	Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)	Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of four members of the city council. 
(e)	Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath given by the mayor, that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in section 3.14 of this Charter. 
Sec. 5.12. - Convening of court. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 5.13. - Powers. 
(a)	The municipal court shall try and punish violation of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violation as provided by law. 
(b)	The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)	The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction [according to the punishment allowed under state law]. 
(d)	The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violation. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. 
(f)	The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)	The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated. 
(h)	Each judge of the municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(i)	Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)	The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 5.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Heard County, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs or certiorari. 
Sec. 5.15. - Rules. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulation necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or into the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of theses taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation taxes and business license fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individual or corporation who transacts business in this city or who practices or offers to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if paid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by him. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.15. - Sewer fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Roads. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess, charge, and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - Borrowing. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Accounting and budgeting. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.23. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.24. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.25. - Adoption. 
(a)	The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)	The city council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the beginning of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6.23 of this Charter. 
(c)	The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.26. - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.27. - Changes in budget. 
The city council by majority vote may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes. 
Sec. 6.28. - Capital improvements. 
(a)	On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 3.17 of this Charter. 
(b)	The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the beginning of each year. No appropriations provided for a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his recommendation. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 6.29. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.30. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)	It is in writing; and 
(2)	It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 3.14 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.31. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.32. - Sale of property. 
(a)	The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)	The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)	Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Rules and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Charter language on other general matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.13. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)	Section captions in this Charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)	The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)	The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.14. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Franklin, in the County of Heard, approved June 30, 1964, (Ga. L. 1964, Ex. Sess., p. 2299), is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 7.15. - General repealer. 
All laws and part of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Franklin, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Franklin City Code" or the "city Code." 
(Code 1998, § 1-101) 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and city council. 
(1)	General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(2)	Gender, singular and plural. Every word in any code provision or ordinance importing the masculine gender shall extend to and be applied to females as well as males; and every word importing the singular number only shall extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; and every word importing the plural number only shall extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
(3)	Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future when applicable. 
(4)	Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority. 
(5)	Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision required the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
(6)	Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any code provision or ordinance or in any order issue pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when any such time is expressed in hours the whole of Sunday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
(7)	Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
(Code 1998, § 1-102) 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this Code shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified. 
Advice and consent. Whenever the term "advice and consent" of the city council is used in this Code it shall be construed to mean an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire city council. 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Franklin, Georgia. 
City council, council. The term "city council" or "the council" means the City Council of the City of Franklin, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Franklin, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases the terms "or" and "and" are interchangeable: 
(1)	"And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)	"Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	"Either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Heard County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the municipal court of the city. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the mayor and city council of the City of Franklin, Georgia. 
Judge or recorder. The term "judge" or "recorder" means the Judge of the Municipal Court. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the City of Franklin, Georgia. 
Mayor and city council. The term "mayor and city council" means the mayor and city council of the City of Franklin, Georgia. 
Misdemeanor. The term "misdemeanor" means a violation of the state criminal law punishable by a fine not in excess of $1,000.00 or confinement in a county or other jail for a term not exceeding 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Municipality. The term "municipality" shall be construed as synonymous with the term "city," "town," or "municipal corporation." 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Franklin" were added thereto. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" or "sworn." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the latest edition of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or to land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, agency, partnership, association, organization, government, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every specie of property except real property, as hereinafter defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" means anything of value, including but not limited to real estate, tangible and intangible personal property, contract rights, services, chooses in action, and other interests in or claims to wealth admission or transportation tickets captured or domestic animals, food and drink, and electric or other power. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or notice. The term "reasonable time or notice" means only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a special or temporary character. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of the pedestrians, but does not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approach thereto, within the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or to land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Week. The term "week" means seven calendar days. 
Writing or written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1998, § 1-103) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(5). 
Sec. 1-4. - Section headings. 
The underlined headings of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere captions to indicate the contents of the section or subsection and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section or subsection, nor unless so expressly provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the headings, is amended or re-enacted. 
(Code 1998, § 1-104) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section or ordinance. 
(a)	The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)	When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
(Code 1998, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amending Code. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as the Code and subsequent ordinances omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section of The Code of the City of Franklin, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used. "The Code of the City of Franklin, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or subsection chapter) ____________ to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:…." The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, chapters, or provisions sought to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, chapter, or provision number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1998, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1998, § 1-107) 
Sec. 1-8. - Penalty where no penalty provided. 
(a)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" or "violation of such provision of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)	Unless a higher penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall subject the person committing the violation to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and costs or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment, any or all of such penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the judge of the municipal court. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)	The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the city's Charter or this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 1-108) 
Sec. 1-9. - Interpretation of Code. 
In all interpretations of this Code and ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to state laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-10. - Substantive compliance with Code. 
A substantial compliance with any requirement of the Code, or ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment. 
Sec. 1-11. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or section thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Rates, charges, and fees established. 
(a)	Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the city council, and such changes shall be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)	Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the city council by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
(c)	The rates, charges, or fees established by the city council are available for public examination on a fee schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, this unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, the intention being that they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-14. - Certain ordinances not repealed or affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)	Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)	Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless superseded; 
(5)	Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures; 
(6)	Any right of franchise granted by the city to any person, firm, or corporation; 
(7)	Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, widening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)	Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)	Any appropriation ordinance; 
(10)	Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(11)	Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)	Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a board of zoning appeals or planning commission, including joint commissions; 
(13)	Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; 
(14)	Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city or annexing property to the city; 
(15)	The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(16)	Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(17)	Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(18)	Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; and 
(19)	Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)	Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-15. - Catchlines of sections; notes and references. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Code of ethics. 
(a)	Prohibited conduct. Public officials and employees of the city shall treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness, and equality under the law, and shall avoid both actual potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. Prohibited conduct of each such official and employee shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Granting or making available to any person any special consideration, treatment, advantage, or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public large; 
(2)	Requesting, using, or permitting the use of any publicly-owned or publicly-supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor, or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or any other person, except as otherwise allowed by law; 
(3)	Participating in the deliberation of or voting on any matter involving his financial or personal interest; 
(4)	Engaging in private employment with, or rendering services for, any private person who has business transactions with the city, unless he has made full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such employment or services; 
(5)	Appearing on behalf of any private persons, other than himself, before any public body in the city; 
(6)	Accepting any gift, whether in the form of money, thing, favor, loan, or promise, that would not be offered or given to him if he were not an official or employee; 
(7)	Disclosing any confidential information concerning any official or employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the city, without prior formal authorization of the governing body; 
(8)	Using or permitting the use of confidential information to advance the financial or personal interest of himself or any other person; or 
(9)	Appointing or voting for the appointment of any person related to him by blood or marriage to fill an office, position, employment, or duty, when the salary, wages, pay, or compensation is to be paid out of public funds. 
(b)	Hearings and determinations. Upon the sworn complaint of any person alleging facts which if true would constitute a violation of this section, the city council shall conduct a public hearing at which the accused shall be given an opportunity to be heard, either personally or through city council. At the conclusion of said hearing, the city council shall, in written findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, make a determination concerning the propriety of the conduct of the official or employee in question. 
(Code 1998, § 3-102) 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for public officials and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-2—2-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-24—2-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - THE MAYOR 

Sec. 2-50. - Compensation. 
The monthly compensation of the mayor shall be $750.00, plus $50.00 per called meeting attended. 
(Code 1998, § 3-308; Ord. of 5-7-2009(02), § 2(3-308)) 
Secs. 2-51—2-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - THE CITY CLERK/TREASURER 

Secs. 2-74—2-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-105—2-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMPLOYEE PERSONNEL POLICY 

Sec. 2-122. - Adoption of policy. 
The Substance Abuse Policy of the city is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as fully as if set out. A copy of said substance abuse policy is will be maintained on file for public examination in the office of the city clerk. The city shall have the power to enact and amend an employee personnel policy, from time to time, and when enacted or amended will abide by its regulations and procedures. 
Secs. 2-123—2-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 2-147. - City housing authority board. 
The mayor and council shall appoint five persons to the board. Terms of office shall be for four years and terms shall be staggered. 
(Code 1998, § 3-701) 
Sec. 2-148. - City zoning and planning commission. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint five members to the planning and zoning commission. There is no limit to each person's term. 
(Code 1998, § 3-702) 
Sec. 2-149. - County water authority. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint two persons to the county water authority. 
(Code 1998, § 3-703) 
ARTICLE VII. - RETENTION OF PUBLIC RECORDS 

Sec. 2-150. - Records retention schedule adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq., the City of Franklin has adopted the Records Retention Schedule for Local Government Records as published by the Georgia Secretary of State's Department of Archives and History, and any such amendments or updates as may be made to such Retention Schedule for Local Government Records. 
(Ord. of 4-6-2017(1), § 1) 
Sec. 2-151. - Maintenance of records. 
All City of Franklin records shall be maintained in accordance with approved retention schedules, in the most updated version of the Retention Schedule for Local Government Records. 
(Ord. of 4-6-2017(1), § 1) 
Sec. 2-152. - Coordination of records management plan. 
The City Clerk shall serve as the coordinator of the records management plan and is authorized to act for and on behalf of the city in directing and coordinating all records management matters under the Georgia Records Retention Act. In discharging the records management records destruction duties, the City Clerk shall, whether personally or by delegation, maintain all records in accordance with the Georgia Secretary of State Retention Schedules for Local Government Records adopted by the mayor and council, and shall not destroy, allow, or direct any employee to destroy, any record except as provided on the aforesaid retention schedule. 
(Ord. of 4-6-2017(1), § 1) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - License required. 
Each brewer, wholesale dealer, and retail dealer of malt beverages or wine as such terms are defined in chapters 5 and 6, title 3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-1 et seq. and 3-6-1 et seq.) who does business within this municipality shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk/treasurer in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(1); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 4-2. - Fee established. 
The annual business license fee for wine retailers, malt beverage brewers, retail dealers, and wholesale dealers whose place of business is located within the municipality, and the annual license fee for other wholesale dealers doing business in the city shall be as established by the city council, from time to time. The fee shall be reduced one-half if the license is issued during the last six months of the calendar year. 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(2); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 4-3. - Publication of notice of application for license. 
No application for a license for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages or wine within this municipality shall be acted upon by the city council until after notice shall have been run in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for at least ten days prior to the regular meeting at which such application is to be presented and considered. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant and the location of the proposed business, and shall be run at the applicant's expense. 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(3); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 4-4. - Retail licensee qualifications. 
The retail licensee must be a citizen of the United States. 
(1)	The licensee shall not have been convicted within five years of the date of his application of felony, or any violation of the laws of this state, or any other state, relating to the sale of alcoholic liquor. 
(2)	The licensee shall be the owner of the premises for which the license is held or the holder of a written lease thereon. No license shall be issued for any premises in which a portion thereof is used as a residence. 
(3)	The licensee shall be active in, and solely responsible for, the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. 
(4)	The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications according to this section and shall place same on file with the city clerk before any license is issued. 
(5)	If the application covers a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications. 
(6)	No person shall be granted a license to engage in the sale of malt beverages at retail unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city council that such person, or the officers and directors of any corporation, shall be of good moral character. 
(7)	Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the law of the state. 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(4); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 4-5. - Factors for council consideration. 
The full council, in passing upon an initial application for a malt beverage and wine license at the final meeting thereon, shall be guided by the following factors as to whether to grant or deny such application: 
(1)	The proximity of other establishments selling malt or alcoholic beverages to the proposed location; 
(2)	The character of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location; 
(3)	The proximity of churches, schools, and playgrounds to the proposed location; 
(4)	Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons; 
(5)	Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom; 
(6)	The feelings and attitudes of the citizens residing in the area adjacent to the proposed location; 
(7)	The information set forth in the application; 
(8)	Whether any malt or alcoholic beverage license previously issued for such location was ever revoked for cause by the city council; 
(9)	Whether the applicant has ever sold malt or alcoholic beverages illegally in the municipality; 
(10)	Fingerprint report. 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(5); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 4-6. - Time period for applicant to act upon grant of license. 
An applicant who is granted a license shall pay all necessary fees and meet all administrative requirements to activate such license within 45 days after the action taken by the council to grant the license. This time period may only be extended by the full council. 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(5.5); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 4-7. - Change of location or ownership. 
A license issued under the provisions of this section shall permit the sale or manufacture of malt or alcoholic beverages only on the premises described in the application. The license is not transferrable from one person to another or from one location to another without the express approval of the licensing body of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(6); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 4-8. - Sanitary conditions. 
All premises used for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages and wine shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of the city and the laws of this state. 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(7); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 4-9. - Regulations. 
(a)	No holder of a license authorizing the sale of malt beverages and wine at retail in the city nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)	Knowingly sell beer or wine to a person under the legal age for the purchase of beer or wine as established by the state; 
(2)	Knowingly sell beer or wine to any person while such person is in an intoxicated state; 
(3)	Sell beer or wine upon the licensed premises or permit beer or wine to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law; or 
(4)	Permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of peace, or any lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct or practices. 
(b)	In addition: 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, or possess for the purpose of sale, any malt beverages or wine where such person does not have a license from the city to sell or possess for sale such beverages. 
(2)	No licensee, agent or employee shall consume malt beverages or wine while operating an establishment. 
(3)	No licensee, agent or employee shall permit on the premises any disorderly conduct, or any notice or conduct which will interfere with contiguous property owners. 
(4)	No licensee, agent or employee for a premises on which malt beverages or wine may be consumed shall allow a person under the legal age for the purchase of malt beverages on the premises. 
(5)	No licensee, agent or employee for a premises on which malt beverages or wine may be consumed shall allow persons to congregate outside the building on such premises. 
(6)	Malt beverages and wine shall be received at or delivered to the premises of the retail licensee by no other means than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the state to make deliveries in said state. 
(7)	Transportation of malt beverages or wine by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of retail license or wholesale permit. 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(8); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 4-10. - Hours of sale. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, in or upon any licensed premises, any malt or alcoholic beverages for transport away from such premises except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and midnight on weekdays and Saturdays. 
(b)	Any retail licensee of malt beverages to be consumed on the premises which derives less than 50 percent of its gross sales from the sale of food to be consumed on the premises, shall be closed to the general public at all times other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and midnight on weekdays and Saturdays and 30 minutes preceding or following such hours. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at wholesale, in or upon any licensed premises, any malt or alcoholic beverages, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail, in or upon any licensed premises, any malt beverages on Sundays. 
(e)	It shall be lawful to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail, in or upon any licensed premises, any malt beverages on election days, provided that such sales of alcoholic beverages shall not be within 250 feet of a polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
(f)	It shall be lawful to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail, in or upon any licensed premises, any malt beverages on Christmas days, provided that Christmas day is not on Sunday. 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(9); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 4-11. - Furnishing malt beverages to minors and intoxicated persons; possession by minors. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, or cause to be furnished, or to permit any person in his employ to furnish malt beverages to any person who is noticeably intoxicated. 
(b)	Possession by minors. 
(1)	The term "minor," as used in this section, means any person under the age of 21 years. 
(2)	No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, attempt to purchase, or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit faked, forged or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain malt or alcoholic beverages which he is not legally entitled to purchase. 
(4)	It shall be illegal for a minor to loiter in an establishment selling alcoholic beverages at retail for consumption on the premises. 
(5)	No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(6)	No person engaged in the business regulated hereunder shall make or permit to be made any sales to minors. 
(7)	Any person found guilty by the city court of violating the provisions of this section shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8; except that any person convicted of violating subsection (b)(2) of this section shall, upon the first conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by not more than six months' imprisonment or a fine of not more than $300.00, or both and except that any person convicted of violating subsection (b)(4) of this section shall, upon the first conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature. Fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. Each day any violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
a.	Any person convicted of violating any prohibition contained in subsection (b) of this section shall, upon the second or subsequent conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature, except that any person convicted of violating subsection (b)(2) of this section shall, upon the second or subsequent conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
b.	In addition to any other penalty provided for in this subsection, the driver's license of any person convicted of attempting to purchase an alcoholic beverage in violation of subsection (b)(2) of this section upon the first conviction shall be suspended for six months and upon the second or subsequent conviction shall be suspended for one year. 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(10); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 4-12. - Terms of the license. 
A license shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city council, or any future city council, and subject to revocation with or without cause, and with or without notice or hearing. In case of revocation, the licensee shall not be entitled to a return of the unearned license fee. All such licenses shall have printed on the front these words: 
"This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled by the city, with or without cause, and with or without notice or hearing." 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(11); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
Sec. 4-13. - Grounds for revocation of license. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for immediate revocation of a license by the city council. 
(Code 1998, § 32-201(12); Ord. of 8-17-1998; Ord. of 11-4-1999; Ord. of 2-3-2000) 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 
Secs. 4-14—4-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-45. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages or wine. 
Consumption on the premises license means a license issued to a sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation allowing the licensee to engage in sales of nonpackaged malt beverages and wines to the general public for their use on the premises and within the structure occupied by the licensee. On the premises (indoors) sales of beer and wine for consumption shall include also porch areas which are defined as covered (roofed) areas surrounded entirely by banisters or other barriers, although generally open to the passage of air and light. 
Malt beverage (beer) means any fermented beverage made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverage, containing less than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. 
Premises means the definite closed or petitioned locality whether a room, shop or building, wherein malt beverages and/or wine are sold, any and all surrounding and adjacent areas, whether enclosed or not, which are owned by or under the control of the person to whom the license is issued. 
Restaurant means an establishment that is used and held out to the public as a place where meals prepared on the premises are regularly served to the public for adequate pay each day the establishment is open for business, has kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve food, and has at least 50 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises. 
Retail sale or sale means selling or offering for sale any alcoholic beverage to any member of the public. 
School or college means only such state, county, city, or other school that teaches the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state to included licensed preschool and/or kindergarten facilities and does not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subject are taught. 
Wine means any vinous liquors or other fermented fruits, fortified or unfortified, containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 1) 
Secs. 4-46—4-63. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4-64. - License required; limitations. 
(a)	Required. No person shall engage in the business of providing malt beverages and wines of any kind in the city limits without first obtaining a license under this section. 
(b)	Limitation on alcohol. The only authorized license under this section shall be for the consumption of malt beverages and wine on the premises. 
(c)	Limitation on premises. Any type of consumption on the premises licensed may be granted only to a restaurant as defined in section 4-45. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 2) 
Sec. 4-65. - Qualifications for license. 
(a)	Applicants. All applicants shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)	A licensee shall be at least 21 years of age, of good moral character, and a citizen of the United States and the state; 
(2)	A licensee shall not have been convicted within the past ten years of a felony, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, any other misdemeanor or violation of a city ordinance within the last four years, or at any time of any criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, taxes, or gambling; 
(3)	A licensee shall not have been denied or had revoked, within the five years next preceding his application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity; 
(4)	A licensee shall be the owner of the premises to be licensed or the holder of a lease thereon for substantially the same period to be covered by the license; 
(5)	Any person having two convictions for selling alcohol to a minor within a three-year period shall not be eligible for a license; 
(b)	Premises. The premises shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)	The premises shall meet the qualifications for a restaurant as defined in section 4-45; 
(2)	The main structure of a place of business for the sale of any wine or malt beverages shall not be located within 100 yards of any church building, any school building, school grounds or college campus; 
(3)	The main structure of a place of business for the sale of any wine, or malt beverages shall not be located within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government; 
(4)	The main structure of a place of business for the sale of any wine or malt beverages shall not violate any city zoning ordinances, and shall be located within a zone appropriate for the business; 
(5)	The premises shall have a well-maintained parking lot to accommodate as many patrons as are allowed inside the premises. The lot shall at all times have adequate lighting, sufficient to light up all areas of the lot. 
(c)	Prior alcohol violations. If the location, even under prior ownership, has ever received a prior citation for a violation of an alcohol ordinance, the new applicant shall be required to demonstrate how the establishment will avoid reoccurrence of the problem. It shall be grounds for the denial of a license that a new applicant has a past association with a prior license holder whose license was revoked at the same location. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 3) 
Sec. 4-66. - Application; fees. 
(a)	Application to city council. All applications for licenses to sell malt beverages and wine under this division shall be made in person by the applicant to the city clerk in writing on forms furnished by the clerk. All applications shall contain a sworn and notarized statement by each applicant of all material facts, including the following: 
(1)	The name, age, address and length of residency of the applicant; 
(2)	The name, location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license; 
(3)	Name and address of the owner of the premises (attaching a copy of the deed or lease); 
(4)	Name and address of the person who is to be considered the person in control of the conduct of the business and who will be on the premises during the time the business is open except for temporary absences for which he will designate a substitute; 
(5)	Whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has made application at any previous time for any malt beverage or wine license and the disposition of that application, stating in detail the governmental authority involved and the business entity for which the license was sought; 
(6)	Whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has ever been convicted of a crime, other than for traffic violations, or a municipal ordinance violation; 
(7)	Whether a previous license issued to the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has been revoked by any state or subdivision or by the federal government and the reason for revocation; 
(8)	The names of all persons, firms or corporations having a financial interest in profits or losses; 
(9)	Any other such information as the city council may from time to time require. 
(b)	Fees. The cost for all licenses for the sale of malt beverages and wine by the drink shall be as established by the Mayor and City Council, from time to time, and shall be paid no later than 14 days after notification of approval of the license by the appropriate City official. Each application shall also be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $200. The license shall not become active until all payments have been made. The fee shall be reduced by one-half if the license is issued during the last six months of the calendar year. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 4; Ord. of 10-2-2014(1)) 
Sec. 4-67. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)	Additional information. The applicants shall furnish all data, information, fingerprints, surveys, and records pertinent to the application requested of them in writing by the city council, and the failure to furnish any requested information within 30 days of the request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. 
(b)	Investigations. The city council may require the city police department to conduct an investigation of the applicants, and may conduct an inquiry into the tax records of the applicants. The city may require up to 60 days from the date of the application to investigate and process the application. 
(c)	Legal advertisement. No application for a malt beverage or wine license under this division shall be acted upon by the city council until after the applicant shall have run a notice of application in a local newspaper at least one time per week for three weeks preceding the regular meeting at which time the application is to be presented and considered. This notice shall contain the name of the person applying and the name of the person for which the application is submitted, if different, and the location of the proposed premises. 
(d)	Public hearing. After the advertisement has run for three weeks, a public hearing upon all applications for a license hereunder shall be held before the city council at a regular or special meeting. Licenses may be issued after the public hearing and all investigations are completed. All applicants will be approved or denied not more than 60 days after the filing of the application. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-68. - Issuance of license. 
(a)	Standards met. All applicants for a license meeting the qualifications set forth in section 4-65 and complying with the procedural requirements set forth in sections 4-66 and 4-67 shall be granted the license requested. 
(b)	Display. If issued, the license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view, to the public, at the place of business of the licensee. 
(c)	Grounds for not granting license. When contrary to the public interest and welfare, no license to sell malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises shall be issued by the city council to or for: 
(1)	Any person who has been convicted of or pled guilty under any federal, state or local law of any felony involving moral turpitude; 
(2)	Any person who has been convicted or pled guilty under any federal, state or local law of any felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately preceding the filing of the application for such license; 
(3)	Any person convicted of or having pled guilty to, under any federal, state or local law, a misdemeanor, particularly, but not limited to, those involving alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine, gambling or tax law violations, if such conviction or plea tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules, regulation or resolutions; 
(4)	A location within an area where, in the judgment of the city council, the number of malt beverages or wine licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare; 
(5)	A location at which the operation of the proposed business would be in violation of the zoning ordinance or other similar regulation of the city; 
(6)	A location at which a previous malt beverage or wine license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the city council, the problems which have arisen from the operation of a malt beverage and wine license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of malt beverages or wines be permitted at such location; 
(7)	Which the granting of such license would constitute a violation of state or local law, regulation or resolution; 
(8)	Any person who is an official of or employee of the city; 
(9)	Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation where any manager, partner, officer, or director has been convicted or pled guilty to any felony or offense involving moral turpitude; 
(10)	Any known close association between the applicant and a prior license holder at the same proposed location if the prior license holder has had the license revoked for violation of this article. 
(d)	Written denial. The city clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant of the denial, the reasonable grounds therefor, and provide the applicant an opportunity to appeal as set forth in section 4-71. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 6) 
Sec. 4-69. - Term; transfer; renewal. 
(a)	Term. The malt beverages and wine license issued shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated on the license and shall expire on December 31 of that year. 
(b)	Transfers. No city license under this section may be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another without permission and approval of the city council upon written application made. Approvals as to any change shall be at the sole discretion of the city council. Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at some other location must make a complete new application for such location. 
(c)	Renewals. 
(1)	A licensee that desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must file a renewal application for such year on or before November 15 of the preceding year. Payment of license fees for renewal shall be made at the time of application; and upon approval of renewal by the city council at a regular meeting, the license may be issued. 
(2)	All applications for a renewal of licenses for the ensuing year shall be treated as applications for new licenses, except that no advertising, investigations, or waiting period shall be required, except in the discretion of city council. 
(3)	With the application for renewal, the licensee shall furnish to the city clerk for the months of August, September and October of the then current calendar year an affidavit showing the gross sale of food products, excluding sale of malt beverages and wines, the gross sales of malt beverages and wines and the gross sale of other items. This affidavit shall be on a form furnished by the clerk, attached to this affidavit shall be a copy of the state sales and use report for the same period. These reports shall remain confidential. 
(4)	The city clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant of a denial of a renewal, the reasonable grounds therefor, and provide the applicant an opportunity to appeal as set forth in section 4-71. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 7) 
Sec. 4-70. - Revocation; suspension. 
(a)	Revocation or suspension. Licenses may be revoked or suspended for the following: 
(1)	The licensee has furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license; 
(2)	Any violation of this and/or another chapter, for any violation of state or federal law; 
(3)	The licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for licensure; 
(4)	The licensee is operating or conducting the business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance; 
(5)	The gross sales of food products in relation to malt beverage and wine sales fall below the ratio of one-to-one for three consecutive months (licensee's sales of malt beverages and wines exceed or equal the sale of food); 
(6)	The licensee is in violation of the terms of this article. 
(b)	Automatic revocation. A license issued under this article shall be automatically revoked by operation of law if: 
(1)	The licensee's state alcoholic beverage license is revoked; 
(2)	Payment of the annual license fee is not received by the city within 14 days after notification that the issuance of a license has been approved by the city manager; 
(3)	Operation of the licensed activity is not commenced within six months after the license is issued unless extended by the city manager for good cause; 
(4)	Operation of the licensed activity is commenced and then discontinued for a period of 30 days unless extended by the city manager for good cause; 
(5)	The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report and maintain any records or remit any license fee imposed or taxes required under this article; 
(6)	Payment of the annual renewal license fee is not received by the city within the time prescribed in section 4-69; 
(7)	The named licensee is convicted of a felony by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)	No refund. In case of the revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar year, the licensee shall not be entitled to receive any refund of any fees paid for the license. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 8) 
Sec. 4-71. - License appeals and hearings. 
(a)	No license shall be denied, suspended, or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. The chief of police or his designee may temporarily suspend any license for a period of up to 72 hours without hearing if the licensee is in violation of this article and the safety of the public necessitates the suspension. 
(b)	The city clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of his order to deny, suspend, or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city clerk may have a review thereof by appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the city clerk. In order to defray administrative costs, said written petition must be accompanied by a filing fee of $200.00. 
(c)	A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the city clerk, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. 
(d)	The findings of the city council shall be forwarded to the city clerk within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify the appellant of the action of the city council. 
(e)	The findings of the city council shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
(1)	Contrary to law or ordinances; or 
(2)	There is no evidence in the record to support the findings of the city council. 
(f)	The findings of the city council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 9) 
Secs. 4-72—4-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-101. - Sale without license. 
Any person who engages in the business of selling malt beverages or wine, whether by a single act or more often, in the city, without first obtaining the city license required in division 2 of this article for the calendar year in which such business is conducted; any person engaging in such business in the city after such license has expired or has been revoked; and any person violating any other provision of this article, upon conviction for each offense, shall be punished up to the maximum allowed by the city Charter. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 10) 
Sec. 4-102. - Minors; identification check. 
(a)	Minors. No licensee nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)	Knowingly sell or furnish malt beverages or wine to any person under 21 years of age; 
(2)	Permit persons under 18 years of age to serve, sell or take orders for malt beverages or wine. 
(b)	Identification check. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to examine the identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age. Identification in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person and such person's photograph; giving such person's date of birth; and including, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 11) 
Sec. 4-103. - Time of sale. 
(a)	The hours of sale of malt beverages and wines shall be Mondays through Saturdays, 11:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(b)	No licensee nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall sell malt beverages or wines upon the licensed premises on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 12) 
Sec. 4-104. - Consumption only on the premises. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsections (d) and (e) below, all alcoholic beverages sold by consumption on the premises licensees shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises. Each licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person so removes any alcoholic beverages from the premises in any type of container. 
(b)	Except for consumption on the premises licensees located within the central business district of the city (i.e., that portion of the city generally described as City of Franklin Square and surrounding areas), each consumption on the premises licensee shall post in a prominent place at each exit from the licensed premises a sign in substantially the following form: 
"It is a violation of City Ordinance to take any type alcoholic beverage from this outlet." 
Such sign shall be uniform letters not less than one inch in height. 
(c)	Except as provided in subsections (d) and (e) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have in his possession an open container of any alcoholic beverage: 
(1)	On any public street, sidewalk, park or other public place within the city, or upon or within any motor vehicle on the streets, sidewalks, parks and public places of the city; or 
(2)	While on private property, open to public view, without the express permission of the owner, agent or person in lawful possession thereof. 
(d)	However, a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensee's premises shall have the right to serve alcoholic beverages to patrons seated in an outdoor dining area as part of the operation of the premises. The licensee shall not have the right to serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is not seated at a table or in a chair provided by the licensee. In addition, alcoholic beverages shall only be transported into outdoor dining areas and/or opened in outdoor dining areas by a licensee's working employees as part of their work duties. 
(e)	Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted in certain areas during special events; number and size limited. Within the central business district of the city (i.e., that portion of the city generally described as City of Franklin Square and surrounding areas), the following regulations shall apply during special events approved by the Mayor and Council: 
(1)	The Mayor and Council may designate the days and hours of special events within the City where the provisions of this section shall apply (i.e., Fourth of July, Musical events on the Square, etc.). The city shall post signs around the Square when these Special Event Rules are in effect. 
(2)	Two drink on-street limit. Any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense alcoholic beverages in paper or plastic cups or containers other than a can, bottle, or glass, for removal from the premises; provided, however, that no establishment shall dispense to any person more than two such alcoholic beverages at a time for removal from the premises, and no person shall remove at one time more than two such alcoholic beverages from the licensed premises. 
(3)	Size limited to 16 ounces. No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in possession on the streets and sidewalks, in parks and squares, or in other public places within the defined area any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
(4)	Drinking from can, bottle, or glass prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, or glass or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private. 
(5)	During all designated special events all City Ordinances prohibiting public drunkenness will be strictly enforced. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 13; Ord. of 5-7-2015(1), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 4-105. - Additional prohibitions. 
No licensee nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)	Knowingly sell malt beverages or wines to any person while such person is in a noticeably intoxicated state or to any habitual drunk and whose intemperate habits are known to such person; 
(2)	Permit any disorderly conduct or breach of the peace on the licensed premises; 
(3)	Sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic beverages the sale or possession of which is not authorized under the license; 
(4)	Sell alcoholic beverages of any kind in any back room or side room which is not open to the general public; 
(5)	Permit smoking, inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted tobacco or other plant material product including cigarettes, cigars, and pipe tobacco or other plant material within the licensed premises; 
(6)	Offer either free or at a reduced price malt beverages or wine in conjunction with the sale of any food item or sale of any other malt beverage or wine; 
(7)	Sponsor, conduct, or allow contests or promotion which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of malt beverages or wine on the licensed remises; 
(8)	Allow any person to bring in his own alcoholic beverage of any kind (brown bag) on the licensed premises; 
(9)	Permit gambling, betting, or any games of chance on the licensed premises; 
(10)	Permit live entertainment involving any person who is unclothed or in such attire, costume, or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of buttocks, vulva or genitals within the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 14) 
Sec. 4-106. - Maintenance of property. 
(a)	The licensee/owner shall at all times maintain the premises, keeping the inside and outside of the premises clean and free from debris. 
(b)	The licensee/owner shall perform all repairs necessary for the safety and well-being of its employees and patrons. 
(c)	The licensee/owner shall ensure that, at all times, all areas of the parking lot are well-lit. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 15) 
Sec. 4-107. - Recordkeeping; inspections. 
(a)	Recordkeeping. The licensee shall maintain accurate records of total sales derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverage sold on the licensed premises and of the total sales derived from the sale of malt beverages and wine sold on the premises. 
(b)	Inspections. 
(1)	The city council or its designee at any time during the year may make special requests of any or all licensees under the terms of this division requiring them to submit either audited or unaudited records of total sales, affidavits or such other materials as may be necessary to ensure compliance by the licensee with the terms of this article. These reports may be requested for any month or series of months deemed necessary by the requesting official. 
(2)	The city council or its designee shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business for the purpose of verifying compliance with this article and state law. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 16) 
Sec. 4-108. - Conduct of others. 
(a)	The licensee shall have available in his place of business at all times a copy of this article and shall be responsible for compliance with this article by all persons on the premises. 
(b)	The licensee/owner shall be responsible for monitoring the licensed premises, as well as the parking lots and other outside areas around the establishment and shall prohibit disruptive, disorderly, and/or dangerous behavior. 
(c)	The licensee is responsible for the conduct or actions of his employees while in his employment within the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 17) 
Sec. 4-109. - Violations. 
(a)	Any licensee or any agent or employee of the licensee who violates this article shall, upon conviction for each offense, be punished by a fine and license suspension as follows: 
(1)	First offense: A fine of $500.00; 
(2)	Second offense, if occurring within 12 months of the first offense: A fine of $500.00 and suspension of the licensee's license for a period of 30 days from the date of the conviction; 
(3)	Third offense, if occurring within 24 months of the first offense: A fine of $500.00 and suspension of the licensee's license for a period of 12 months from date of the conviction; 
(4)	Fourth offense, if occurring within 36 months of first offense: A fine of $500.00 and permanent suspension of the licensee's license. 
(b)	Each day a violation occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(c)	Any person whose license is suspended pursuant to this section shall be entitled to petition the city council for a hearing pursuant to section 4-71. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2012, § 18) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance adopted Feb. 2, 2017(1), repealed Ch. 6 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 6 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-9, 6-37—6-45, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1998, § 30-101—30-103, 30-105—30-110, 30-201, 30-202, 30-205—30-209; and Ord. adopted Nov. 5, 2009, § 1. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 6-26. - Provisions incorporated by reference. 
The Responsible Dog Ownership Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. is by this reference incorporated in this section and made a part of this Code in as full and complete a manner and with like effect as though set out in full in this section. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 6-27—6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL CONTROL 

Sec. 6-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal. An animal shall be considered abandoned under the following conditions: 
(1)	Any animal placed upon public property or within a public building and left unattended or uncared for; 
(2)	Any animal placed upon private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant and left unattended or uncared for; or 
(3)	Any animal left on the property of the owner or custodian of such animal for more than 36 hours unattended and without food and water. 
Animal means any type of domestic or exotic animal or fowl including, but not limited to, dogs and cats. 
Animal control department or department means the department designated by the mayor and council as being responsible for administering and enforcing the provisions of this article. 
Animal establishment means any pet shop, kennel, grooming shop, auction, performing animal exhibition or other facility engaged in the handling of animals, excluding licensed veterinarians and veterinary clinics and hospitals. 
Animal nuisance. An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it: 
(1)	Damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property (other than the property of the owner of the animal), or public property and recreational areas; 
(2)	Causes unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions; 
(3)	Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking; 
(4)	Molests, attacks or interferes with persons on public or private property, unless the animal is a guard dog actively performing its duties while confined to the property of the owner or responsible person; 
(5)	Chases vehicles; 
(6)	Attacks other animals; or 
(7)	Runs uncontrolled. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by any governmental entity, humane society or other organization for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this article or state law. 
At large. An animal is considered at large when it is not under control as provided in this article. 
Auctions means any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this article. Individual sales of animals by owners are not auctions as defined in this article. 
Cruelty means any act, omission or neglect whereby unjustifiable pain, suffering, maiming or death may be caused or permitted to any animal as defined in this section. 
Humane manner means care of an animal including, but not limited to, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome fresh food and access to fresh, clean, wholesome water at all times, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Kennel means any premises where any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling animals. 
Owner means any person who has title to or the right to possession of an animal, including, but not limited to, the caretaker or custodian of any animal or person harboring or having control of an animal. An animal is deemed in a person's possession if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more. 
Pet shop means any person engaged in the business of buying or selling two or more species of live animals with the intent that they be kept as pets. 
Spayed or neutered means incapable of sexual reproduction. 
Tethering. An animal may be restrained using a tethering device in which the chain or tether must be attached to both the animal and the anchor using a swivel or similar devices that prevent the chain or tether from becoming entangled or twisted. The chain or tether must be attached to a well-fitted collar or harness. The chain or tether cannot be used without a well-fitting collar or harness. The chain or tether must be at least four times the body length of the animal measured from the tip of the nose to the base of its tail. 
Under control. Any animal shall be considered under control if it is confined to the premises of its owner, or is secured by a leash, chain or lead of sufficient strength to prevent it from escaping from its owner when away from the premises of the owner. 
Veterinary clinic or hospital means a clinic or hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
Vicious or dangerous animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of one or more documented, provoked or unprovoked attacks or threats of attack of such severity as to cause property damage, physical injury or significant mental trauma to the victim. Animal attacks on persons or other animals shall be documented by reporting such attacks to the county animal control office. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-52. - Purpose; scope. 
(a)	It is the intent of this article to make animal owners responsible and accountable for the actions, behavior and conditions of their animals. 
(b)	Nothing in this article shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal, state or municipal law. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-53. - Animal control. 
(a)	Generally. An animal owners' premises shall be maintained in such a manner as not to constitute either a private nuisance to adjoining property owners or a nuisance to the public generally. Pens or enclosures in which animals are confined or maintained shall at all times be kept and maintained in a proper, clean and sanitary condition so they are kept free from offensive odors which would disturb any person residing within a reasonable distance of the premises. The animals themselves shall be restrained in such a fashion that they shall not disturb such persons by making noise. An animal may be restrained by using a tethering device as defined in section 6-51 but such tethering area must also be maintained in a proper clean and sanitary condition and the tethered animal must have access to adequate food, water and shelter while on such tether. 
(b)	Livestock or fowl. It shall be unlawful for any person to have, control or possess any pasture or enclosure for livestock or fowl in any fashion not authorized by the zoning ordinance of the county. 
(c)	Restraint. 
(1)	Generally. An animal owner shall restrain his animal in such a way as to prevent the animal from having access to the property of another person, without the permission of that person. An animal may leave the property of the animal owner when accompanied by the animal owner, but the animal owner must have the animal on a leash and must prevent the animal from having access to the property of another person without the permission of that person, or from attacking, threatening or harassing other persons. 
(2)	Dogs and cats. An owner of a dog, cat, or any animal shall restrain the animal in such a manner, whether by leash, fence or other appropriate enclosure (fence, pen, etc.), which will ensure that the animal is contained within the boundaries of the property owned or leased by the owner of the animal. In all residentially zoned districts (including subdivisions and mobile home parks and/or subdivisions) dogs, cats or any other animal shall be actively restrained as provided for in this article in order to prevent their leaving the property of their owner, unless the animal is under the direct supervision and control of the owner of the animal or his designee. 
(3)	Attack prevention. An animal owner shall restrain his animal in such a manner as to prevent the animal from attacking, threatening or harassing any person on the public right-of-way of the roads, streets, highways and sidewalks in the county. 
(d)	Vicious or dangerous animals. Any owner of a vicious animal shall confine it within a building or secure enclosure and not release it unless it is securely muzzled and under restraint. Any vicious animal not secured as provided in this article is declared a nuisance and may be impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article and/or confined by the department for a period of 30 days. If an action is brought in any court of competent jurisdiction concerning the attack or attempt to attack by such animal, the period of confinement may be extended until the entry of a final order of disposition in such action. Further, in any prosecution of an owner or a responsible person of any vicious animal for any violation of this article, the court may, upon conviction entered against the owner or responsible person, order that the animal be humanely destroyed. 
(e)	Hunting dogs. Hunting dogs in the custody of persons hunting in accordance with state game and fish department laws, rules and regulations are exempt from the mandates of this section. The owners of such dogs shall be civilly liable for any damage occasioned by the actions of their dogs. 
(f)	Animals in heat. Any owner or custodian shall confine any dog or cat in heat. 
(g)	Animals at large. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any chickens, ducks, horses, cows, goats, pigs, dogs, cats or any other type of animal, livestock, or other fowl within the county to permit them to run at large or to be a menace or nuisance to that person's neighbors or the public in general. In regard to poultry and/or fowl as referenced in this subsection, same shall be confined in an enclosure, housing or pen of some sort to the extent possible. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-54. - Impoundment. 
Any animal at large or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this article may be impounded in the animal shelter in a humane manner, for a period of not less than three days, in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	If within that time an animal so impounded has not been reclaimed by its owner in accordance with the provisions of this article, the animal shall become the absolute property of the department, which may convey ownership of the animal to any responsible person or any conditions that the department may prescribe, or the department may humanely destroy the animal. 
(2)	An animal control officer may follow an animal that has been seen by that officer running at large onto private property to capture and impound the animal. No injunction, action or claim for damages may be brought against the department or its officers, agents or employees with respect to actions contemplated in this section. 
(3)	The department shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of any animal impounded in the animal shelter that the animal has been impounded, the manner by which the animal may be reclaimed, and that the animal shall become the property of the department as provided in this section. 
(4)	Following the impoundment of an animal found at large which has on its owner's address, and prior to its destruction the department shall use reasonable care to give the owner five days' notice of the proposed destruction. 
(5)	Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the department may refuse to release any animal impounded in the animal shelter for rabies, contagious disease quarantine or for use as evidence in a criminal prosecution for any time period as the department may determine. 
(6)	Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the department may humanely destroy any animal impounded in the animal shelter when the department reasonably believes that destruction of the animal is necessary to prevent disease, injury or overcrowding in the animal shelter, or to prevent the presence or threatened presence of contagious disease, the likelihood of danger or injury to humans or animals or any other condition. 
(7)	Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the department may humanely destroy any animal impounded in the animal shelter when the animal control department reasonably believes the animal has sustained an injury or disease which will likely result in maiming, prolonged and/or severe suffering or death. 
(8)	The department may set all appropriate fees pertaining to the care and impoundment of animals. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-55. - Rabies. 
(a)	Any person who knows that an animal, domestic or wild, is rabid or suspects an animal of having rabies, or knows that an animal has been bitten by a rabid animal, shall promptly report the information, to the extent known, to the state department of human resources and the department. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the owner, the health department, physicians, hospitals or any other person or agency gaining information that any domestic animal has been bitten or is probably infected with rabies, to impound the animal in the facility of a competent veterinarian within this county, where the animal shall be held for observation for any period of time as may be reasonably necessary to determine whether or not the animal is infected with rabies. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-56. - Adoption. 
The department may convey ownership (permit adoption) of any animal which has become the property of the department to a responsible person subject to conditions prescribed by the department, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Payment of an adoption fee to be set by the department and any vaccination, licensing or veterinary costs; 
(2)	Evidence that the animal has been, or will be, examined by a veterinarian and vaccinations against rabies and other disease administered; and 
(3)	Evidence that the animal has been, or will be, neutered or spayed. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-57. - Cruelty to animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either by act or omission, to: 
(1)	Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill needlessly, carry or confine in a vehicle in an inhumane manner, or otherwise mistreat, any animal; 
(2)	Fail to provide any animal with proper food and veterinary care; 
(3)	Fail to provide any animal with access to shelter to protect it from all types of weather, 24 hours daily; 
(4)	Fail to provide any animal access to good and wholesome fresh water at all times; 
(5)	Intentionally poison any animal; 
(6)	Allow or promote any fight between animals, or to allow or permit any fight in or upon any premises in that person's possession or under that person's control; 
(7)	Allow an animal to be kept in unsanitary conditions; or 
(8)	Knowingly or willingly permit or aid in the release of any animal on any property with the intention of abandoning the animal. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-58. - Vaccination. 
(a)	All animal owners within the city shall have their animals over three months of age, including both dogs and cats, inoculated for the prevention of rabies. 
(b)	The department may adopt any other rabies control regulations as it deems necessary for the protection of public health and safety. 
(c)	All regulations of the state department of human resources presently existing or as adopted in the future pertaining to rabies control and vaccination are incorporated in this article by reference as though fully set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-59. - Animal establishments. 
(a)	Permits. 
(1)	Required. No person shall operate an animal establishment without first obtaining a permit from the department, nor may any person operate an animal establishment in a manner in violation of any provision of this article. 
(2)	Term. The license period shall begin with the first day of the calendar year and shall run for one year. Renewal application for permits shall be made 30 days prior to and up to 60 days after January 1 of each year. Application for a permit for a new establishment under the provisions of this article shall be made within 60 days of the start of business or operation. 
(3)	Separate permit required. Every facility regulated by this article shall be considered a separate enterprise, requiring an individual permit (e.g., two kennels at different locations but owned by the same person shall be considered as two animal establishments). 
(4)	Display. Permits obtained in accordance with this article shall be displayed in a prominent location on the premises of the animal establishment. 
(b)	Application procedure. 
(1)	Each animal establishment shall file an annual permit application with the department within the time periods provided by this article. 
(2)	The permit application shall be made on a form provided by and available from the department. 
(3)	Upon receipt of a completed application, the department shall make an inspection of the facility to ensure that all animals are provided for in a humane manner and that the establishment is in compliance with all provisions of this article. The department shall be permitted to make the inspection at any reasonable time during normal business hours. A $40.00 nonrefundable inspection fee shall be paid directly to the department prior to the inspection. 
(4)	The department shall either issue or decline to issue a permit to the applicant. If a permit is not granted, it shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for denial. 
(5)	Any animal establishment denied a permit may not reapply for a period of at least ten days. Each reapplication shall describe any previous denial or revocation. A nonrefundable fee of $10.00 shall be paid to the department for reinspection prior to each reinspection. 
(6)	If an applicant is shown to have withheld or falsified any material information on any application, the department may refuse to issue or is entitled to revoke any permit. 
(c)	Revocation of permits. 
(1)	The department may revoke any permit if the person holding the permit refuses or fails to comply with this article, or any other law or regulation governing the protection and keeping of animals, including refusal to allow inspection of the animal establishment as provided in this section. 
(2)	Whenever a permit is revoked for cause, or pending any proceedings to contest such action, the department shall have power of entry to inspect all premises where the animals are being kept and shall notify the owner in writing as to the period of time that reasonably shall be allowed for removal of animals from the premises and shall state the specific reasons for revocation. If any owner shall fail to remove the animals as directed, the department may impound the animals pursuant to the impoundment provisions of this article. 
(d)	Prohibited conduct. Any animal establishment shall not sell, trade or give away any animal over three months of age unless the animal has been vaccinated as required by this article. 
(e)	Inspection. The animal control department shall be permitted to inspect any animal establishment and all animals and the premises where the animals are kept at any reasonable time during normal business hours to ensure compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(f)	Standards. 
(1)	All animal establishments shall, in addition to the other requirements of this article, comply with the minimum standards of this subsection. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a permit. Standards for animal establishments are as follows: 
a.	Enclosures must be provided which shall allow adequate protection against weather extremes. Floors of buildings, runs and walls shall be of an impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfection. 
b.	Building temperatures shall be maintained at a comfortable level to ensure adequate ventilation. 
c.	Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down and turn around without touching the sides or top of cages. 
d.	Cages are to be of a material and construction that permit cleaning and sanitizing. 
e.	Cage floors shall be of concrete, unless radiantly heated, and shall have a resting board or some type of bedding. 
f.	Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the weather. Runs shall have an impervious surface. 
g.	All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry and in a sanitary condition. 
h.	The food shall be free from contamination, and shall be wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal. 
i.	All animals shall have fresh water available at all times. 
(2)	All pet shops, including pet shops operated in conjunction with another holding facility, shall, in addition to the other requirements of this article, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of a permit or revocation of a permit. Standards for pet shops are as follows: 
a.	Hot water at a minimum temperature of 160 degrees shall be available for washing and disinfection. Cold water shall be easily accessible in all parts of the shop. Fresh water for consumption shall be available to all species of animals at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. 
b.	The room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a level that is healthy for every species of animal kept in the shop. 
c.	All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will have room to stand, turn and stretch out to the animal's full length. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-60. - Interference with duties of department; right of entry onto property and into vehicles; equipment. 
(a)	No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the department or any other officer in the performance of its duty or seek to release any animal in the custody of the department, except as provided in this section. 
(b)	The animal control officers, police and other enforcement officers of the city are authorized to enter upon any premises or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animal found therein or thereon to be in violation of this article, including, but not limited to, an animal that has bitten a person within ten days. 
(c)	The department may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle between the dates of May 1 and September 13. The operator of the vehicle will be charged with cruelty to animals as defined in this article. No injunction or claim for damages may be placed against the department or its officers for this action. 
(d)	The animal department is authorized to employ any equipment it deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, humane wire box traps; and the department may, subject to conditions it may determine, lend such traps or other equipment to private persons for the purpose of preventing nuisances resulting from animals at large. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-61. - Disposal of dead animals. 
Any dead animal shall be properly disposed of by its owner, either by proper burial or by taking said animal to any place authorized by law to dispose of same within 24 hours after the discovery of the animal by its owner. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-62. - Enforcement; jurisdiction; summons. 
(a)	The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the department, the police department and the codes enforcement office. 
(b)	Persons in violation of this article shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the municipal court of the city. 
(c)	Representatives of the department and officers of the police department are authorized to issue a summons to any person for violation of any provision of this article. The summons shall be in a form approved by the municipal court, shall designate the offense charged and shall require the person so charged to appear before the municipal court on a date certain to answer all charges therein. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-63. - Records. 
It shall be the duty of the department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into its custody. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 6-64. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code, and/or perform public service work not to exceed 100 hours (work to be performed at the animal shelter), or any combination thereof. If such violation is continued each day's violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(1)) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDING REGULATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION CODES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department refers to the state department of community affairs. 
Sec. 8-2. - References to officials in adopted technical codes. 
Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this chapter, then that designated official of the city, who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code, shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
Sec. 8-3. - State minimum standard codes. 
(a)	The following technical and building codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are adopted by reference and incorporated into this Code as if set out fully herein, including the administration and appendix chapters: 
(1)	International Building Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007. 
(2)	International Residential Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. 
(3)	International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2008. 
(4)	International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. 
(5)	International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. 
(6)	International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. 
(7)	National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2006. 
(8)	International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments 2008. 
(9)	International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition, as amended. 
(10)	International Existing Building Code, 2006 Edition. 
(11)	CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, Appendix G, as the Standard Swimming Pool Code. 
(12)	Standard Amusement Device Code. 
(13)	Excavation and Grading Code. 
(14)	Standard Swimming Pool Code. 
(b)	If any of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section are adopted as a state minimum code pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the edition adopted by the state shall control. If any of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section are less stringent than the state minimum codes promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the state minimum code shall control. 
(c)	A copy of each of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section, as adopted by the state, is filed in the office of the city clerk and available for review by the public. The same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 36-101) 
Sec. 8-4. - Statewide application. 
(a)	The city shall enforce those state minimum standard codes which have statewide application. 
(b)	The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, erection, installation, alteration, demolition, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of buildings or structures, plumbing, mechanical, gas, and electrical systems within the city. Any and all requirements of this chapter shall expressly include any and all technical codes as amended by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 36-102) 
Sec. 8-5. - Enforcement of codes. 
(a)	The city or its designee shall have the power: 
(1)	To adopt by ordinance or resolution any reasonable provisions for the enforcement of the state minimum standard codes, including procedural requirements, provisions for hearings, provisions for appeals from decisions of local inspectors, and any other provisions or procedures necessary to the proper administration and enforcement of the requirements of the state minimum standard codes; 
(2)	To provide for inspection of buildings or similar structures to ensure compliance with the state minimum standard codes; 
(3)	To employ inspectors, including chief and deputy inspectors, and any other personnel necessary for the property enforcement of such codes and to provide for the authority, functions, and duties of such inspectors; 
(4)	To require permits and to fix charges therefor; 
(5)	To contract with other municipalities or counties adopting any state minimum standard code to administer such codes and to provide inspection and enforcement personnel and services necessary to ensure compliance with the codes; and 
(6)	To contract with any other county or municipality whereby the parties agree that the inspectors of each contracting party may have jurisdiction to enforce the state minimum standard codes within the boundaries of the other contracting party. 
(b)	No local inspector shall require any person performing work in compliance with a state minimum standard code or variations thereto which are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter to comply with the standards of any other building code not covered by this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 36-106) 
Secs. 8-6—8-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HIGH-EFFICIENCY PLUMBING FIXTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 8-29. - Definitions. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(b)	The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3 (high-efficiency plumbing fixtures), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 
(Code 1998, § 38-101) 
Sec. 8-30. - Residential building construction. 
(a)	No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state minimum plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 8-32. 
(b)	The standards are as follows: 
(1)	A water closet or toilet that: 
a.	Is a dual flush water closet that meets the following standards: 
1.	The average flush volume of two reduced flushes and one full flush may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
2.	The toilet meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the following standards, as applicable: 
(i)	American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2-2008; 
(ii)	American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.14-2006 six-liter water closets equipped with a dual flushing device; and 
3.	Is listed to the WaterSense™ Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; or 
b.	Is a single flush water closet, including gravity, pressure assisted, and electro-hydraulic tank types, that meets the following standards: 
1.	The average flush volume may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
2.	The toilet must meet the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.192/CSA B45.1 or A112.19.14; and 
3.	The toilet must be listed to the WaterSense™ Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; 
(2)	A shower head that allows a flow of no more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)	A urinal and associated flush valve that: 
a.	Uses no more than 0.5 gallons of water per flush; 
b.	Meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2/CSA B45.1; 
c.	For flushing urinals, meets all WaterSense™ specifications for flushing urinals; and 
d.	Where non-water urinals are employed, complies with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.3/CSA B45.4 or American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.19/CSA B45.4. Non-water urinals shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions after installation. Where non-water urinals are installed they shall have a water distribution line roughed-in to the urinal location at a minimum height of 56 inches (1,422 millimeters) to allow for the installation of an approved backflow prevention device in the event of a retrofit. Such water distribution lines shall be installed with shut-off valves located as close as possible to the distributing main to prevent the creation of dead ends. Where non-water urinals are installed, a minimum of one water supplied fixture rated at a minimum of one water supply fixture unit shall be installed upstream on the same drain line to facilitate drain line flow and rinsing; 
(4)	A lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 1.5 gallons of water per minute at a pressure of 60 pounds per square inch in accordance with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.18.1/CSA B.125.1 and listed to the WaterSense™ High-Efficiency Lavatory Faucet Specification; and 
(5)	A kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute. 
(Code 1998, § 38-102) 
Sec. 8-31. - Commercial building construction. 
There shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of section 8-30. 
(Code 1998, § 38-103) 
Sec. 8-32. - Exemptions. 
(a)	New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 8-30 and 8-31 when: 
(1)	The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)	When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this chapter were installed; 
(3)	Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)	Units to be installed are: 
a.	Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.	Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.	Specifically designed as toilets for juveniles. 
(b)	The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee as determined by the mayor and council shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Code 1998, § 38-105) 
Sec. 8-33. - Enforcement; penalty. 
This chapter shall be enforced by the office of the city building inspector. Citations for violations may be issued by the city building inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 38-106) 
Chapter 10 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; city as trustee of cemetery funds, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Management and supervision. 
The responsibility for the management, operation, maintenance, and general supervision of all municipal cemeteries shall be vested in the mayor and council. 
(Code 1998, § 24-101) 
Sec. 10-2. - Superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(a)	Appointment. The mayor and council may appoint a superintendent of municipal cemeteries, which officer shall be subject to removal at any time by the mayor and council. 
(b)	Duties. The superintendent of municipal cemeteries shall have the following duties: 
(1)	To look after and take proper care of all municipal cemeteries and see that no lot in any cemetery is used or occupied in violation of this chapter or of any rule or regulation promulgated by the mayor and city council; 
(2)	To keep full and detailed accounts of the receipts and expenditures on account of the municipal cemeteries, and at least one time per month turn over to the city clerk/treasurer all monies collected on such accounts; and 
(3)	To see to the digging of graves and to the proper entering of the dead when called upon to do so. 
(Code 1998, § 24-102) 
Sec. 10-3. - Purchase and conveyance of lots. 
(a)	Records of ownership. The city clerk shall keep records of the ownership of all lot easements in the municipal cemeteries, of the burial capacity of each lot, of the location of each grave, of the names and ages of the persons buried in each grave that has been or shall hereafter be used, and of the date of burial of each. 
(b)	Sale or transfer by owner. Owners of lots shall not be permitted to sell or transfer lots without the written consent and approval of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1998, § 24-103) 
Sec. 10-4. - Rules for interment. 
No deceased person shall be interred in any municipal cemetery until the superintendent of municipal cemeteries has found: 
(1)	The lot in which burial is to be made has been fully paid for; 
(2)	The person arranging for such burial has the right to the use of such lot; 
(3)	Such lot is not used beyond its capacity; and 
(4)	Proper record is made of the name and age of the deceased person and of the exact location of the grave. 
(Code 1998, § 24-104) 
Sec. 10-5. - Restrictions on use. 
(a)	Enclosures. No curbing, fencing, or enclosure of any sort shall be erected on, in, or around any burial lot in the cemetery, but the city reserves the right to erect curbing along the walks and driveways if it so desires. 
(b)	Stones and monuments. Owners of cemetery lot easements shall have the right to erect proper stones or monuments marking the burial site, except that no slab shall be set other than in a horizontal position and flush with the ground. 
(1)	Headstones shall not exceed two feet in height above the ground and 18 inches in width and shall be set in a solid concrete foundation. 
(2)	Monuments of cut stone or marble shall not exceed ten feet in height and the erection of same must be authorized and supervised by the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(c)	Mausoleums. Mausoleums may be placed on the burial lots designated on the plat of a municipal cemetery as "memorial lots," by the holders thereof, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	Before erecting any mausoleum, the holder of such lot shall furnish complete plans and specifications to the city clerk/treasurer, for submission to the mayor and council, together with an application for permission to construct; and no mausoleum shall be erected until such application is approved. 
(2)	A mausoleum shall be situated from the front line of the lot on which it is placed at a distance not less than the depth of the structure itself, and from all other sides of the lot at a distance equal to the greatest height of the structure. 
(3)	No bodies shall be placed in any such mausoleum except in sealed caskets and in hermetically sealed compartments. 
(Code 1998, § 24-105) 
Sec. 10-6. - Regulations in general. 
(a)	Trees and shrubs. No tree or shrub shall be planted, removed, cut down, or destroyed within the borders of any burial lot, walkway, or lawn space, without the consent of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(b)	Injury to monuments. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface, or in any manner injure any monument, enclosure, mausoleum, or ornament thereof within any municipal cemetery. 
(c)	Discharging firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any gun, pistol, or other firearm within any municipal cemetery except at a funeral ceremony. 
(d)	Depositing offensive matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any part of any cemetery or any land adjoining it any dead carcass or any putrid or offensive matter whatsoever. 
(e)	Disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself in a boisterous or disorderly manner within the perimeter of any municipal cemetery. 
(f)	Entering cemeteries at night. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any municipal cemetery or walk upon or across any such cemetery between sunset and sunrise without the written consent of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(g)	Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to post any advertisement or sign, or to solicit any work in a municipal cemetery. 
(h)	Unauthorized interments. It shall be unlawful for any person to inter any dead body in any part of a municipal cemetery without the express authorization of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(i)	Disinterment. Disinterments shall be made only when authorized by the mayor and city council and the county board of health. 
(Code 1998, § 24-106) 
Sec. 10-7. - Authority of the city to regulate. 
(a)	The mayor and city council reserve to themselves and their successors in office the right to alter, amend, modify or add to the rules, regulations, conditions, and restrictions herein set forth at any time it is deemed advisable so to do in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)	There shall be no liability whatsoever, either tort or contractual, on the part of the city, or its officials or officers (or their successors in office), or its agents or employees, to any purchasers of any cemetery lots, or to any person holding under them, or to the family or relatives of any person buried in the cemetery, or to any person of the family of such person who has erected any monument, marker, or mausoleum therein, by reason of any acts, thing or things, omission, negligence, or otherwise relating to the cemetery. In accepting any conveyance of any burial lot, each purchaser agrees that all heirs and assigns shall hold such lot subject to all amendments hereto made by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1998, § 24-107) 
Sec. 10-8. - Forfeiture and reclamation of abandoned cemetery lots. 
Any lot in a cemetery owned by a municipality which has not been used for the interment of human remains and for which no provision for perpetual care has been made and the present owner is unknown and a period of at least 75 years has passed since any portion of the lot has been used for interment purposes, may be reclaimed by the owner of the cemetery, the governing authority or other officials having a contract over the cemetery. The method of forfeiture and reclamation shall be performed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-5-211. 
(Code 1998, § 24-108) 
Sec. 10-9. - Authority of municipalities to preserve abandoned cemeteries. 
Municipalities are authorized to preserve and protect any abandoned cemetery or any burial ground which the municipality determines has been abandoned or is not being maintained, to expend public money in connection therewith, and to exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire any interest in land necessary for that purpose. 
(Code 1998, § 24-109) 
Chapter 12 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; statewide application of International Fire Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a). 

Sec. 12-1. - State minimum fire safety standards. 
The state minimum fire safety standards shall have statewide effect and shall not require adoption by the city. The state minimum fire safety standards, as adopted in the rules and regulations promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner pursuant to chapter 2 of title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.), as said rules and regulations now exist, and as they shall be lawfully amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out by the city. Future amendments to and changes in said standards as reflected in future amendments to or changes in said rules and regulations are hereby adopted and shall become effective in the city upon promulgation without the necessity of further action on the part of the city. The city is authorized to enforce these standards on all buildings and structures except one-family and two-family dwellings and those structures listed in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13. 
(Code 1998, § 10-101) 
Sec. 12-2. - References to officials in adopted technical codes. 
Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this chapter, then that designated official of the city, who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code, shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
Chapter 14 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule power to exercise authority regarding stormwater systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined herein, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city clerk's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 14-7. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. The term "critical facilities" includes: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, minining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before July 17, 1986, the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 6, 1986, the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. The term "freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after July 17, 1986, the effective date of the initial FIRM, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after March 6, 1986, the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance from which this chapter is derived adopted by the community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after March 6, 1986, the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The term "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)	The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be: 
a.	The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
b.	In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
The term "substantial improvement" includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
(2)	For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(3)	The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include: 
a.	Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
b.	Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 6) 
Sec. 14-2. - Authorization. 
Article IX, § II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a)) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 14-3. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 14-4. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 14-5. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health; 
(2)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)	To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 14-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 14-7. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
Application. This section shall apply to all areas within the unincorporated area of the Franklin, Georgia. 
Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified on the Franklin, Georgia, map as identified by FEMA, and in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated April 19, 2017, Flood Insurance Study Number 13149CV000B, and Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Community 130106, Panel Numbers 13149C0161D, 13149C0162D, 13149C0163D, dated 19 April, 2017, along with all supporting technical data, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 2, § B; Ord. of 4-6-2017(2)) 
Sec. 14-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 14-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 14-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 14-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 14-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 14-13. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than five days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 14-14—14-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 14-45. - Designation of chapter administrator. 
The city clerk is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 14-46. - Permit procedures. 
(a)	Application, specific information required. Application for a development permit shall be made to the city clerk on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage. 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 14-69(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(b)	Work undertaken prior to certification. Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
(c)	Review of certification data. The city clerk shall review the referenced certification data in subsection (a) of this section submitted. 
(d)	Discovery of deficiencies; failure to submit certification or make required corrections. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 14-47. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city clerk shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Review proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-7, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 14-46. 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 14-46. 
(7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 14-46(a)(1)c and 14-69(4) or 14-72(2). 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 14-48—14-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 14-68. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.	So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 14-69. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-68(4), pertaining to elevated buildings. All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions set forth herein, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth herein and in section 14-47(7). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved: 
1.	On individual lots or parcels; 
2.	In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.	In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.	On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood; 
must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Reference section 14-48(6).) 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.	Meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a and c of this section. 
(4)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-7 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 14-70. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
(a)	Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-7, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-7, then the city clerk shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. 
(2)	Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions in subsections (a)(2)a and b of this section shall apply: 
a.	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-68(4) pertaining to elevated buildings. All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
(b)	The city clerk shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 14-71. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-7, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 14-69. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 14-72. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-7 may include designated "AO," shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	a.	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-68(4), pertaining to elevated buildings. 
b.	The city clerk shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions set forth herein, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth herein and as required in section 14-46. 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 14-73. - Standards for subdivisions. 
The following are the standards for subdivisions: 
(1)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 14-74. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 4, § G) 
Secs. 14-75—14-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 14-92. - Procedural standards. 
(a)	The planning and zoning board, as established by the mayor and city council, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city clerk in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning board may appeal such decision to the county superior court, as provided in section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1). 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the planning and zoning board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)	Conditions for variances shall be the following: 
(1)	A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.	A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)	The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The city clerk shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)	Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsection (h) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the planning and zoning board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2010, art. 5) 
Chapter 16 - LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Applications. 
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or law of this municipality shall submit an application for such license to the city clerk/treasurer, which application shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(1)	Form of application. Each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city clerk/treasurer. 
(2)	Contents of application. Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.	Name and home address of the applicant if an individual, or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
b.	Place where the proposed business is to be located; 
c.	Kind of business to be conducted; 
d.	Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership; 
e.	Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation; 
f.	Complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer, or director of the applicant for violation of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, state, or federal government; and 
g.	Such additional information which the city clerk/treasurer or city council may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter. 
(3)	Verification. Each application shall be sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer if a corporation. 
a.	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6, the city shall not issue a business license to any person engaged in a profession of business required to be licensed by the state under title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. tit. 43). The person requesting a business license from the city must provide the city with evidence of licensure by the state. No business license may be issued by the city without such proof. 
b.	Professions and businesses required to be licensed by the state are as follows: 
Accountants 
Architects 
Athletic trainer 
Athlete agents 
Auctioneers 
Barbers 
Charitable solicitors 
Chiropractors 
Contractors, air conditioned 
Contractors, low voltage 
Contractors, utility 
Cosmetologists 
Counselors, professional 
Dentists 
Dental hygienists 
Dietitians 
Dietetic counselors 
Driver training instructors 
Driver training schools operators 
Electrical contractors 
Embalmers 
Engineers, professional 
Firearms dealers 
Funeral directors 
Geologists 
Hotel, inns and roadhouse operators 
Junk dealers 
Landscape architects 
Land surveyors 
Librarians 
Manicurist 
Merchant, transient 
Motor vehicle racetrack operators 
Nurses 
Nursing home administrators 
Occupational therapists 
Opticians, dispensing 
Optometrists 
Pest control, persons engaged in structural 
Physical therapists 
Physicians 
Physician assistants 
Plumbers 
Podiatrists 
Polygraph examiners 
Private detective and private security business operators 
Psychologists 
Real estate appraisers 
Real estate brokers and salespersons 
Recreation administrators, leaders, 
Specialists and technicians 
Respiratory care 
Sanitarians, registered professional 
Scrap metal processors 
Social workers 
Speech language pathologists and audiologists 
Therapists, marriage and family 
Used car dealers 
Used motor vehicle parts dealers, dismantlers and rebuilders and salvage dealers 
Veterinarians and veterinary technicians 
Water and wastewater treatment plant, operators and laboratory analysts 
(4)	Payment of fee. Each application shall be accompanied by the amount of the fee chargeable for such license, such amount to be prorated by quarters to the end of the fiscal year. 
a.	Issuance of receipts. The city clerk/treasurer shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a license, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application, nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
b.	Rebate of fee. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk/treasurer shall refund such fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city. 
(5)	Confidentiality of information. All information furnished or secured under the authority of this chapter shall be kept in strict confidence by the city clerk/treasurer, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)	False statements. False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of such license. 
(Code 1998, § 32-101) 
Sec. 16-2. - Procedures for issuance. 
(a)	Issuance of license. Upon completion of the application, the city clerk/treasurer shall issue a business license to the applicant therefor, which license shall state the nature of the business authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city clerk/treasurer. The request for a beer/wine license is covered in chapter 4, alcoholic beverages. 
(b)	Limitation on issuance. No license shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	Council discretion. The mayor shall sign approval of the business license at his discretion and if he deems it necessary, will forward the request to the city council for their approval. If the license is disapproved, the city clerk/treasurer will follow procedures to revoke the issued license. The granting of a business license under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a privilege only, and nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in such business. 
(Code 1998, § 32-102) 
Sec. 16-3. - Display of license. 
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city to keep his license posted in a conspicuous place on the premises used for such business at all times. 
(Code 1998, § 32-103) 
Sec. 16-4. - Inspections. 
(a)	Search of premises. Whenever inspections are a reasonable precedent to the licensing of a business or to the detection of violations of public peace, order, or morality that would normally be cause to revoke a license for any period of time, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto, for the purpose of making the inspection, any officer or employee of the city who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested. 
(b)	Testing of material. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is a reasonable precedent to the licensing of a business or to the detection of violations of the public welfare that would normally be cause to revoke a license for any period of time, it shall be the duty of the licensee of the municipality whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the city requesting the same, sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis. 
(c)	Refusal to allow inspection. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the mayor may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of a licensed business in the city who refuses to permit any officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection, or take an adequate sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection; provided, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the city, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample. 
(Code 1998, § 32-104) 
Sec. 16-5. - Termination and renewal of licenses. 
(a)	All annual licenses shall terminate on December 31 when no provision to the contrary is made. 
(b)	Each licensee shall renew the license by paying the license fee to the city clerk/treasurer by January 1 of each calendar year. The license will be considered past due February 1 of each year. If ownership of the business or any other pertinent information is needed, the business shall give the information to the city clerk/treasurer at this time. 
(Code 1998, § 32-105) 
Sec. 16-6. - Revocation, suspension, etc. 
After affording the licensee notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, the city council may, if it finds this chapter to have been violated by the licensee, his agent, or employee, revoke such license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the city council may deem necessary. 
(Code 1998, § 32-106) 
Sec. 16-7. - Change of location. 
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed business or occupation may be changed, provided ten days notice thereof is given to the city clerk/treasurer, and provided that all building and zoning requirements are complied with. 
(Code 1998, § 32-107) 
Sec. 16-8. - Transfer of licenses. 
All licenses shall be personal to the licensee to whom issued; but, in cases where the ownership is changed and both the name and location of the licensed business or occupation are maintained, the mayor and city council may allow the license to be transferred. 
(Code 1998, § 32-108) 
Sec. 16-9. - Duplicate licenses. 
A duplicate license shall be issued by the city clerk/treasurer to replace a previously issued license which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing of a sworn affidavit attesting to such fact and the payment of a fee to the city clerk/treasurer. The amount of the fee shall be as established by the city council, from time to time. 
(Code 1998, § 32-109) 
Sec. 16-10. - Branch offices. 
For the purpose of this chapter, each branch establishment or location wherein a representative of the owner is employed and is authorized to transact business for such owner shall be deemed a separate place of business, for which a separate license shall be required; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch offices. 
(Code 1998, § 32-110) 
Sec. 16-11. - Joint license. 
A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses for which a license is required. 
(Code 1998, § 32-111) 
Sec. 16-12. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall conduct a business or occupation without having obtained a license therefor as required by this chapter, or who shall violate any other provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 32-112) 
Secs. 16-13—16-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESSES REGULATED 

Sec. 16-43. - Life insurance. 
(a)	Life insurers license fees. There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each life insurer doing business within the city, in an amount as established by the city council, from time to time. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 16-44, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in an amount as established by the city council, from time to time. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1). 
(b)	License fee for life insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of a life insurer for life insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee per location for each year that they are in business. 
(c)	Life insurance agency license fees; independent life insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 16-44, in an amount as established by the city council, from time to time, for each such location within the city. 
(Code 1998, § 32-202) 
State Law reference— General assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c); powers of municipal corporations to impose license fees on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 16-44. - Construction contractors. 
(a)	Plumbers. No master, contracting, or journeyman plumber, as such terms are defined in chapter 14, title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, shall be permitted to engage in any plumbing business in this municipality, unless such person shall hold a valid license issued to him by the state division of master plumbers and journeyman plumbers. Any person desiring a license to engage in such profession shall be required to pass an examination pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-14-8. Municipalities are not prohibited from fixing, charging, assessing, or collecting any license fee, registration fee, tax, or gross receipt tax on any such profession. 
(b)	Electrical contractors. No electrical contractor, as such term is defined in chapter 14, title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, shall be permitted to engage in any electrical contracting business in this municipality unless such person shall hold a valid license issued to him by the state division of electrical contractors and passed an examination pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-14-8. 
(c)	Conditioned air contractors. No conditioned air contractor, as such term is defined in chapter 14, title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, shall be permitted to engage in any conditioned air contracting business in this municipality unless such person shall hold a valid license issued to him by the state division of conditioned air contractors and passed an examination pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-14-8. 
(d)	Low-voltage contractor. No low-voltage contractor, as such term is defined in chapter 14, title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, shall be permitted to engage in any low-voltage contracting in this municipality unless such person shall hold a valid license issued to him by the state division of low-voltage contractors and passed an examination pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-14-8. 
(Code 1998, § 32-203) 
State Law reference— Electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors, and utility contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 16-45. - Peddling, soliciting, canvassing, and temporary merchants. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable organization means any person, group or organization which complies with Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 19B8, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. 
Educational institution means an entity organized and operated exclusively for educational purposes and which either maintains a regular faculty and curriculum and has a regularly enrolled body of students in attendance at the place where its educational activities are regularly carried on, or is accredited by a nationally recognized, independent higher education accreditation body. 
Peddler shall mean any person who engages in the business of selling any goods, wares, merchandise or services or who solicits orders for such goods, wares, merchandise or services by going from house to house or place to place and who does not have a permanent place of business. 
Religious organization means an entity which conducts regular worship services or is qualified as a religious organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, that is not required to file IRS Form 990, Return of Organization Exempt From Income Tax, under any circumstances. 
Roadside stand whenever used in this section, means any trailer, tent, motor vehicle, or other facility or structure, not erected on a foundation that is erected and operated for the sale or solicitation of any merchandise. No roadside stand may be used as a food establishment as defined in O.C.G.A. § 26-2-370. 
Soliciting as it applies to this section, shall mean any action which compels or attempts to compel another to purchase, donate or otherwise do business with the person doing the soliciting. 
Temporary merchant is a person who sells produce, goods and merchandise for profit, from a stationary location or from a pushcart, bicycle cart, tent, motorized cart or any other motor vehicle or trailer, that is temporary in nature (six months or less in one location), and is not operated by or as an accessory use to the primary use existing on the premises. 
Vendor means a roadside vendor or any person who sells, gives away through barter, offers to sell, or solicits to sell any fruit, vegetables, nuts, berries, citrus, cut flowers or any other similar item. 
(b)	Registration required. Any person 18 years of age or older who is peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the city, shall be required to register and obtain an identification card as provided by this article. 
(c)	Registration; fee; application for identification card. Any person 18 years of age or older desiring to sell, peddle, solicit or canvass within the city shall make application with the city through its designated agent and pay a nonrefundable registration fee of $25.00. The application shall provide the following information: 
(1)	Name and description of applicant; 
(2)	Address, both legal and local; 
(3)	A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4)	The name and address of the applicant's employer, if other than the applicant, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship between the applicant and the employer (i.e. date of hire, position applicant holds); 
(5)	If a vehicle is used, a description of the vehicle and tag number, as well as a copy of the driver's license of the designated driver; 
(6)	Information on any convictions or pending cases of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore; 
(7)	The date(s) and time(s) which the applicant proposes to sell, peddle, solicit or canvass within the city; and 
(8)	Anticipated location of selling, peddling or solicitation. 
(d)	Investigation of applicants; consideration of approval. Eligibility of an applicant is contingent upon an investigation which reveals the applicant's history is free from convictions, charges or accusations of a nature which, in the judgment of a reasonable person, could jeopardize the safety and property of the citizens and of the city in general. Such convictions, charges and accusations include, but are not limited to: 
(1)	Felonies; 
(2)	Misdemeanors of a high and aggravated nature; 
(3)	Misdemeanors which would constitute moral turpitude. 
After proper inquiry and investigation, the police department shall determine whether the applicant is eligible to be permitted. Each eligible applicant shall be issued a registration certificate. If, after proper inquiry and investigation, the police department shall determine that the applicant is not eligible, the police department shall deny the application and file the application, investigation documentation and written recommendation to deny the applicant at the police department where it will be maintained for two years; and, notify the applicant by personal service or by first-class mail to the address shown on the application. It shall be conclusively presumed that notice by first-class mail was received by the applicant and the failure of the applicant to receive such notice shall not invalidate the action taken. 
(e)	Exhibition of registration/identification card. Each registrant under this article shall at all times while in the city visibly display the registration and shall exhibit the same when requested to do so by any law enforcement officer or by any municipal authority and by any person being solicited. Possession of this registration card shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any product or project by the city. No registration card shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. 
(f)	Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, peddle, canvass or solicit after sundown. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, peddle, canvass or solicit without having registered with the police department in accordance with this article or to sell, peddle, solicit or canvass without having on his person and in his possession the registration issued in accordance with this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or deface any permit or registration issued under this article. Violation of this section shall result in citation and punishment as set forth in the general provisions chapter of this Code. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, peddle, canvass or solicit who is under the age of 18 years of age. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or peddle food items prepared on site or which are otherwise prepared outside of a state-licensed facility, except for the following conditions: 
City-sponsored or approved festivals (for city-sponsored or approved festivals or special events the vendor must obtain permission from the city or its designee to set up a booth and must pay the vendor fee for the event); 
Charitable fundraisers on private property provided the property owner has given written consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, peddle, canvass or solicit on public property or within the right-of-way in the city limits including, but not limited to: 
State Route 27. 
State Route 34. 
State Route 100. 
It shall be unlawful for any vendor or itinerant vendor to operate within or upon, and sell, solicit, or barter, transact or solicit business without complying with the following requirements; 
(1)	Possession of a valid permit, issued by the police department. This requirement shall not apply to those persons excepted by subsection (g) below; 
(2)	Must be located on privately owned real property within the commercial, industrial, or highway frontage zoning districts, and with the written permission of the owner of the property; 
(3)	Must comply with all other ordinances of the city specifically including sign ordinances and parking requirements; 
(4)	Must be located at least thirty-five feet back from the paved edge of any roadway, and, if operated on a corner lot, shall not be operated within a sight distance triangle area formed by the street, property lines, and a line connecting them at points at least 35 feet from the intersection of the street lines maintaining at least 35 feet from any intersection. The measurement of 35 feet shall start at the edge of the roadway, inward; 
(5)	There shall be a maximum of one vendor per business location; 
(6)	There shall be a maximum of five vendors permits issued per day within the city. 
(g)	Exceptions. The fee set forth in subsection (c) above shall not apply to: 
(1)	Solicitations, sales or distributions made by educational, civic, religious or charitable organizations which have their principal place of activity in the city or which are otherwise approved by the mayor and council; 
(2)	Persons selling, distributing or soliciting orders for farm and garden produce as raised or prepared by the vendor or members of his family, and homegrown so far as the sale of such commodities is authorized by law; 
(3)	Persons selling, distributing or soliciting orders for local or area newspapers. 
All persons and organizations as described in subsections (1), (2), and (3) above shall comply with all other requirements of this section. 
(h)	Standards and guidelines for granting or denying approval. In addition to all other requirements stated in this chapter, the city shall consider the following standards and guidelines in reaching its decision on whether to grant or deny an application to peddle, solicit, canvass, or sell as a temporary merchant: 
(1)	The report of the police investigation as required by this chapter, and any other reports that may be required; 
(2)	The number of approvals already granted for similar entities within the city limits and in the trading area of the location for which an approval is sought; 
(3)	The criminal record, general good character and reputation of the applicant and/or the affiliated organization; 
(4)	Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom; 
(5)	The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location, that is, whether the neighborhood is predominantly residential, industrial or business; 
(6)	Whether the applicant has satisfied all requirements pertaining to the application process; 
(7)	Consideration of the health, safety, location, parking and welfare of the citizens and preservation of surrounding neighborhoods, with reference to such factors as noise, traffic and loitering; 
(8)	Consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the participants to the selling, peddling, soliciting and canvassing, including, but not limited to, age of participants, level of adult supervision, likelihood of subjection of participants to life threatening occurrences; and 
(9)	The history or reputation of the location for criminal activity, including, but not limited to, prostitution or other sex offenses, crimes of violence, gambling, and illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs. 
(i)	Temporary merchants. A temporary merchant shall comply with the following rules: 
(1)	Display of products must be located outside of the road right-of-way, and all structures shall be located in accordance with the setback requirements based on the zoning district and classification of the property on which the activity is taking place. 
(2)	May only be located on property where controlled vehicular access and adequate parking located outside of the road right-of-way is provided. 
(3)	Meet criteria established by the standard building code for construction for any temporary structure on the premises, other than a tent. A building permit will be required for such structures. 
(4)	Provide to the city a copy of a written agreement of the land owner permitting use of the property by the roadside vendor, accompanied by a plat of the property being used, if the temporary merchant is not the owner of the property on which the activity is taking place. 
(5)	Comply with all City Code requirements, including site plan review and building plan review, upon erection of any structure requiring electrical service, temporary or permanent. 
(6)	Comply with all requirements of this chapter relating to signs. The signs of temporary merchants will be treated as temporary signs for special events and shall meet the requirements set forth in the city's sign ordinance. The temporary sign may be maintained for a maximum period of six months. 
A temporary merchant must obtain a permit from the city, and pay the occupation tax or registration fee prior to engaging in any selling or display activities set forth in this section. 
If the temporary merchant does not construct a building or structure in compliance with the city building codes, then any tent, stand, or other temporary structure must be removed from the site at dusk during each day of operation. 
Any temporary stand or tent must be maintained in a neat and orderly manner free of loose debris and trash. Proper trash receptacles should be provided and maintained. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2017(1), Exh. A) 
Editor's note— Ordinance adopted Feb. 2, 2017(1), Exh. A, repealed § 16-45 in its entirety and enacted a new § 16-45 to read as set out herein. Former § 16-45 pertained to peddlers and itinerant merchants and derived from Ordinance adopted Nov. 5, 2015. 
Sec. 16-46. - Parades. 
(a)	Registration and permit. Any person who wishes to organize, form, or conduct a parade as defined herein shall be required to register such parade with the police chief at least 24 hours in advance of the event and to obtain a permit therefor. 
(b)	Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term "parade" means any march, ceremony, demonstration, exhibition, or procession of any kind upon any public street of the city. 
(c)	Application. Application for a permit to conduct a parade shall be made to the police chief in writing, shall be signed by the person responsible for the conduct of the parade, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The time proposed for the parade; 
(2)	The route of the proposed parade; 
(3)	The number of vehicles (if any) and number of persons whose participation is anticipated in the proposed parade; 
(4)	The name and address of the person or organization sponsoring or promoting the proposed parade; and 
(5)	The name and address of the person making the application for a parade permit. 
(d)	Review of application. The police chief shall forward the application to the mayor, who shall review the information set forth in the application and ascertain the following: the extent of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to be anticipated at the time and place of and on the route of the proposed parade; the availability of police forces to escort the proposed parade and to direct traffic in conjunction with the proposed parade; and whether or not, in the light of all the circumstances, the proposed parade will unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public. 
(e)	Disposition. In the event the mayor determines in view of all the circumstances that the proposed parade will unreasonably burden and interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, he shall deny the request for a parade permit; and if he determines on the contrary that the proposed parade will not unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, he shall grant the parade permit. In either case, the mayor shall indicate his disposition on the application and shall notify the applicant of the action taken. 
(f)	Exemption. The provisions of this section shall be inapplicable to any parade which is conducted under the supervision of a practicing mortician in conjunction with any funeral. 
(Code 1998, § 32-206) 
Sec. 16-47. - Billiard and pool rooms. 
(a)	License required. Each person keeping, operating, or maintaining a billiard table, pool table, or any other table of like character within the corporate limits of the city for use by the public must obtain a license from the city clerk/treasurer in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)	Sale or use of intoxicating liquors. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or allowed to be used in or on the premises of billiard rooms or any place operated in connection therewith, except if such premises or establishment is an establishment which is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages and derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages; provided, however, that if alcoholic beverages are sold by the drink for consumption on the premises of a billiard room, the governing authority of a local government may prohibit the sale, serving, or use of alcoholic beverages therein unless the establishment derives at least 75 percent of its revenue from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages; and no local government may prohibit billiard rooms or the playing of billiards in any business which neither sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises nor engages in package sales of such beverages nor allows alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises. 
(c)	Fee established. The annual business license fee for each operator of a billiard or pool room in the city shall be as established by the city council, from time to time. 
(d)	Hours of operation. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of any billiard or pool room in the city to permit such establishment to be open for business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. or between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 6:00 a.m. on Monday. 
(e)	Minors. It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of or control of any pool room or billiard room open to the public to admit into such room any minor, whether for the purpose of playing billiards or pool or not. 
(f)	Clear view of premises required. The owner, operator, or manager of any billiard or pool room in the city shall not permit to be used on such premises any screens, shades, partitions, or other devices of like character which shall have the effect of obstructing the view through the windows or doors of the place where the billiard or pool tables are kept. 
(g)	Doors. The doors of all billiard or pool rooms licensed under this section shall be kept unlocked whenever the tables are in use, or when any person other than the proprietor or his agent is present in such place. 
(h)	Gambling. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of any billiard or pool room open for public use to allow gambling of any kind to occur upon such premises. 
(i)	Exemption. The provisions of this section shall not apply to billiard tables or rooms operated by private industrial concerns, Young Men's Christian Associations, religious orders, charitable institutions, state, county, or city institutions, fraternal orders, or bona fide clubs using such tables for members or employees only. 
(j)	Penalty. Every person, firm, or corporation operating a billiard room within a municipality without having applied for a license pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq., shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to the general penalties as described in section 1-8. Each day that the billiard room is operated without a license shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 32-207) 
State Law reference— Local governments power to license, regulate, and tax billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 
Sec. 16-48. - Establishment selling food. 
(a)	Necessary permits. Prior to opening or operating a food service establishment one must obtain the following valid permits: 
(1)	Certificate of zoning compliance for the proposed location; 
(2)	Valid food service permit from the county board of health; 
(3)	Certificate from the fire marshal indicating an acceptable inspection of the premises. Each year upon renewal of the business license the licensee shall provide proof of a current food service permit from the county board of health. 
(b)	Failure to obtain any of the required permits will result in the refusal to license a food service establishment and loss of any of the required permits or certificates will result in the revocation of a city business license. Violation of any of the permits may be enforced by the city as a city ordinance violation. 
(c)	Grease traps. All restaurants and any other establishment selling food within the city limits shall hereinafter be required to install grease traps in accordance with the specifications set forth by the mayor and council or by the county board of health. Failure to comply with this regulation shall be grounds for revocation of the establishment's business license. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2014(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— Ordinance adopted Oct. 2, 2014(3), §§ 1, 2, repealed § 16-48 in its entirety and enacted a new § 16-48 to read as set out herein. Former § 16-48 pertained to establishments selling food and derived from the Code of 1998, § 32-208. 
Secs. 16-49—16-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-75. - License term; fees, renewal procedure. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the applicant for a license under this article shall make application for license issuance and renewal, and shall pay license fees, in the same manner as that provided for business licenses generally under the City Code. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-76. - Penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-77. - Suspension and revocation. 
Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked, in the discretion of the city council, for material misrepresentations in the application therefor, for suspension or revocation of the licensee's state master license, and for any violation of this Code or state law. The procedure for suspension or revocation and appeal therefrom shall be as provided in sections 16-201 through 16-208. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 16-78—16-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 16-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Coin-operated amusement device. 
(1)	The term "coin-operated amusement device," as used in this division, means any amusement machine or device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token, or similar object, for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. 
(2)	The term "coin-operated amusement device" does not include vending machines in which are not incorporated gaming or amusement features, nor does the term include any coin-operated mechanical musical devices. 
(3)	The term "coin-operated amusement device" does not include commercial establishments only featuring an array of large mechanical or electronic games, such as pinball machines or video games, that charge players money before each game and which are primarily aimed at doing business for minors. 
Operator, as used in this chapter, means any person who sets up for operation by another or leases or distributes for the purpose of operation by another, any device as defined in this section, whether such setting up for operation, leasing or distributing is for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such device, or otherwise. 
Proprietor means any person or club who, as the owner, lessee, or proprietor, has under his or its control any establishment, place or premises in or at which such device is placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-102. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the business of an operator or proprietor of a coin-operated amusement device, as the term is defined in section 16-101, without first obtaining the proper license therefor. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-103. - Operator's fee. 
The license fee for each operator shall be $250.00 per year for the first 50 devices set up for operation, or leased or distributed to any proprietor. If more than 50 devices are set up for operation, or leased or distributed by the same operator, then such operator shall take out another operator's license at the fee of $100.00 for each additional 25 devices, or fraction thereof in excess of the first 50. All operator's license fees shall be payable annually in advance, provided that where an application is made after the expiration of any portion of any license year, a license may be issued for the remainder thereof upon the payment of a proportionate part of the annual fee. In no case shall any portion of the license fee be refunded to the licensee. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-104. - Proprietor's fee. 
The license fee for each proprietor as defined in section 16-101 shall be $50.00 per year for each device used or played, or exhibited for use or play. All proprietors' license fees shall be payable annually in advance, provided that where an application is made after the expiration of any portion of any license year, a license may be issued for the remainder thereof upon the payment of a proportionate part of the annual fee. In no case shall any portion of the license fee be repaid to the licensee. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-105. - Application; contents; fee. 
(a)	Application for a license under this article shall be filed in writing with the city clerk, on a form to be provided by the city, and shall specify: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses. 
(2)	The address of the premises where the licensed devices are to be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such place. 
(3)	That the applicant is of good character and has never been convicted of a felony. 
(4)	The trade name and general description of the devices to be licensed, the name of the manufacturer and the serial number and, if the applicant is a proprietor, the number of devices to be licensed. 
(5)	The name and address of the operator of the devices, if other than the proprietor. 
(b)	The proper license fee shall accompany such application for a license under this article. It shall be referred by the city clerk to the mayor and council who shall make or cause to be made such investigation as they deem necessary. If the application is approved by the mayor and council, the license shall be issued by the clerk. If the license is denied the fee shall be returned to the applicant. All licenses under this article shall expire on December 31 following their issuance. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee. Such license shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and, in the case of a proprietor, shall apply only to the premises for which such license is issued. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-106. - Increasing number of devices. 
In case a proprietor licensed under the provisions of this article desires, after the expiration of any portion of any license year, to increase the number of devices to be used or played, or exhibited for use or play in his establishment, he shall surrender his license to the city clerk who shall issue a new license showing the number of devices licensed thereunder, upon the payment of the proper license fee therefor. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-107. - Regulations on amusement devices. 
(a)	No coin-operated amusement device therein shall be operated so as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)	It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to maintain order on the licensed premises at all times. 
(c)	It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to see that the licensed premises do not become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of persons therein. 
(d)	Every premises licensed under this article shall have affixed within the building in plain view evidence of the issuance of its license, however, it is not required that the license be affixed to each machine. 
(f)	The license required and described in this article shall be purely a personal privilege and shall not constitute property. It is not transferable in any manner. 
(g)	Any violation of the Criminal Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. Title 26), or of any ordinance, may result in revocation of a license issued under this article. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-108. - Gambling prohibited. 
The owner, operator or manager of any establishment with coin-operated amusement devices shall not allow gambling of any kind to occur upon such premises. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 16-109—16-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AMUSEMENT PARKS, CARNIVALS, AND OTHER EXHIBITIONS 

Sec. 16-126. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement park or carnival means an establishment or area offering amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduct of games of skill, goods-dispensing facilities, and sideshows. 
Public exhibition means and includes circuses, menageries, sideshows, and other similar itinerant amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-127. - Prohibited use. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct or operate an amusement park, circus, carnival, or public exhibition, as such terms are defined herein, without having first obtained a license from the city clerk in the same manner as provided in chapter 16, article I, including paying the applicable license fee. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-128. - Conditions precedent to issuance of license. 
No license under this section shall be issued until the following conditions have been met: 
(1)	The operator and sponsor of the amusement park, circus, carnival, or public exhibition have each assumed full responsibility for maintaining order and for keeping the site clean and free of trash, papers, and other debris, and have placed trash containers in adequate number and in convenient locations for the use of the public. 
(2)	All rides have been inspected for mechanical, structural, electrical, and other hazards by the appropriate officers and employees of the state, and adequate safeguards have been placed to protect both operators and the general public from inadvertently coming into contact with moving parts, belts, motor gears, electrical switches, and other possible or potential hazards. A copy of the proof of inspection and any required state license must be attached to the application. 
(3)	The applicant has placed on file with the city clerk a certificate or certificates of insurance indicating that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damages arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in connection with such carnival or exhibition. Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 for each person, and $300,000.00 for each accident. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-129. - Inspections. 
The chief of police and the fire chief shall see that proper inspections and patrols are made of the premises used for the activities licensed herein. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-130. - Applicability of state law. 
Any person who shall operate an amusement park, circus, carnival, or other public exhibition in the city shall at all times be in full compliance with applicable state licensing and regulatory provisions. Any violation of state law shall be grounds for denial of issuance or suspension or revocation of any license issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 16-131—16-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
Subdivision I. - Generally 

Sec. 16-151. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of adverse secondary effects frequently engendered by such businesses including criminal activities will be curtailed; provided, however, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition because the court has determined that adult entertainment is a protected form of expression. Otherwise a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests-reduced criminal activity and the preservation of the quality of urban life through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-152. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a quasi-criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operation, conduction or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-153. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means: 
(1)	Any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business; and 
(2)	Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons regularly expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(3)	Any other business or establishment which regularly offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is licensed or invited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in video tapes or movies or other reproductions, for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
City clerk means the person designated from time to time by the city council to administer the provisions of this article. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons regularly congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing, or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which regularly features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction service means any business, agency or persons whose primary business is to, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means a person that has not been convicted of a felony or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude in the past five years. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Lingerie modeling studio means an establishment whose primary business activity consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Minor means, for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
Parcel and parcel of land mean any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; completely bare buttock; or female breast showing the areola and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, unless completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)	Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophasy, coprophilia, piguerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)	Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)	Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)	Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)	Torture; 
(6)	Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; 
(7)	Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented beating or the inflection of pain; or 
(8)	Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-154. - Underage persons. 
No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract as a dancer with a person under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed as provided herein. No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 16-155—16-175. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Licensing 

Sec. 16-176. - License required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this article, without a license. No license so issued shall condone or make legal an activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under state or federal law. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture theater, adult hotel or adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau, modeling studio, adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which licensee shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-177. - Prohibited licensees. 
No license shall be issued under this article to or held by: 
(1)	An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)	Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)	Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued share of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(4)	Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character. 
(5)	Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. 
(6)	Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the federal, state, or local law. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-178. - Limitation on aggregate number of licenses. 
Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young vs. American Mini Theaters. Inc., 427 U.S. 50, 70-71, 96 S.Ct. 2440, 49 L.Ed.2d 310 (1976). 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-179. - Applications for licenses; fees. 
(a)	Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk or his designated representative. 
(b)	The application for licensure shall be made to the city clerk, on the form provided by the clerk, accompanied by a nonrefundable administrative fee and an annual license fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council. The purpose of the administrative fee is to defray, in part, the costs of investigation and report required by this article. In the event the application for license is denied, the annual license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(c)	The mere application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of, or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. No such establishment shall operate unless and until its license has been approved by the mayor and council under this article. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-180. - Contents of application. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The full, true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)	The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)	The previous addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)	Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(5)	Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the share of corporate stock outstanding. 
(6)	The business license history of the applicant and whether the applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had the license or license for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation. 
(7)	All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the date and places of any the convictions. 
(8)	If the applicant is a corporation, LLC, or other business entity, the name of the entity shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, operating agreements, or other enabling documents, together with the place and date of formation, together with the names and addresses of each of its current members, officers, or directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of any stock in the entity. The applicant entity shall designate one of its members or officers to act as its responsible managing officer. The designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(9)	If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the court clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant partnership shall designate one of its general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. The designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(10)	The name and address of the owner and lesser of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted, and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(11)	The other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(12)	The age, date of birth, and social security number of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the share of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(13)	If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any. 
(14)	At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or violation of any federal, state or local law or ordinance involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The chief of police shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on the forms. 
(15)	Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(16)	Whether the premises are owned or rented and if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, and a copy of those documents giving the legal right, documents giving legal title conditioned only on the city's granting of a license under this article. 
(17)	A certified plat by a registered surveyor or engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site, or other business hereunder regulated. 
(18)	Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged in the presence of a notary to be true and correct by: 
a.	If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.	If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.	If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.	If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official, member of other designated representative. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-181. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee established by resolution of the city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-182. - Investigation. 
The city shall have 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-183. - Grant of license; findings. 
Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the license if it finds: 
(1)	The required annual license fee has been paid. 
(2)	The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)	The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)	The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)	The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any members, officers or partners, if the applicant is a limited liability corporation or other business entity, the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude. 
(6)	The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or license denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)	The building, structure, equipment, or location of the business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(8)	The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)	The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not within five years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or licensed any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where the adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitation for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur. 
(10)	On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)	The proposed premises is not located too close to any church, school, library, government building or site, or any other business restricted hereunder (Section 16-221). 
(12)	The grant of the license will not cause a violation of this or any other regulation of the city or any state or federal law. 
(13)	Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-184. - Denial of license; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, it shall notify the city clerk and, within 45 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the clerk. The clerk shall, within ten days thereafter, notify applicant by certified mail of the denial. Any applicant who is denied a license may appeal the denial to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-185. - Display of license. 
An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-186. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-187. - Licenses nontransferable. 
(a)	No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the license and the license shall thereafter be null and void except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)	As an exception to subsection (a) of this section, if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of the license, and in that case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partners. 
(c)	An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-188. - Change of location or name. 
(a)	No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a reasonable change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city, and approval has been obtained from the city clerk and the building inspector. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the city's codes, have been met. 
(b)	No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified in his license and at the location specified for that name. 
(c)	Any application for any extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 16-189—16-200. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Appeals 

Sec. 16-201. - Notice of appeal. 
The licensee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council, and the name of the applicant. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five and no more than 30 days after receipt of the application for the city council action. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-202. - Discretion of council regarding appeal procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the city council agenda, the city council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)	Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give the notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)	Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-203. - Notice of hearing. 
The clerk shall be responsible for the publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-204. - Conduct of hearing before city council. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the city council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties, and from city staff. The city council may sustain, over-rule or modify the action complained of the action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-205. - Conduct of hearing before hearing officer. 
The hearing officer, appointed, pursuant to the procedure set out in this article, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-206. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-207. - Report of hearing officer; notice of hearing. 
(a)	If a hearing officer has been appointed to hear the appeal, the hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date the hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the city council. 
(b)	The report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendation. 
(c)	All reports shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall be considered public records. A copy of the report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee the same day as it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to city council and the chief of police. 
(d)	The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee of the date of the meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the licensee stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-208. - Review of report by city council; determination. 
The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the city council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)	Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of the cases the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)	Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 16-209—16-220. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Location Restrictions 

Sec. 16-221. - Proximity to other facilities. 
No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)	Within 600 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential purposes; 
(2)	Within 600 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park, recreational facility, hospital, nursing home or playground is located; 
(3)	Within 600 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)	On a tract of land containing less than 100 feet of road frontage; 
(5)	In any residential, neighborhood commercial, or downtown business zoning district. It must be located strictly within an industrial zoning district. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-222. - Measurement of distances. 
For the purposes of this article, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 16-223—16-240. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Maintenance of Premises 

Sec. 16-241. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to the licensed [premises for] thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be allowed to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections license. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-242. - Self-inspection of premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspection of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the chief of police. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-243. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises, or any part thereof, may be sealed by order of the chief of police on his finding of a violation of this chapter resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the chief of police shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the chief of police may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the chief of police. The chief of police shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "unclean" or "unsafe," as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 16-244—16-280. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Employees 

Sec. 16-281. - Qualifications. 
(a)	Employees of an adult business establishment shall be not less than 21 years of age. 
(b)	Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this chapter. 
(c)	Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult business establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)	The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms employed on the licensed premises and work on any licensed premises shall include as well, work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licenses premises. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 16-282—16-300. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Erotic Dance Establishments 

Sec. 16-301. - Applicability. 
The regulations of this division shall apply to erotic dance establishments in addition to all other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-302. - Advertising prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an erotic dance establishment located within the city without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-303. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-304. - Minimum lighting requirements. 
All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times that patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-305. - Performance restrictions. 
(a)	All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for the purpose, which is raised at least two feet from the level of the first floor. 
(b)	No dancing shall occur closer than six feet from the level off the floor. 
(c)	No dancer shall touch, fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall touch, fondle or caress any dancer. 
(d)	No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(e)	No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
DIVISION 5. - CLOSING HOURS 

Sec. 16-306. - Purpose; applicability. 
(a)	The purpose of this article is to discourage criminal activity associated with late-night entertainment venues which remain open past the operating hours of businesses licensed to sell alcohol. Therefore, this article is adopted to protect the public's health, safety and welfare. 
(b)	This article shall apply to all public entertainment facilities with the city including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, dance halls, billiard halls, pool rooms, arcade game establishments, and establishments offering live musical performances, including disc jockey performances. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a jukebox, tape deck or other means of playing music constitutes entertainment subject to this article. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-307. - Prohibited hours; penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any public entertainment facility located within the corporate limits of the city to offer or provide public entertainment between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Tuesday through Saturday. In addition, all public entertainment facilities located within the corporate limits of the city shall be closed and all sales and services stopped by 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and shall not resume business any earlier than 8:00 a.m. the following Monday morning, punishable as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 16-308—16-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MASSAGE BUSINESSES 

Sec. 16-321. - Purpose. 
(a)	The purpose of this article is to provide for local licensing and regulation of locations where massage is offered, pursuant to the authority of the Charter of the City of Franklin, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b)(17), and O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. as amended. 
(b)	A license issued pursuant to this article is a privilege, not a right. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-322. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following definitions apply: 
Act means the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, enacted by and defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. as amended. 
Board means the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy, enacted by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-4. 
For hire means a reasonable expectation that the person to whom the massage is provided, or some third person on his or her behalf, will pay money, give other consideration, or provide any gratuity therefore. 
Massage means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term includes complementary methods, including, without limitation, the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands; the term also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. Massage therapy shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities. 
Massage business or massage parlor means a business with a location in the city at which any person engages in or offers massage, regardless of the name of the business or the words used to describe the business through signage or advertisement or in filings with the secretary of state. Massage parlors are subject to regulation by a local government, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b)(17) and O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22(a) as amended. 
Massage therapist means: 
(1)	A person who holds a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended state license in the practice of massage therapy issued by the board pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act. 
(2)	A person who holds a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended state provisional permit in the practice of massage therapy issued by the board pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, and working under the supervision of a licensed massage therapist. 
(3)	A person pursuing a course of study leading to a degree or certificate as a massage therapist in an educational program recognized by the board, if such person is designated by title indicating student status and is fulfilling uncompensated work experiences required for the attainment of the degree or certificate, and working under the supervision of a licensed massage therapist. 
(4)	A nonresident person rendering massage therapy up to 60 days during a 12-month period for treatment of a temporary sojourner only; provided that such nonresident massage therapist holds a license, registration or certification from another state, jurisdiction or country if the requirements as determined by the Georgia Board for Licensure are substantially equal to the requirements contained in this chapter; or provided that such nonresident massage therapist is currently nationally certified in therapeutic massage and bodywork. 
(5)	A person duly licensed, registered, or certified in another jurisdiction, state, territory, or a foreign country when incidentally in this state to provide service as part of an emergency response team working in conjunction with disaster relief officials or as part of a charity event with which he or she comes into the state. 
Masseuse, masseur, massage practitioner, or persons practicing massage means a person who performs or engages in the practice of massage. 
State license means a license to practice massage therapy issued by the board, pursuant to the Act. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-323. - Requirements for licensure. 
(a)	State license. No person other than a massage therapist shall perform or offer to perform massage in the City of Franklin. 
(b)	City license. No person or entity shall operate a massage parlor without a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended license from the city, pursuant to this article. Every person who performs or offers to perform massage on the premises must be a massage therapist as defined herein, and it shall be unlawful to operate as a massage parlor unless all such persons are and remain licensed massage therapists. The city license of a massage parlor that fails to meet this requirement is subject to revocation. 
(c)	Conviction of a crime. No license under this section shall be issued or renewed to any person or entity who shall have been convicted for any charge involving a felony, crime of moral turpitude, prostitution, masturbation for hire, or any sexual service crime, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilty or plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. Licenses granted to persons who fail to meet this requirement at any time shall be subject to revocation. 
(d)	Age of licensee; education. No person under the age of 18 shall be issued a license to operate a massage parlor. 
(e)	Personal residency; agent. All applicants for licenses under this article and all actual owners of parlors for which licenses are sought shall be bona fide residents of Heard County at the time of the filing of the applications and shall remain bona fide residents of such county during all times that the licenses and renewals thereof are in effect, or shall name one or more residents in the county as the agent or representative of the licensee, who shall be responsible for any matter relating to such license and who, at all such times, shall be a bona fide resident of Heard County. 
(f)	Corporate residency. All applications for licenses under this article by a corporation or other business entity shall name in the application one or more residents in the county as the agent and representative of the corporation to receive all communications, notices, services of process, or other papers or documents on behalf of the corporation in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation, or other action with respect to any license issued pursuant to this article. The application shall give the mailing address of the person, and the mailing to any such person at such address of any notice required to be given under this article or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. If any such person shall cease to be a resident of the county, another person shall immediately be appointed, in writing, in his place, and written notice shall be given the city clerk, stating the name and address of the new agent. 
(g)	Annual license fee. The annual license fee shall be determined from time to time by the mayor and council, based upon the reasonable costs of the actual regulatory activity, and listed in a schedule of fees and charges maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-324. - Application for license. 
(a)	To operate a massage parlor within the boundaries of the city, the applicant must first make application to the city clerk on a form provided, and that person, after having fully and truthfully completed such form and paying the prescribed fees and having received a license, shall maintain and operate such business pursuant to the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. 
(b)	The "applicant" for a license hereunder shall be the actual owner of the proposed licensed business and may be a natural person, a corporation or a limited liability company. 
(1)	Where the applicant is a corporation, "applicant" shall be the president and secretary, and each officer must provide those items required of applicants, and in addition the corporation shall present a letter of good standing from the secretary of state. 
(2)	Where the applicant is a limited liability company, "applicant" shall include all members and the manager, if the company is manager-managed, and each member and manager must provide those items required of applicants, and in addition shall present a letter of good standing from the secretary of state. 
(3)	Partnerships shall not be issued licenses in a partnership name, but partners may be licensed individually, however if the partnership is only operating at a single location, only one licensing fee shall be charged. 
(c)	Upon applying for a license with the finance officer of the city, each applicant shall provide a true and correct copy or original of the state license for each and every massage practitioner, performing or anticipated to perform massage at its location, and a list of all other employees to the finance officer for inspection and copying. Failure of any massage practitioner to provide his or her state license shall automatically result in the denial of the issuance of a city license to the applicant. 
(d)	The city may request that the applicant provide or consent to the provision of a GCIC criminal history at the time of application. 
(e)	Subsequent to the city license being issued, the licensee shall, in person, furnish to the finance officer a true and correct copy or original of the state license of each new massage practitioner at the licensee's massage parlor prior to such person's commencing to perform or offering to perform massage at such massage parlor. When any massage practitioner discontinues performing massage at a massage parlor, the licensee shall make the departure known in writing to the finance officer within 30 days of such departure. 
(f)	Each applicant for a license shall make his or her affidavit before the finance officer, on a form provided by the finance officer, upon oath, swearing or affirming that all persons practicing massage on the premises of his or her massage parlor are licensed massage therapists and that all requirements of this article for a license have been met. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-325. - License renewal. 
Licenses for massage parlors may be renewed on a calendar year basis, provided that the licensee(s) continue to meet the requirements set out in this article and the requirements of the Act. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-326. - Registry. 
A registry shall be kept of all persons practicing massage on the premises of such massage parlor, which shall be available for inspection by an agent of the city during normal hours of business, providing the following information: 
(1)	Legal name and any other name(s) the massage practitioner has been or is known as or by; 
(2)	Current address including street and city; 
(3)	State or country of birth; date of birth; 
(4)	Number and expiration date of state license; and 
(5)	Position with the massage parlor or business entity. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-327. - Posting licenses and rates. 
(a)	Each massage parlor shall post its license obtained pursuant to this article, along with the state license of each masseuse operating on the premises of such parlor, in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep such licenses there at all times. 
(b)	Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area or other conspicuous location available for all prospective customers. No service shall be allowed or permitted that is not prominently posted with its fees in such location. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-328. - Escort services and adult entertainment prohibited. 
No massage parlor shall act as an escort or dating service. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-329. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, given, dispensed, provided, consumed, or caused or allowed to be sold, served, given, dispensed, provided, consumed by or to any person on the premises of a massage parlor or kept thereon. "Alcoholic beverages" means and includes all types and kinds of alcohol as defined in this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-330. - Hours of operation; inspection. 
(a)	Massage parlors shall be open for business only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., inclusive. 
(b)	Any business holding a license issued under this article shall, at any time that the premises are open for business, be open to inspection by an officer of the police department, the health department, license inspectors, and/or fire department inspectors. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-331. - Name; place of business; sale, transfer or change of location. 
No person or business entity granted a location license pursuant to this article shall operate the business under a name not specified in the license, nor conduct business at any location or place not specified in the license. No license shall be transferable. Upon the sale or relocation of a massage parlor, the license thereof shall be null and void. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-332. - Operating requirements. 
(a)	Every portion of the premises of, and all equipment and supplies of, the massage parlor shall be kept clean and shall be operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)	All employees and masseuses at each massage parlor shall wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering the breast, buttocks and genital areas. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-333. - Revocation, suspensions, violations and penalties. 
(a)	The city may, upon notice and a hearing for good cause, revoke or suspend or place on probation the license of any massage parlor: 
(1)	That commits or allows any violations of the provisions of this article of the City Code; 
(2)	That allows any masseuse, working on the massage parlor's premises, to commit or offer to commit a sexual crime under O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 6; 
(3)	That allows any person to perform or offer massage on the premises who is not a licensed massage therapist; 
(4)	Where the applicant for the massage parlor's city license gave false information on the application, in his or her affidavit, or in the massage parlor's registry as required in this article, or fails to update information related to the license to the finance officer as required by this article; or 
(5)	Where the licensee fails at any time to meet the requirements for licensure under this article. 
(b)	Any violation of any section of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-8, general penalty, of the Code of Ordinances of the city. Each day during which said offenses occur shall constitute a separate offense, as shall each separate act constitute a violation. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-334. - Exemptions. 
The requirements of this article shall have no application to or effect upon the following persons acting within the scope of their professions: 
(1)	Medical doctors and osteopaths, chiropractors, physical and occupational therapists, podiatrists, acupuncturists, registered or licensed practical nurses, barbers, beauty culturists, and cosmetologists duly licensed to practice in this state pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43. 
(2)	Employees of duly licensed nursing and convalescent homes and hospitals while working at their place of employment 
(3)	Athletic directors or trainers who are affiliated with an accredited educational institution or a bona fide sports team and whose work is limited to athletic team members. 
(4)	Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local regulation of massage therapy by the laws of the state. 
(5)	A person who restricts his or her practice to the manipulation of the soft tissue of the human body to hands, feet, or ears who does not have the client disrobe and does not hold himself or herself out as a massage therapist. 
(6)	Any person who desires to provide in Franklin only certain bodywork services which the person believes are of a modality that is not a massage as defined in this article may request from the planning commission a waiver of the licensing requirements of this chapter for conducting the business of and providing such bodywork services. Such request will be made in writing, filed with the city clerk at least 15 days before the regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission, and shall fully explain why the modality is not massage therapy. The planning commission shall act upon the request at the next regularly scheduled meeting. If the request is granted, the licensing requirements of this chapter shall be waived for the person making the request. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed pursuant to this Code of Ordinances or state law. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 16-335—16-350. - Reserved. 
Sec. 16-351. - Suspension and revocation. 
Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked, at the discretion of the city council, for material misrepresentations in the application therefor, for suspension or revocation of the licensee's state master license, and for any violation of this Code or state law. The procedure for suspension or revocation and appeal therefrom shall be as provided in sections 16-201 through 16-208. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-352. - Notice of appeal. 
The licensee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council, and the name of the applicant. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five and no more than 30 days after receipt of the application for the city council action. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-353. - Discretion of council regarding appeal procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the city council agenda, the city council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)	Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give the notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)	Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-354. - Notice of hearing. 
The clerk shall be responsible for the publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-355. - Conduct of hearing before city council. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the city council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties, and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-356. - Conduct of hearing before hearing officer. 
The hearing officer, appointed, pursuant to the procedure set out in this article, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-357. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-358. - Report of hearing officer; notice of hearing. 
(a)	If a hearing officer has been appointed to hear the appeal, the hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date the hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the city council. 
(b)	The report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendation. 
(c)	All reports shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall be considered public records. A copy of the report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee the same day as it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to city council and the chief of police. 
(d)	The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee of the date of the meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the licensee stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-359. - Review of report by city council; determination. 
The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the city council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)	Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of the cases the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)	Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 16-360. - Penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2017(1)) 
Chapter 18 - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 18-1. - Operation of court. 
Matters concerning the municipal court shall be governed by the charter and state law. 
Sec. 18-2. - Rules of court. 
The statutes and uniform rules in force in the superior courts of this state, including but not limited to motions, pleas and practice, shall be enforced in the municipal court as they are legally applicable to the municipal court, except as they are modified by the presiding judge of the municipal court or in conflict with the provisions of the Charter. 
Sec. 18-3. - Court cost. 
(a)	Pursuant to state law, there shall be collected by municipal court in every case in municipal court involving the violation of a criminal ordinance or statute in which a fine is levied and collected and, in addition to such fine and all other costs and fees, an additional fee in an amount, as established by the city council from time to time, to be used for court technology. 
(b)	Pursuant to state law, there shall be collected by municipal court in every case in municipal court involving the violation of a criminal ordinance or statute in which a fine is levied and collected and, in addition to such fine and all other costs and fees, an additional fee in an amount, as established by the city council from time to time, to be used for court security. 
(Code 1998, § 5-114) 
Sec. 18-4. - Solicitor. 
(a)	The office of the solicitor (prosecuting attorney) shall be established for the purpose of providing representation for the interests of the citizens of Franklin in matters pertaining to violations of City of Franklin ordinances and Georgia State offenses enforceable within municipal court. 
(b)	The mayor and council shall appoint the solicitor. The compensation of the solicitor shall be fixed by the mayor and council within budgetary constraints. No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as the solicitor unless he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(c)	Jurisdiction; powers. Pursuant to the City Charter, the solicitor's office shall share the jurisdiction and powers vested therein as well as any powers granted by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(d)	The solicitor shall serve at will as appointed by the mayor and council. 
(e)	This section shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the solicitor's office to date as authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2016(1), §§ 1—5) 
Chapter 20 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.; municipal authority to require by ordinance the repair, closing, or demolition of unfit dwellings or other unfit structures intended for human habitation, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
(a)	For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed as follows: 
Nuisance per se means an act, occupation, or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
(b)	The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-1-1 (nuisances—definition in general) and 41-2-8 (nuisances—abatement of nuisances generally—definition), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-1-1 and 41-2-8, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-1-1 and 41-2-8. 
(Code 1998, § 33-101) 
Sec. 20-2. - Duty of owner. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
Sec. 20-3. - Proceedings to abate generally. 
Any nuisance existing within the corporate limits of this city, except for a nuisance hereinafter excepted, shall be abated in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
(1)	Initiation. Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(2)	Notice of hearing. Upon the filing of a complaint as provided in subsection (1) of this section, the city clerk/treasurer shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance complained of is located and, if the person maintaining the same be a different person from the owner, then also to the person maintaining the nuisance, calling on such person to show cause, either personally or by attorney, at the time and place directed by the court, why such activity alleged to be a nuisance should not be ordered abated and removed by the judge of the municipal court. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
a.	A copy of such notice shall also be mailed to the complainant or complainants. 
b.	Nonresidents of the state shall be served by posting a copy of such complaint or orders in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(3)	Order of abatement. If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
a.	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
b.	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(4)	Effect of noncompliance. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
1.	If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; and 
2.	The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(5)	Penalty. Any person who shall erect or continue after notice to abate a nuisance which tends to annoy the community, injure the health of the citizens in general or corrupt the public morals shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1998, § 33-102) 
Sec. 20-4. - Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in the foregoing section shall prevent the mayor and city council from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Code 1998, § 33-103) 
Sec. 20-5. - Unfit buildings or structures. 
If there exists within the city dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and are inimical to the welfare and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this city; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures, power is conferred upon such municipality to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish the dwellings, buildings, or structures (see O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7). 
(Code 1998, § 33-104) 
Sec. 20-6. - Public health hazard or general nuisance on private property. 
All provisions of this chapter shall be applied to private property where an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions shall create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that said property is in violation of this chapter and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17. 
(Code 1998, § 33-105) 
Sec. 20-7. - Accumulation of junk. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any property in the city other than a person who is a licensed junk dealer to permit to accumulate on such property any junk. The term "junk" includes any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or junked motor vehicles, or parts thereof, old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers, or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and motor vehicles, no longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but the term "junk" does not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as by-products, waste, or scraps from the operation of his own business, or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing processes. 
(b)	The accumulation of junk by an owner or resident of any property in the city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be abated and/or removed according to the procedures provided for under this Code and state law. 
(1)	Notice to remove. It shall be the duty of the police chief to notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of any premises upon which junk is permitted to accumulate in violation of the provisions of this section that such material must be removed within 30 days from the date of such notice. Notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner or occupant, at his last known address. 
(2)	Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove such junk within the designated time period, the mayor and council is authorized and empowered to arrange for the removal of such material by the city or by a private individual or firm through contract with the city. 
(Code 1998, § 31-107) 
Sec. 20-8. - Property maintenance. 
(a)	Accumulation of weeds, garbage, or trash. It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any lot, area, or place located within this municipality to allow to accumulate or permit to remain on said property any deleterious, unhealthful or unsightly growths or objects of any kind, which would likely become a breeding place for snakes, rats, flies, mosquitoes, or other harmful or dangerous creatures or insects, or which would likely contribute to the spread of disease or increase the risk of fire or pose a health hazard for any other reason, or pose a hazard to traffic on the public streets and highways of the city. 
(1)	Notice to remove. It shall be the duty of the mayor and council to notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of any premises upon which prohibited growths or objects have been permitted to accumulate that such growths or objects must be removed, cut and/or destroyed within five days from the date of such notice. Notice shall be by registered mail, address to said owner or occupant, at his last known address. 
(2)	Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove, cut and/or destroy such growths or objects within the designated time period, the city shall remove the condition, and the costs thereof shall be charged against the property owner, and, in the event the bill for such charges remain unpaid for 30 days after it has been rendered, shall become a lien upon the premises enforceable in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
(b)	Vacant lots. Vacant lots must be kept free of underbrush and unsightly objects and must be covered with vegetation so as to prevent excessive erosion. 
(Code 1998, § 31-110) 
Secs. 20-9—20-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 

Sec. 20-35. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Unsafe buildings. All buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the city which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed to be unsafe buildings: 
(1)	Those in which the interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the base of such wall; 
(2)	Those buildings which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent, or more, of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of a nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering; 
(3)	Those buildings which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs, or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose for which it is used, or intended to be used; 
(4)	Those buildings which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes, so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of occupants thereof or the people of the city; 
(5)	Those buildings which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of those living therein, or may live therein; 
(6)	Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein; 
(7)	Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic, or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication; 
(8)	Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the people of the city; and 
(9)	Those buildings which exist in violation of any ordinance of the city, so as to constitute a nuisance, and to be unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the people of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 33-201) 
Sec. 20-36. - Declared as public nuisances. 
All unsafe buildings as defined in section 20-35 are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated, or demolished as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11 and as hereinbefore and hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1998, § 33-202) 
Secs. 20-37—20-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-61. - General regulation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing within the city limits. 
(Code 1998, § 14-101) 
Sec. 20-62. - Certain acts, conditions or sounds prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. 
(b)	The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)	Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or any other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creating by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)	Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the purpose of producing or reproducing sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with more volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)	Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)	Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)	Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(6)	Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. Any loud exhaust which may be heard from a distance of more than 50 feet shall violate this provision. 
(7)	Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(8)	Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading of a vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(9)	Construction or repairing of building. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on week days, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period of not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building inspector should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(10)	Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, court or church, while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(11)	Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of, or ringing bells or use of other noise making devices by peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(12)	Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale, except parades, etc., authorized by proper authorities. 
(13)	Metal, rails, pillars and columns, transportation thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along the streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks, or in any way disturbs the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(14)	Railroads, operation thereof. The causing, permitting or continuing any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of a railroad, or cars thereon. 
(15)	Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliances, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(16)	Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of the operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(Code 1998, § 14-102; Ord. of 2-2-2017(2)) 
Sec. 20-63. - Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)	Noises of safety signals and warning devices; 
(2)	Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call acting in time of emergency; and 
(3)	Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(Code 1998, § 14-103) 
Sec. 20-64. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed each day during or upon which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. 
(Code 1998, § 14-104) 
Sec. 20-65. - Injunctions. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this article which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents of this city shall be deemed, and is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1998, § 14-105) 
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; abandoned motor vehicles generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to violate any of the following subsections: 
(1)	Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another; 
(2)	Any person who shall endanger the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, threats or abusive conduct; 
(3)	Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct; 
(4)	Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(5)	Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in public; 
(6)	Any person who shall collect in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes as defined by the current ordinances of the city or laws of this state; 
(7)	Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(8)	Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(9)	Any person who assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in said city, or who shall aid or abet therein; 
(10)	Any person who shall accost or attempt to force his company upon any person or attempt to pick up any person with an unwelcome advance; 
(11)	Any person who utters in the presence of another, any bawdy, lewd or obscene words or epithets; 
(12)	Any person who frequents any place where gaming or illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated; 
(13)	Any person who shall act in a dangerous manner toward others; 
(14)	Any person who shall use "fighting words" directed towards any person; 
(15)	Any person who shall assemble or congregate for the purpose of trouncing upon another; 
(16)	Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(17)	Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority; 
(18)	Any person, participant, or official who is in attendance at any sporting event over which the city has any supervisory capacity, who through speech or physical conduct acts unseemly and who repeatedly annoys, offends, and imposes himself upon others in attendance; or 
(19)	Any person within the city limits who directs language to another in an abusive or demeaning manner which contains epithets relating to sexual reproduction, lineage, incest, chastity or excretion. 
(b)	Any person who shall violate any subsection of this section may be charged with the offense of "disorderly conduct" and on conviction thereof, may be found guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1998, § 31-101; Ord. of 11-10-2005; Ord. of 2-2-2017(3)) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 22-2. - Discharging firearms, air guns, etc. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm within 350 yards of any street, alley, or building, or at any point upon the land of another person without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof; or to discharge any air gun, BB gun, or other toy gun which projects lead or any other missile. This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty, nor to prohibit any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm while: 
(1)	Under the influence of alcohol or any drug or any combination of alcohol and any drug to the extent that it is unsafe for the person to discharge such firearm except in the defense of life, health, and property; 
(2)	The person's alcohol concentration is 0.08 grams or more at any time while discharging such firearm or within three hours after such discharge of such firearm from alcohol consumed before such discharge ended; or 
(3)	Subject to the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, there is any amount of marijuana or a controlled substance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-21, present in the person's blood or urine, or both, including the metabolites and derivatives of each or both without regard to whether or not any alcohol is present in the person's breath or blood. 
(c)	The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has been legally entitled to use a drug shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section; provided, however, that such person shall not be in violation of this section unless such person is rendered incapable of possessing or discharging a firearm safely as a result of using a drug other than alcohol which such person is legally entitled to use. 
(d)	Any person convicted of violating subsection (b) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature. 
(Code 1998, § 31-102) 
Sec. 22-3. - Report of treatment of wounds. 
All physicians and all hospital superintendents in the city are hereby required to report to the city police department all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from wounds inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind. Such report may be made in writing or by telephone, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the police department. All reports shall be made within 24 hours after treatment by a physician or after admission to the hospital. (See O.C.G.A. § 31-7-9, reports by physicians and other personnel of non-accidental injuries to patients.) 
(Code 1998, § 31-103) 
State Law reference— Reports by physicians and other personnel, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-9. 
Sec. 22-4. - Throwing of missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to throw any stone, rock, or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Code 1998, § 31-104) 
Sec. 22-5. - Ball playing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball by throwing, catching, pitching, or batting a ball on any public street, alley, or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 31-105) 
Sec. 22-6. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or place in the city, or within any public building. 
(Code 1998, § 31-106) 
Sec. 22-7. - Abandonment of motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or to leave unattended for a period in excess of ten days any motor vehicle on any street, road, alley, or other public way in the municipality. 
(Code 1998, § 31-108) 
Sec. 22-8. - Loitering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found idling, loitering or loafing, in any alcoholic beverage establishment, hotel, billiard room, street, lane, sidewalk or alley, in any other public place within the city to the encouragement of loafing and idleness; to be one of an assembly of persons loafing, idling or loitering in streets, lanes, sidewalks or alleys, or in any public places within the city to the encouragement of loafing and idleness; or to act or conduct himself in a suspicious manner or to fail to give a satisfactory explanation for his presence at this place under these circumstances. 
(Code 1998, § 31-109) 
Sec. 22-9. - Containers for household garbage; misuse or vandalization of container. 
It is unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse contents of, or otherwise vandalize any containers provided by the city or a private collection service for the dumping of trash or garbage. 
(Ord. of 2-5-1998) 
Sec. 22-10. - Skateboards and certain activities prohibited. 
(a)	No person upon roller skates, skateboards, inline skates or riding in or by means of any coaster or similar device (hereafter "skating or riding") shall go upon any public roadway or sidewalk within the city. Skating or riding on the public roadways or sidewalks within the city is prohibited. 
(b)	Any person violating subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(c)	No parent, legal guardian or person legally in loco parentis or other person having legal control or custody of or responsibility for a minor between six and through and including 16 years of age shall at any time, through insufficient control or supervision, allow any such child to engage in an offense defined in subsection (a) of this section. Responsibility for the prevention of such offenses by a minor shall be attached to the parent or other such person having legal custody or control of the child upon proof of prior notification of said child's potential to so offend. Such prior notification shall be established through confirmation by local law enforcement agency records or other evidence that the parent or other such person having legal custody or control of the child was notified, within the immediately preceding 12 months, of at least two previous warnings against such child for an offense referenced in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 1(31-111)) 
Sec. 22-11. - Violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons in the city to violate any open burning ban or other fire restriction statutes or regulations enacted by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division or any state or local fire marshal. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2014(2)) 
Chapter 24 - PUBLIC PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, AND RECREATION CENTERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5); authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

Sec. 24-1. - Development of municipal recreation programs. 
The authority to develop programs of recreational activities and services designed to meet the leisure time interest and needs of all municipal citizens is hereby granted to and vested in the park and recreation board, which board shall have the power to purchase, maintain and equip parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, and the buildings associated therewith, and to develop, maintain, and operate all types of recreation facilities, as provided in chapter 64, title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1998, § 23-101) 
Sec. 24-2. - Regulations governing use of public parks and facilities. 
(a)	Use of grounds and facilities in general. Each person, firm, or corporation using the public parks and grounds shall cleanup all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(b)	Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation using such parks, grounds, or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)	To willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, waterlines or other public utilities or parks or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices, or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal; 
(2)	To throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters; 
(3)	To damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof; 
(4)	To hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, or throw missiles at any animal, reptile, or bird or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest, or young of any other animal; 
(5)	To bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the presence of same, and properly disposed of elsewhere; 
(6)	To disturb the peace, or use any profane or obscene language; 
(7)	To endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act; 
(8)	To commit any assault or battery, or engage in fighting; 
(9)	To carry, possess, or drink any alcoholic beverage in the park; 
(10)	To violate any rule for the use of the park, made or approved by the city council; 
(11)	To prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and with the rules applicable to such use; 
(12)	To swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted; 
(13)	To dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet, or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose; 
(14)	To possess or use any fireworks, explosives, firecrackers, firearms, bows and arrows, spring guns, air rifles, slingshots, or any device which discharges projectiles by any means; and 
(15)	To refuse to cease the violation after notice. 
(c)	Hours of operation. The public parks shall be open as determined by the mayor and council. 
(d)	Group activity. Whenever more than 15 members of any group, association, or organization desire to use any park facility for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties, or theatrical or other entertainment performances, a representative of such group, association, or organization shall first obtain a permit from the mayor for such purpose. 
(1)	The mayor shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group, association, or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members of the public, and if the said group, association, or organization meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the mayor and council. 
(2)	Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the city from any liability of any kind or character and to protect city property from damage. 
(e)	Picnic areas and use. No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas, or of any of the buildings or structures therein, for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(f)	Other regulations. 
(1)	Games. It shall be unlawful for any person to take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball, and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts, or areas provided therefor. 
(2)	Camping. It shall be unlawful for any person to set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such purpose, such as a house-trailer, camp-trailer, camp-wagon, or the like. 
(3)	Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the mayor and council. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes, or cigars, tobacco paper, or other inflammable material within any park area or on any highway, road, or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(4)	Animals. It shall be unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any park, and it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is on a leash. 
(5)	Automobiles. It shall be unlawful to drive or park any automobile except on a street, driveway, or parking lot in any park; or to park or leave such vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking. 
(6)	Sales. It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, sell, peddle, or offer for sale any commodity or article within the park unless such person possesses a license issued by the city. 
(7)	Alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person within any park to have in his possession, custody, or control any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever. 
(8)	Signs. It shall be unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park, except that these provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any official duty. 
(Code 1998, § 23-102) 
Chapter 26 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(a) and (b)(2); ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal power of ad valorem taxation to provide for financial assistance to its development authority, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 26-19. - Ad valorem tax. 
This section shall be governed by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state and its regulations. 
(Code 1998, § 4-101) 
Sec. 26-20. - Malt beverage excise tax. 
(a)	Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of malt beverages within the municipality an excise tax in the sum of $0.05 per 12 ounces and in similar proportion for bottles, cans, and containers of various sizes. 
(b)	Against whom levied. The malt beverage excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages in the municipality. 
(c)	Due date and required report. The malt beverage excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of malt beverages sold for the preceding calendar month by size and type of container. 
(d)	Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Code 1998, § 4-102) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to impose excise tax on the sale of malt beverages in bottles, cans, or other containers, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq. 
Sec. 26-21. - Gross direct premiums tax. 
(a)	Rate of levy on life, accident, and sickness insurers. There is hereby set and levied for each calendar year upon each company authorized to write life, accident, and sickness insurance and to write life, accident, and sickness insurance and which is doing business within the municipal corporate limits an annual tax equal to one percent of the annual gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year from policies insuring persons residing within the corporate limits of the municipality. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall have the same meaning as that used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The tax levied by this subsection is in addition to any license fee imposed by this Code. 
(b)	Rate of levy on all other insurers. There is hereby set and levied for each calendar year, upon each insurance company not taxed under the provisions of the preceding subsection (a) of this section and which is doing business within the municipal corporate limits, an annual tax equal to 2.5 percent of the annual gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year from policies insuring persons residing within the municipal corporate limits. The tax levied by this subsection is in addition to any license fee imposed by this Code. 
(c)	Due date and required report. The gross direct premiums tax levied herein shall be due and payable on March 1 in each calendar year. Payment shall be made to the city clerk/treasurer and shall be accompanied by a report showing the names and addresses of the agents representing the insurance company in the city, the classes of insurance written, the premiums received for each class, and such other reasonable information as may be required. The required report shall be made on forms prescribed by the city clerk/treasurer and made out over affidavit of an officer of the company. Payments shall be deemed delinquent if not received within 45 calendar days from the due date. 
(d)	False information. It is hereby declared to be a violation of this section for any person, firm, corporation, or agents thereof to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any report herein required to be filed. 
(e)	Confidentiality of information. All reports required to be filed under this section shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be used solely by the officers of the city responsible for the administration of this section. 
(f)	Enforcement. The taxes levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of this municipality. 
(Code 1998, § 4-103) 
Sec. 26-22. - Public utility franchise tax. 
(a)	Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on each electric light and power company, gas company, telephone and telegraph company, water company, and any other public utility making use of the streets, alleys, or other public ways or places in the city for the purpose of rendering utility services, a franchise tax in the amount of five percent of the annual gross revenue received from residential commercial, and industrial sales. 
(b)	Due date and required report. The public utility franchise tax shall be paid within 90 days after the end of the franchise grantees fiscal year, and payment by a report showing the volume of gross sales by service classification (residential, commercial, industrial) for said preceding year. 
(Code 1998, § 4-104) 
Sec. 26-23. - Local option sales tax. 
This section is governed by state law and various contracts and agreements with the county. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105) 
Sec. 26-24. - Municipal tax sales. 
(a)	Time, place, and manner of sale. The time, place, and manner of the sale of property, both real and personal, for taxes due this municipality shall be the same as that provided by law for sheriffs' sales for state and county taxes. 
(b)	Sale by parcels. When not impracticable, all property sold for municipal taxes shall be so offered for sale that the smallest amount that will bring the amount of taxes and costs shall alone be sold. 
(Code 1998, § 4-106) 
Sec. 26-25. - Occupation tax. 
(a)	Required; necessary for business dealings in the city. Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupational tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city such business tax registration shall be shown to the mayor and city council or to any law enforcement officer of said city upon request. For further regulations of businesses and occupations with the city, please refer to chapter 16, licensing and business regulations. 
(b)	Construction of terms; definitions. 
(1)	Definitions. As used in this section: 
Clerk means clerk of the city council. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. An employee of a business who is also a practitioner shall not fall under this definition, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(2)	The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 (specific, business, and occupation taxes- definitions) shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
(c)	Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. The amount of the administrative fee shall be as established by the city council, from time to time. 
(d)	Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(1)	An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(2)	Occupation tax schedule. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation, as computed on a full-time position basis or fulltime position equivalent basis, shall be in an amount as established by the city council, from time to time. 
(3)	No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(e)	Professionals. Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(C)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)	The occupation tax based on number of employees; or 
(2)	A fee in an amount per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. The amount of the per practitioner fee shall be as established by the city council, from time to time. 
(f)	Tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(1)	Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by February 1 of each year, be subject to penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained 30 days following the commencement of the business and a penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the clerk and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the city any of the kind of profession, trade or calling subject to this chapter without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the magistrate judge, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(2)	In addition to the remedies in subsection (f)(1) of this section, the town marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(g)	Allocation of employees of businesses with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside the city, only employees who work within the unincorporated limits of the city will be counted for taxing purposes. 
(h)	State registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed; additional requirements for licensure. 
(1)	Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to title 43 of the O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A. tit. 43) shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(2)	Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(3)	In addition to the requirements of this Code, the following businesses shall meet the listed additional requirements before the clerk may issue a license under this section: 

 
(i)	Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. All persons subject to this chapter shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this chapter, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. 
(j)	Businesses not covered by this chapter. The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)	Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)	Those electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agriculture products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)	Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)	Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal, or hulls.) 
(8)	Agriculture products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(k)	More than one place or line of business. Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(l)	Inspection of books and records. In cases where a professional chooses to pay his tax pursuant to subsection (e)(1) of this section the clerk through his officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. 
(m)	Requirements of public hearing before tax increase. The city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this chapter. 
(n)	Revocation of license. 
(1)	If any holder of a city business license issued by the clerk is engaged in unlawful activities involving the operation of the licensed business, including violations of laws of the state, appropriate city ordinances, applicable zoning regulations, or applicable heating, electrical, health, or building codes, the business license may be revoked in the manner provided herein. Where it is reported to the mayor that a holder of a city business license is engaged in unlawful activities, a preliminary investigation shall be conducted by the mayor in order to attempt to determine whether there is a basis for the reports. If the mayor's preliminary investigation reveals that there may be a basis for revocation or suspension of the license, the license holder will be notified to appear before the mayor and show cause on a date certain why his business license should not be revoked or suspended. The licensee may appear in person at the hearing or be represented by counsel. At the conclusion of the hearing the mayor, based upon evidence submitted at the hearing, shall enter an order making a finding of fact and then: 
a.	Find that the evidence does not authorize revocation or suspension; 
b.	Issue a warning to licensee; 
c.	Suspend license and probate suspension; 
d.	Revoke license and probate revocation; 
e.	Suspend license; 
f.	Revoke license. 
(2)	Within 30 days from the date of the order from the mayor, the licensee may appeal the decision by filing a notice of appeal with the mayor to the city council. The hearing shall be scheduled before the city council at its next regular meeting. The mayor shall notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing. The city council, based on the file and order of the mayor and any evidence presented at the hearing, may affirm, overrule, or partially affirm and partially overrule the decision of the mayor. The city council is authorized to: 
a.	Find in favor of the licensee; 
b.	Issue a warning to licensee; 
c.	Suspend the license and probate suspension; 
d.	Revoke license and probate revocation; 
e.	Suspend license; 
f.	Revoke license; and 
g.	Take any other appropriate action regarding licensee. 
(o)	Registration of name of business; payment of fees. No person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall be engaged, prosecute, or carry on a business, trade or profession either in whole or in part, within the city by maintaining an office or by soliciting orders through that office or engage in any business in any manner without having registered the name of the business with the clerk or his authorized representative and paid fees or taxes as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1998, § 4-107) 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 
Secs. 26-26—26-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUDGET[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum budget, accounting, and auditing requirements for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-46. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31 and shall comply with the city charter and state law. 
(Code 1998, § 4-201) 
Sec. 26-47. - Requirement of annual balanced budget. 
Matters concerning the city budget shall be governed by the Charter and state law, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)	Adoption of budget ordinances or resolutions; 
(2)	Budget officer; 
(3)	Procedures for adoption of budget; 
(4)	Form and content of budget; 
(5)	Budget message; 
(6)	Amendments; audits required; 
(7)	Forwarding audits to state auditor; 
(8)	Public inspection of audits; 
(9)	Annual report, submitted to the department of community affairs; 
(10)	Capital program; 
(11)	Transfer of appropriations; 
(12)	Emergency appropriations; 
(13)	Lapse of appropriations. 
(Code 1998, § 4-202) 
Chapter 28 - SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below, unless the context clearly indicates a contrary meaning: 
Billboard means any off-site or off-premises sign as defined in this section advertising a person, business, product, event, or subject. 
Bulletin board means any sign erected by a charitable, educational, or religious institution or a public body, which is erected upon the same property as said institution or body, for purposes of announcing events which are held on the premises thereof. 
Erect means to build, paint, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix. 
Flashing sign means any sign whose illumination is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effect. For the purposes of this chapter, illuminated signs which indicate the time, temperature, date, and other public service information shall not be considered as flashing signs. 
Ground sign means any sign supported by uprights or braces places into or upon the ground, and not supported by or suspended from any building. 
Identification and informational signs means signs of an identification or of informational nature bearing no advertising. 
Illuminated signs means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign itself. 
Mobile sign means any sign mounted on a trailer or other vehicle or having wheels for the purpose of transportation to a site where an advertising message may be conveyed. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform with the provisions of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived at the date of adoption of same. 
Off-premises or off-site sign means a sign which contains a message unrelated to a business or profession conducted on, or to a commodity, service, or activity sold or offered upon, the premises where such sign is located. 
On-premises sign means any sign which contains a message related to a business or profession conducted on, or to a commodity, service, or activity sold or offered upon, the premises where such sign is located. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
Projecting sign means any sign which is attached perpendicular to a building or other structure and extends more than six inches horizontally from the plane of the building wall. 
Real estate sign means a temporary sign placed upon property for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale or lease of said property. 
Roof sign means a sign which is displayed above the eaves and under the roofline of any building. 
Sign means every device, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, stroke, stripe, trademark, or reading matter, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public. For the purpose of determining number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship to elements, or where there is reasonable doubt as to the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign. 
Signable area means the total area upon which a message may be displayed on any sign. 
Special event means any activity or circumstance above and beyond the normal day-to-day activities of the business or institution concerned, to include sales, grand openings, going-out-of-business sales, relocations, new product announcements, etc. 
Temporary means having or suggesting a nondurable character or a life span of 90 days or less. 
Temporary sign means any sign used to announce the occurrence of a special event, as herein above defined, or the occurrence of a temporal event or activity, or constructed in such a manner or used in such a fashion as to suggest a life span of 90 days or less. 
Wall sign means any sign which is attached flat to, painted on, or pinned away from the wall or facade; provided, however, that said sign may not project away from the wall or facade by more than six inches. 
(Code 1998, § 34-101) 
Sec. 28-2. - Penalties. 
Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to punishment according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. 
(Code 1998, § 34-113) 
Sec. 28-3. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, relocate, or maintain within this municipality any sign or billboard as defined in section 28-1, without first obtaining an erection permit from the city in the manner set forth in this section. 
(1)	Application for erection permit. Application for erection permits shall be made upon blanks provided by the city clerk, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
a.	Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
b.	Address of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign or billboard is to be attached or erected; 
c.	Position of the sign or billboard in relation to nearby buildings or structures; 
d.	One accurate scale drawing of the plans, specifications, and method of construction and attachment to the building or the ground for the sign or billboard as well as a scale drawing of the site showing drives, structures, and any other limiting site features; 
e.	Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the structure; 
f.	Written consent of the owner of the building or land to which or on which the structure is to be erected; and 
g.	Such other information as the mayor and council shall require to show full compliance with this chapter and all other ordinances of the city. 
(2)	Display of permit. Every sign or billboard constructed, erected, or maintained for which a permit is required by this chapter shall be plainly marked with the permit decal issued for said structure firmly affixed thereon in such manner that the information therein contained shall be readily accessible and durable. 
(Code 1998, § 34-102) 
Sec. 28-4. - Construction standards. 
(a)	Surfaces of signs. All signs or billboards which are constructed within five feet of a street right-of-way shall have a smooth surface, and no nails, tacks, or wires shall be permitted to protrude therefrom, except electrical reflectors and devices which may extend over the top and in front of the advertising structures. 
(b)	Movable parts. Any movable part of any sign or billboard shall be securely fastened by chains or hinges. 
(c)	Reflectors. Goose neck reflectors and lights shall be permitted on ground signs, and wall signs, provided, however, the reflectors shall be provided with proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. 
(d)	Flood light illumination. Signs or billboards illuminated by flood lights or spot lights shall be positioned in such a manner that none of the light spills over onto an adjoining property or glares or shines into the eyes of motorists or pedestrians. 
(e)	Fluctuating illumination exemptions. Any attraction device or sign which flashes, blinks, is animated, or fluctuates in light intensity shall be prohibited; provided that time, temperature, weather informational signs, official warnings, and regulatory signs shall be exempt from this limitation. 
(Code 1998, § 34-103) 
Sec. 28-5. - Ground signs and billboards. 
(a)	Height and signage area limitations. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any ground sign whose total height is greater than 20 feet above the level of the adjoining ground level. 
(b)	Setback requirements. No ground sign may be erected on, over, or within five feet of any public right-of-way. 
(c)	Erection standards. All ground signs shall be securely built, constructed, and erected upon posts and standards sunk at least three feet below the natural surface of the ground, and supported and braced by timers or metal rods in the rear thereof. 
(d)	Billboards special requirements. The following provisions shall apply to all billboards in the city, notwithstanding any other provisions of this section: 
(1)	Spacing. Billboards on a given street shall be spaced at least 300 feet apart, measured linearly along the right-of-way visible in any one direction. 
(2)	Height. No billboard shall be taller than 32 feet in height. 
(3)	Public parks, etc. No billboard shall be located or placed so as to face any public park, playground, or cemetery, or be located within 150 feet of the boundary of such an area when measured along a common street right-of-way. 
(Code 1998, § 34-104) 
Sec. 28-6. - Wall signs. 
(a)	Signage area limitations. No wall sign shall have a signable area of any one wall size more than 300 square feet. 
(b)	Projection above sidewalk. No wall sign shall be attached to a wall at a height of less than ten feet above the sidewalk or ground. 
(c)	Erection standards. All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall. In no case shall any wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood, or nails. 
(Code 1998, § 34-105) 
Sec. 28-7. - Roof signs. 
(a)	Height and signage area limitations. No roof sign shall have a surface or facing exceeding 300 square feet, nor have its highest point extended more than 20 feet above the roof level. 
(b)	Setback from roof edge. No roof sign shall be erected or maintained with the face thereof nearer than five feet to the outside wall toward which the sign faces. 
(c)	Erection standards. Every roof sign shall be thoroughly secured to the building by iron or other metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods, or braces. 
(Code 1998, § 34-106) 
Sec. 28-8. - Projecting signs. 
(a)	Signage area limitations. The signable area of any one projecting sign shall not exceed 100 square feet each side. 
(b)	Projection over public property. Every projecting sign shall be placed at least ten feet above the public sidewalk over which it is erected, and no sign or part thereof shall extend nearer the curbline than one foot. Every projecting sign erected over public driveways, alleys, and thoroughfares shall be placed not less than 15 feet above the level of same. 
(c)	Erection standards. No projecting sign shall be secured with wire, strips of wood, or nails, or be hung or secured to any other sign. 
(Code 1998, § 34-107) 
Sec. 28-9. - Temporary and mobile signs. 
(a)	Size and signage area limitations. No temporary or mobile sign shall exceed four feet in any of its dimensions or 50 square feet in signage area. 
(b)	Placement limitations. No temporary or mobile sign shall be placed within five feet of the edge of any public right-of-way, nor shall more than one temporary or mobile sign be permitted at any one business location. 
(c)	Erection standards. Each temporary sign shall met the erection standards specified for that particular type of sign (ground sign, wall sign, etc.). 
(d)	Duration of permits. Permits for temporary and mobile signs shall authorize the erection of said signs and their maintenance for a period not exceeding 30 days. 
(e)	Limitation on advertising. Any advertising contained on any temporary or mobile sign shall pertain only to the business, industry, or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which such sign is erected or maintained; provided, that such limitation shall not apply to signs of a civic, political, or religious nature. 
(Code 1998, § 34-108) 
Sec. 28-10. - Special requirements. 
(a)	Obstruction to doors, windows, or fire escapes. No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to, or egress from, any door, window, or fire escape; nor shall any sign be attached to any stand pipe or fire escape. 
(b)	Signs not to constitute traffic hazard. No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this chapter shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or be placed at any location where, by reason of the position, shape, or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device; or make use of the word "stop," look," drive-in," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
(c)	Posting on trees, poles, etc. No sign shall be allowed to be tacked, painted, posted, marked, or otherwise affixed on trees, utility poles, or other similar structures, or on rocks, the ground itself, or other natural features. 
(d)	Maintenance. All signs regulated by this chapter shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from all electrical and mechanical hazards, including, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose connections, and the premises surrounding same shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all weeds, rubbish, and debris. 
(e)	Removal of certain on-premises signs. Any on-premises sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted thereon, or a product sold therein, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure, or property upon which such sign may be found within ten days after written notification by certified mail is made by the city building inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 34-109) 
Sec. 28-11. - Unsafe and unlawful signs. 
(a)	If the mayor and council shall find that any sign or other advertising structure regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public health or safety, or is abandoned, or is maintained in a dilapidated condition, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the city shall give written notice to the permittee or property owner thereof. If the permittee or property owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten days after such notice, the erection permit or such structure shall be revoked and the permittee or property owner subject to the penalties set forth in this chapter. 
(b)	In any case in which a sign or other advertising structure is an immediate peril to persons or property, the city building inspector may cause such structure to be removed summarily and without notice. 
(Code 1998, § 34-110) 
Sec. 28-12. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)	Compliance schedule. All nonconforming signs existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, as determined by the mayor and council, must be removed, changed, or altered to conform to the provisions of this chapter, after notification in the following manner, according to the following schedule: 
(1)	The term "original cost," as referred to in this section, means the cost of the sign at the original date of erection as determined by the mayor and council, with the burden of proof to the contrary being on the owner of the sign. 
(2)	Signs having an original cost as defined herein of less than $500.00 shall be brought into conformance within 90 days after they become nonconforming or after notification by the city, whichever comes last. 
(3)	Signs having an original cost of more than $500.00 but less than $2,00.00 shall be brought into conformance within one year after they become nonconforming or after notification by the city, whichever comes last. 
(4)	Signs having an original cost of more than $2,000.00 but less than $5,000.00 shall be brought into conformance with five years after they become nonconforming or after notification by the city, whichever comes last. 
(5)	Signs having an original cost of more than $5,000.00 shall be brought into conformance within five years after they become nonconforming or after notification by the city, whichever comes last. 
(6)	A sign is or becomes nonconforming for the purposes of this section if it is not in conformance with the provisions of this chapter on either of the following dates: 
a.	90 days after the date of original enactment; or 
b.	Any date on which this chapter is amended. 
The amortization period prescribed in this section shall begin to run on the date on which the sign in question becomes nonconforming. 
(b)	Notification of violation. If any sign is erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the city shall give to the owner, agent, or beneficial user thereof written notice by certified mail of such violation, said notice to include a brief and complete statement of the violations to be remedied. If the owner, agent, or beneficial user of such sign is not known, affixing a copy of said notice to the sign or to the building on which the sign is erected for a period of ten days shall be sufficient. 
(Code 1998, § 34-111) 
Sec. 28-13. - Exemptions. 
The provisions and regulations of this chapter shall not apply to the following signs; provided, however, that such signs shall be subject to the provisions of section 28-10: 
(1)	Real estate signs not exceeding eight square feet in area which advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which said signs are located only; 
(2)	Professional name plates not exceeding one square foot in area; 
(3)	Residential name plates used to identify the owner or owners of a private residence; 
(4)	Bulletin boards not over eight square feet in area for public, charitable, or religious institutions when the same are located on the premises of said institutions; 
(5)	Signs denoting the architect, engineer, or contractor responsible for the job when placed upon work under construction; 
(6)	Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, and dates or erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials; 
(7)	Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, and danger signs, and such temporary, emergency, or nonadvertising signs occurring on the public right-of-way as may be approved by the city; 
(8)	Bona fide commercial and residential Christmas decorations; 
(9)	Directional signs not exceeding four square feet in area and with lettering not exceeding six inches in height, designed to direct and inform the public as to the location of exists, entrances, service areas, loading and unloading areas, or other matter of a similar informational nature; and 
(10)	One sign or billboard not exceeding 60 square feet in area nor eight feet in height along all major streets or thoroughfares of the city, on the right-of-way and at the jurisdictional limit, displaying the names of local bona fide civic, fraternal, or service organization within the community. 
(Code 1998, § 34-112) 
Chapter 30 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; local land disturbing ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; local erosion programs, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 

Sec. 30-1. - Title. 
This chapter is known as the Franklin Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 35-101) 
Sec. 30-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means an area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface; also known as "excavation." 
Department means the department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from land disturbing activity; also known as the "plan." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 30-3(5). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device, such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sediment control plan approved in writing by the West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The term "wetlands" generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Code 1998, § 35-102) 
Sec. 30-3. - Scope and exclusions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72; 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)	Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 30-4. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of ordinance 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 30-4 and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chicken, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; forestry land management practices, including harvesting and farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(7)	Any project involving 1 1/10 acres or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, state waters excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves 1 1/10 acres or less, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (8) or (9) of this section; 
(8)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 30-4; 
(9)	Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, provided that any such land disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 30-4(b) and (c). 
(Code 1998, § 35-103) 
Sec. 30-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not excluded by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(b)	Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(2)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(c)	Rules and regulations for governing land disturbing activities. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)	Land disturbing activities shall not be conducted with 25 feet of the banks of any state waters, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; provided, however, that buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to the "Metropolitan River Protection Act" (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.), shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection; and 
(16)	Land disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 100 horizontal feet, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, of the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of ordinance 5 of the "Georgia Water Quality Act" (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), unless a variance for such activity is granted by the director except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
(d)	Adoption of rules and regulations that exceed minimum requirements. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)	Injury of property of another. The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Code 1998, § 35-104) 
Sec. 30-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)	Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning regulations, stormwater management regulations, subdivision regulations, flood damage prevention regulation, this chapter, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party that can obtain a permit. 
(b)	Application requirements. 
(1)	No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city zoning department to perform such activity. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the county board of commissioners and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 30-4(b) and (c). Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)	A fee, in the amount of $200.00 plus $10.00 per acre or fraction thereof in the project area shall be charged. 
(4)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to he issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 30-4(c)(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(5)b of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the insuring authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(5)	a.	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
b.	The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)	Plan requirements. 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 30-4(b) and (c). Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)	Data required for site plan. 
a.	Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located in the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.	Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.	Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
d.	Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.	Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.	Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that: "The installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities." 
g.	Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.	Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for yearround seeding. 
i.	Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.	Maintenance statement: "erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection." 
(3)	Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.	Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.	Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.	Boundary line survey. 
d.	Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.	Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.	Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.	Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.	Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.	Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.	Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, ordinance 6. 
(4)	Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)	Permits. 
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by section 30-4(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(5)b of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)	No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the county tax assessor certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Code 1998, § 35-105) 
Sec. 30-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)	The city zoning department will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)	The city zoning department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(c)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)	The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of importing the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)	The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinances and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a)(1) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary correction action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as an issuing authority. 
(Code 1998, § 35-106) 
Sec. 30-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)	Stop work orders. Upon notice from the issuing authority or its agent, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provision of section 30-5(b)(5)b. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, permitting conditions, or stop work order shall be liable for a monetary penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day, or by a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding 60 days in jail or both fine and jail or work alternative. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1998, § 35-107) 
Sec. 30-8. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council within 30 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
(Code 1998, § 35-108) 
Sec. 30-9. - Validity and liability. 
(a)	Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not effect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(b)	Liability. 
(1)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)	The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Code 1998, § 35-109) 
Chapter 32 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 32-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter is to provide for the protection of the public health by prescribing the manner of storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of residential and industrial waste, rubbish, garbage, and refuse. 
(Code 1998, § 12-101) 
Sec. 32-2. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
Contractor includes every person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and the agents and employees thereof, engaged in construction, electrical, mechanical, air conditioning, heating, plumbing, roofing, demolition, landscaping, masonry, and allied-type work, and shall include nurserymen, and tree trimmers. 
Debris includes residue of any nature accumulating from the activities defined in this chapter. 
Garbage means all vegetable and animal matter, food and other refuse from a kitchen, market, store or elsewhere, including all matters that decay, attract flies or create disagreeable odors. 
Multiple residential unit means any duplex, apartment or groups of apartments under a single roof and used for dwelling places for more than one family. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the national sanitation foundation standard of 1.5 mils and not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, with securing twist tie. An untied plastic bag shall not be an approved container. 
Rubbish means bushes, trees, limbs, boxes, planks, boards, old furniture, scrape iron, tin and all other articles of similar nature and large in size that are not included in the definitions of garbage or trash. 
Single residential unit means any dwelling place occupied by one family. 
Trash means ashes, dirt, paper, yard sweepings and all other accumulations of similar nature and small in size that are not included in the definition of garbage. 
(Code 1998, § 12-102) 
Sec. 32-3. - Precollection. 
(a)	Generally. No person including contractors as defined in section 32-2, shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the city, except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth herein or under the express prior approval of the mayor and council. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The city clerk, by written notice, shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such solid waste accumulation to remove same. Failure to remove such accumulation within two weeks of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject to penalties hereinafter set forth. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continued. 
(b)	Containers. 
(1)	Garbage containers shall be provided by the owner or occupant of each residence or establishment sufficient in number to accommodate such waste generated by the residence or establishment between collections. Containers shall be of durable metal or plastic, water-tight, nonabsorbent, rust-resistant, rodent-proof, and easily cleanable. They shall be equipped with handles and tightly fitted covers and shall have a capacity of not less than 15 gallons nor more than 30 gallons, except that bulk containers of a type accepted by the mayor and council as suitable for mechanical collection by publicly owned equipment used for such collection may be used. Containers failing to comply with these provisions or which have defects causing them to scatter waste upon the ground during collection or causing them to hamper or to injure the persons collecting waste shall be promptly replaced. 
(2)	Disposable plastic bags of a type, size, and material designed for solid waste disposal may be used to contain refuse for storage and collection such that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. 
(c)	Rubbish. Rubbish may be stored for collection in trash bags strong enough to retain the waste; loose paper or cuttings shall be tied in bundles. Rubbish containers or bundles shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight. Limbs or cuttings shall not exceed four inches in diameter nor four feet in length. Rubbish containers or bundles shall be placed for collection beside the solid waste containers. 
(d)	Placement. On days designated by the mayor and council as collection days for the respective routes, garbage and/or rubbish shall be placed for collection on the curb or beside the roadway in front of the residence or establishment owning same, or if the property abuts on an alley, at the rear of the property, but not in the gutter or in the street or alley in such manner as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(e)	Scavenging. No person other than the owner or authorized collection personnel shall sift the contents of or remove anything from containers, boxes, or bundles containing garbage or rubbish. 
(Code 1998, § 12-103) 
Sec. 32-4. - Collection. 
(a)	Limitations. Industrial waste, large animals over 30 pounds, or waste from construction, demolition, landscaping, or processing operations will not be collected, transported, or disposed of by public facilities. Such waste collection, transportation, and disposal shall be by the owners and/or generators of such waste or animals. It shall be a violation of these regulations to place or cause to be placed in any container, box, or bundle, or otherwise for collection, any hazardous waste of any kind except upon specific prior arrangement with the mayor and council. 
(b)	Private contractors. No person other than employees of the city or county shall collect, transport, or dispose of solid waste for pay in the city without having first applied for and received a license to engage in such business. 
(Code 1998, § 12-104) 
Sec. 32-5. - Disposal. 
All disposal of solid waste shall be at disposal sites operated in accordance with state laws including certification and with rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources, and at no other place. Large appliances, stumps, or logs shall not be deposited at publicly operated disposal sites except by prior arrangement with the mayor and council. Fees for such disposal shall be billed and collected as hereinafter set forth. 
(Code 1998, § 12-105) 
Sec. 32-6. - Fees; charges for public collection and disposal. 
Monthly charges for public collection and disposal of solid waste shall be determined from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1998, § 12-106) 
Sec. 32-7. - Billing. 
(a)	Against whom levied. Service charges in accordance with the schedule determined by the mayor and council are levied against both the owner and the occupant of premises served, jointly and severally, but collecting from one shall relieve the other. 
(b)	Charges for solid waste collection and disposal. Charges for solid waste collection and disposal service shall be billed and collected monthly in a manner approved by the city council. 
(Code 1998, § 12-107) 
Sec. 32-8. - Solid waste management plan adopted. 
The City of Franklin Solid Waste Management Planning Standards and Procedures, adopted July 1, 1993, are incorporated by reference as if fully set out herein. 
(Code 1998, § 39-104) 
Chapter 34 - STREETS, CURBS, AND SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City has power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3. 

Sec. 34-1. - General regulations. 
(a)	Generally. The powers of a municipality with respect to its municipal street system shall be subject but not limited to chapter 4, title 32 (O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.), chapter 34, title 36 (O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.) and chapter 39, title 36 (O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(b)	Maintenance and repair of public streets. All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks, and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the mayor and city council, which body shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of state law, this Code, and all ordinances of the city relating to such public ways. 
(c)	Maintenance of sidewalks. It shall be the duty of the city to maintain all sidewalks laid by the city and considered to be city sidewalks. 
(d)	Maintenance of property between sidewalks and streets. All persons who own real estate in the city which abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved shall be required to keep that portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curbline of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts, in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other things which would mar or detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. Any property owner who shall place or allow grass to grow upon the portion of the sidewalk lying between the property line and the curbline of the street as aforesaid, and upon which his real estate abuts, shall keep such grass properly mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of their property, then this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession or control of the same. 
(e)	Defacing sidewalks, streets, and curbs. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street, or curb in the city by painting any signs thereon whether for commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk on, drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way newly laid street, sidewalk, or curbing pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid. 
(f)	Obstructions. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, or maintain any obstruction on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, except as may be provided in this chapter or in the ordinances and laws of the city without express legislative authority, a municipal corporation may not grant to any person the right to erect or maintain a structure or obstruction in a public street. 
(g)	Deposits and discharges onto streets and sidewalks. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal, or property. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewerage, waste milk, or other organic material. 
(h)	Report of defects, obstructions, deposits, and discharges. It shall be the duty of every city officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or discharge, in or on any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk, or other public way of the city, to report the same to the mayor and council, as soon as possible. 
(i)	Private use. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use any street, sidewalk, or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale when such display obstructs pedestrian travel or creates a traffic hazard. It shall also be unlawful for any person, firm or company to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement except as provided by law for the installation and operation of vending machines at welcome centers, tourist centers, and safety rest areas. 
(j)	Encroachments. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, or to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, without having first obtained a permit from the city clerk/treasurer in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(k)	Openings. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk, or alley without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk/treasurer in the manner specified in this chapter. All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the mayor and council. 
(l)	Trees and shrubs. 
(1)	Planting and removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure, or cut any tree, bush, or shrub in or from any public street, parkway, or other public place without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city clerk/treasurer in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(2)	Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any sign, advertisement, or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(3)	Dangerous trees. Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street, or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. 
a.	Any tree or limb of a tree which is likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. 
b.	The mayor and council may cause to be trimmed or removed any and all such trees or shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be removed. 
(4)	Poles and wires. Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys, or other public places of the city shall keep such wires and poles free and away from any nearby trees or shrubs in such places, and keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the mayor and council, so that no injury shall befall either the poles and wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact. 
(m)	Burning of leaves and rubbish. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish, or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks, or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 22-101) 
Sec. 34-2. - Street construction and improvements. 
(a)	Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way, or to repair the same, without having first obtained a permit from the city clerk/treasurer in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)	Bond. Each applicant for a permit to construct or improve any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way, shall be required to file a bond in the amount as determined by the mayor and council with surety to be approved by the city council, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss or damage caused by, or resulting from, the work undertaken. 
(c)	Specifications. 
(1)	Generally. All street and sidewalk pavements and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the specifications established or approved, from time to time, by the mayor and city council. 
(2)	Curb ramping. The standard for construction of curbs on each side of any city street, or any connecting street or road for which curbs have been prescribed, shall be not less than one ramp per linear block giving on the crosswalks at intersections. Such ramps shall be at least 40 inches wide and so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically handicapped persons. 
(d)	Barricades. Any person, firm, or corporation laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk, or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(Code 1998, § 22-102) 
Sec. 34-3. - Driveways and curbs. 
(a)	Permit required. No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade any driveway, curb, or curb-cut on the public streets without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk/treasurer in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)	Fee. The permit fee shall be determined by the mayor and council. 
(c)	Bond. The mayor and council shall have the authority to require an applicant for a permit hereunder to file a bond with his application conditioned to protect and save harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to any persons by reason of the proposed alteration work. 
(d)	Standards for issuance of permit. The city clerk/treasurer shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds: 
(1)	That the plans for the proposed operation have been approved by the mayor and council, to whom such plans shall be forwarded by the city clerk/treasurer within a reasonable time after receipt thereof; 
(2)	That the work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the city for public work of like character; 
(3)	That the operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the means of ingress to and egress from the affected and adjacent properties; and 
(4)	That the health, welfare, safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(e)	Supervision. All work for which a permit is granted hereunder shall be under the direction and supervision of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1998, § 22-103) 
Sec. 34-4. - Procedure for the issuance of permits. 
(a)	Application. Every person required to secure a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall submit a written application for such permit to the city clerk/treasurer. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)	The purpose for which the application is submitted; 
(3)	The nature and location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)	The estimated cost of the proposed work; and 
(5)	The date of commencement and date of completion of the proposed work and other dates or plans as may reasonably be required by the city clerk/treasurer or the mayor and city council. 
(b)	Permit fee. Unless otherwise provided, each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by a permit fee determined by the mayor and council. 
(1)	Issuance of receipts. The city clerk/treasurer shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a permit, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application. 
(2)	Rebate of fee. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk/treasurer shall refund such fee. 
(c)	Review of application and issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application for a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk/treasurer shall forward such application to the mayor and council, who shall approve or disapprove such application within seven days after receipt thereof. After indicating approval or disapproval on the application, the mayor and council shall return the same to the city clerk/treasurer. 
(d)	Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of an approved application from the mayor and council, the city clerk/treasurer shall issue a permit to the applicant therefor, which permit shall state the nature of the work to be done or activity to be carried out and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(e)	Display of permit. It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the permit issued to him in a conspicuous place at the site of the work or activity to be engaged in. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such permit at or about any location not covered thereby, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(f)	Limitation on issuance. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no permit shall be issued to any applicant who has failed to satisfy any bonding requirements imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done or carried out by such applicant. 
(Code 1998, § 22-104) 
Chapter 36 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Recording of maps and plats, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67 et seq.; subdivisions abutting state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.; the Zoning Procedures Laws, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Preamble and enactment clause. 
In pursuance of the authority conferred by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, 1983, art. IX, § 2, ¶ 4, and for the following purposes, among others: 
(1)	To encourage the development of economically sound and stable communities; 
(2)	To ensure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
(3)	To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; 
(4)	To ensure, in general, the wise development of new areas in harmony with the current city comprehensive land use plan; and 
(5)	To protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; 
the city council does hereby ordain and enact into law the articles and sections of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02)(preamble)) 
Sec. 36-2. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)	From and after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, these regulations shall govern the subdivision of all land within the city. 
(b)	Any owner of land within said jurisdiction wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the city clerk a plat of the subdivision which shall conform to all requirements set forth in these regulations. No plat of a subdivision lying within such territory or part thereof, shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk of superior court and no subdivider shall proceed with the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision until such subdivision plat shall have been approved by the planning and zoning board and the city council, and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the city clerk and by the city council. 
(c)	For the purpose of these regulations, the term "subdivision" shall be defined as all divisions of a tract or parcel of land under common ownership into more than two lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, immediate or future, or sale, legacy, or building development, and includes all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivisions and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within the term "subdivision": 
(1)	The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the city. 
(2)	The division of land into minimum of one acre or more where no new street is involved. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02)(juris.)) 
Sec. 36-3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of these regulations, which shall be known as the "City of Franklin Subdivision Regulations," certain words used herein are defined. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in these regulations shall carry their customary meanings as defined in a standard dictionary. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, roads, or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the subdivider may determine the outline of the block. 
Building setback line means the minimum horizontal distance between the street centerline and the building or any projection thereof except: 
(1)	Steps without roofs, uncovered terraces, and open fire escapes, not exceeding ten feet from the main building. 
(2)	Balconies, canopies, or cornices projecting not more than three feet beyond the main building wall. 
(3)	Offset or overlapping portions of the second floor that do not extend more than three feet beyond the main building wall. 
All buildings shall be 75 feet from the centerline of a highway, road, or street, etc. 
City council means the city council of the City of Franklin, Georgia. 
City/county inspector means a qualified person or persons designated by the city council to review specifications and inspect construction. 
Comprehensive plan means a plan, available from the city clerk which may consist of several maps, data, and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city, or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto recommended by the planning and zoning board, indicating the general location for major roads, parks, or other public utilities, or other similar information. 
Cul-de-sac means a street intersecting another at only one end and designated to be permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround as specified in these regulations. 
Dead-end street means a stub street in a subdivision which can at a later time be continued into another portion of the subdivision. 
Drainage plan means a plan or element thereof for the regulation or control of surface runoff and drainage. 
Easement means a grant by the property owner of a strip of land for use by the public, the city, the county, a corporation or other persons for specified purposes. 
Health department means the Heard County Health Department. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the public right-of-way of a road or walkway may be included. An easement may be counted when determining the area and dimensions of a lot if the nature of the easement will not eliminate an adequate building site. 
(1)	Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their meeting point. 
(2)	Double front lot means a lot, other than a corner lot, abutting upon to two or more streets. 
Lot width means the width of the lot at the building line measured parallel to the street right-of-way. 
Plan, comprehensive, means a plan, which may consist of several maps, data and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto adopted by the city council, indicating the general location for major streets, parks, or other public utilities, zoning districts, or other similar information. The term "comprehensive plan" shall be based upon and include appropriate studies of the location and extent of present and anticipated population, social and economic resources and problems, and other useful data. 
Plat, final, means a finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certification necessary for recording. 
Plat, preliminary, means a drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate unquestionably its workability, but is not in final form for recording and the details are not completely computed. 
Streets, roads and alleys means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, parkway, thoroughfare, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place or however otherwise designated. 
(1)	Collector street or road means a street within a subdivision used to carry traffic from the minor streets to the major thoroughfares and includes the principal entrance and circulation streets of a subdivision. 
(2)	Minor street or road means a street used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
Subdivider means any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, or trust, or any group of trusts, or any group or combination of groups acting as a unit, dividing, or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined, including any agent of the subdivider. 
Subdivision means for the purpose of these regulations a subdivision all divisions of a tract or parcel of land under common ownership into more than two lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, immediate or future, or sale, legacy, or building development, and includes all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes re-subdivisions and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)	The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the city. 
(2)	The division of land into minimum of one acre or more where no new street is involved. 
Walkway means a walkway is a right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, ten feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor propelled vehicles are excluded. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02), art. II) 
Secs. 36-4—36-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 36-25. - Preapplication procedure. 
(a)	Prior to the preparation of a subdivision plat, the subdivider is urged to confer with the city clerk, who shall review the sketch plan of the proposed subdivision to determine whether said subdivision meets all requirements of this regulation. This step does not require formal application of filing of the plat. 
(1)	Sketch plan (two copies) should show in sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, street names, subdivision title, and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a free-hand sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey, if available. The sketch plan should include the existing topographic data listed in section 36-26 or as much of this information as is necessary for consideration of the proposed plan. 
(2)	General subdivision information (one copy) should describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to supplement the sketch plan. This information may include data on land characteristics; existing and proposed covenants, community facilities, utilities, and streets, and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, minimum floor area in structures, business areas, playgrounds, park and other areas. 
(b)	Under no circumstances shall favorable consideration by the city clerk be construed as approval. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02), art. III, § A) 
Sec. 36-26. - Procedures for conditional approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)	The subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat together with other supplementary material as specified in this section. 
(b)	Preliminary plat (six copies of blue-line print) shall be at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch or not less than 200 feet per inch for so called mini-farm subdivisions where lots are in large acreage. It shall show all existing conditions and shall show all proposals including: 
(1)	Street names, right-of-way widths, central angles of street intersections, dimensions of radii or chords, approximate grade, similar data for alleys (if any). (Note: The name of the main street of a subdivision which provides ingress/egress to the subdivision shall have the name of the subdivision included as the street's name.) 
(2)	Lot lines, lot numbers, and block letters. 
(3)	Sites (if any) to be dedicated or reserved for parks playgrounds, or other uses, together with the purpose and limitations (if any) of such dedication. 
(4)	Sites (if any) for multifamily dwellings, churches, industry, shopping centers, or other uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. 
(5)	Minimum building setback lines. 
(6)	Location of subdivision tied to land lot or state plane coordinate system. 
(7)	Boundary lines; bearings, if available, and distances. 
(8)	Easements; location, width, and holder. 
(9)	Streets on and adjacent to the tract; name, right-of-way width, pavement width, and location, existing or platted. 
(10)	Significant contour data at such an interval as required to determine preliminary design of the proposed improvements and other dependent features. (United States Geologic Survey Maps (USGS) shall be acceptable for this purpose.) 
(11)	Other conditions on the tract; watercourses, existing structures, existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains and culverts within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto, location and size of nearest water main, sanitary sewer, storm sewer or outlet, and other significant features. 
(12)	Title and certificates (title under which proposed subdivision is to be recorded, with name of owner and name of designer). 
(13)	Names and boundaries of all adjoining subdivisions and names of recorded owners of adjoining un-subdivided land. 
(14)	Scale, north point (arrow), date of survey, and date of plat. 
(15)	Name and address of person to whom hearing notice shall be sent. 
(c)	Fee for filing preliminary plat. At the time of filing an application for preliminary plat approval, a fee shall be paid to the city. This fee shall be $100.00 for each submission of a preliminary plat of a subdivision, to include one revision. Any more revisions will require payment of additional $25.00 fees. 
(d)	Draft of protective covenants, in any (one copy), whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development. 
(e)	At least ten days prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning board at which it is to be considered, one copy of a properly executed application (see section 36-86), together with six copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified, shall be submitted to the city clerk. 
(f)	Within 30 days after the submittal of the preliminary plat and other material, the planning and zoning board shall express conditional approval and conditions of approval (if any) or shall express disapproval and reasons therefor. The applicant may waive this requirement and consent to the extension of such period. 
(g)	The action of the planning and zoning board shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the others retained by the planning and zoning board. 
(h)	Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. 
(i)	Approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective and binding upon the city for a period not to exceed one year from the date of approval and shall thereafter expire and be null and void except to the extent that work on the subdivision has progressed, unless a request for an extension of time has been submitted to and is subsequently approved by the city council. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02), art. III, § B) 
Sec. 36-27. - Procedure for approval of final plat. 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land in the city is proposed and the subdivider has complied with the requirements in sections 36-25 and 36-26, and received the necessary approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall proceed under the following guidelines: 
(1)	Application for final plat approval. The subdivider may, within one year from conditional approval, submit to the planning commission: Six copies of the final plat and other materials, at least one copy of which shall be drawn in permanent ink on plastic vellum (Mylar) 18- by 24-inch sheets. 
(2)	Conform to the preliminary plat as approved. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and, if desired by the subdivider, may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. The final plat, prepared according to the 1961 Georgia Plat Act, shall show but not be limited to the following: (Note: The final plat provided by the subdivider shall be prepared by a professional, registered land surveyor.) 
a.	Sufficient data to locate readily and reproduce on the ground the bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, and building line. This shall include but not be limited to, the radius, length of arc, central angle, and tangent distance for the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets. 
b.	Tract boundary lines, street right-of-way lines, easement and other right-of-way lines, property lines, or residential lots and other sites. 
c.	All dimensions shall be accurate to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and angles accurate to the nearest minute. 
d.	Name and width of all streets or other right-of-way. (The name of the main street which shall providing ingress/egress to the subdivision shall be or include the name of the subdivision.) 
e.	Subdivision name and location, north point and magnetic declination. 
f.	Location, dimensions, purposes, and holder of any easements and any areas or sites to be dedicated to public use or for uses other than residential with statement of purpose and limitations. 
g.	Lots and sites in numerical order and blocks in alphabetical order. 
h.	Accurate location, description, and material of monuments and markers. 
i.	Space shall be provided for certifications of approval or acceptance of: 
1.	The county health department. 
2.	The state water quality control board, where applicable. 
3.	The engineer or surveyor and owner: (See form in section 36-86.) 
4.	The city planning and zoning board. 
5.	The city council. 
j.	Record. "Filed in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Heard County, Georgia, Plat Book No. ____________ , Page No. ____________ ." 
1.	Protective covenants (if any) shall be attached to and identified on the final plat or referenced to deed book and page where recorded. 
2.	Public notice, drainage. The following note shall be placed in a prominent place on the final plat: 
"NOTE: City of Franklin assumes no responsibility for over flow or erosion of natural drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way or for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded subdivision plat." 
(3)	Hearing. Before approval of the final plat the planning and zoning board shall hold a hearing. Notice of the time and place of such meeting shall be sent by the secretary of the board by registered or certified mail to the person designated on the preliminary plat not less than five days prior to the date of the hearing. A signed statement from the designated person acknowledging the date of the hearing will satisfy the requirements of this subsection. 
(4)	Approval of the final plat. Not later than three days after the hearing, the planning and zoning board shall transmit its recommendations to approve or disapprove the final plat to the city council. A notation of the planning and zoning board's action shall be made on the original and two copies of the final plat, including a statement of the reasons thereof if the final plat is disapproved. If action on a final plat in not taken by the planning and zoning board within 30 days of the date of submittal, the final plat shall be considered approved and certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
(5)	Recording of the final plat. Upon approval of the final plat by the city council, the city clerk shall deliver the final plat to the office of the superior court of heard county for recording. The subdivider shall be responsible for the payment of the recording fee on or before the date the final plat is submitted for recording. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02), art. III, § C) 
Secs. 36-28—36-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 36-58. - Streets and/or roads. 
(a)	The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)	Where such is not shown in the comprehensive plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)	Provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
(2)	Conform to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the city council to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
(c)	Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(d)	Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(e)	Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, the planning and zoning board may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts. Such distance shall also be determined with regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(f)	Privately owned reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited. 
(g)	Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
(h)	Street intersections should be as nearly at right angles as practicable. 
(i)	Street right-of-way width shall be as shown in the city thoroughfare plan and where not shown shall be no less than: 
(1)	60 feet without curb and gutter. 
(2)	50 feet with curb and gutter. 
(j)	Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and where it is determined to be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
(k)	Dead-end streets may be platted where the planning and zoning board deems desirable and where the land adjoins property not subdivided, in which case the streets shall be carried to the boundaries thereof. 
(l)	Dead-end streets or culs-de-sac, designed to be so permanently, shall be provided with a turn-around at the closed end. 
(m)	No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with names of existing streets. Proposed streets in obvious alignment with existing and named streets shall bear the name of the existing street. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the city council. (The name of the main street which shall provide ingress/egress to the subdivision shall be or include the name of the subdivision.) 
(n)	Street grades, whenever feasible and with allowance for reasonable vertical curves, shall not exceed the following: 

 
(o)	No street shall have a grade of less than one-half of one percent except in vertical curve reversals. 
(p)	Access to a subdivision shall be provided over a public street or road. Where a subdivision abuts a public road or street which is less than 80 feet in width, the developer to improve said road or street due to such dedication. 
(q)	Approval may be denied on a proposed subdivision where the city council deems a public road leading to the subdivision as being inadequate due to right-of-way width or construction until such time as the road has been brought up to the city subdivision standards. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02), art. IV, § A) 
Sec. 36-59. - Easements. 
(a)	Utility and drainage easements shall be provided as required by the city council. 
(b)	Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, natural channel, or stream there shall be provided an easement conforming substantially to the limits of such course plus additional width as necessary to accommodate future construction and maintenance. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02), art. IV, § B) 
Sec. 36-60. - Blocks. 
(a)	Length, width, and shape of blocks shall be determined with regard to: 
(1)	Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)	Minimum lot size is one-half acre per living unit (including multifamily residential units), where water and sewage are available or one acre where neither water or sewage is available. 
(3)	Need for convenience access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic. 
(4)	Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)	The desirable maximum block length is 1,200 feet and the desirable minimum block length is 600 feet. On culs-de-sac or dead-end streets, the desirable length is 600 feet. 
(c)	Pedestrian easements, not less than ten feet wide, may be required where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. 
(d)	When feasible, all trees of major growth in the subdivision shall be preserved. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02), art. IV, § C) 
Sec. 36-61. - Lots. 
(a)	Lot size, dimensions and setback lines shall conform to the requirements of these regulations. Where possible, in each block, lots shall be dimensioned to the nearest foot with any fractional portion being placed in the corner lot. 
(b)	Lots meeting size requirements are not automatically approved for development with individual sewerage system and/or water supply. 
(c)	Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra width, to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. 
(d)	Each lot shall front upon a public street. 
(e)	Double frontage, and reverse frontage lots, shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to over-come specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen reservation of at least ten feet and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(f)	Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02), art. IV, § D) 
Sec. 36-62. - Public sites and open spaces. 
Park and playground sites may be dedicated to city, and, if so dedicated and accepted, shall be developed exclusively for public recreational or park purposes. The subdivider and the city council shall agree upon a reasonable limit of time within which the city shall be required to complete specified improvements to the site; otherwise, the title of the site shall revert to the subdivider. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02), art. IV, § E) 
Sec. 36-63. - General suitability. 
The planning and zoning board shall not recommend approval of a subdivision or a portion of a subdivision if, from adequate investigation, it has been determined that the area is, because of periodic flooding, improper drainage, or erosion due to topographical or other reasons, unsuitable for development purposes of the kind proposed unless such hazards can be and are corrected. Suitability will be determined at the time of the preliminary plat review. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02), art. IV, § F) 
Secs. 36-64—36-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 36-85. - Improvements. 
Every subdivider at such subdivider's expense shall be required to install or at such subdivider's own expense to have installed by the appropriate public utility the following improvements: 
(1)	Minimum improvements required. 
a.	Receipt of the signed copy of the approved preliminary plat is authorization for the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of plans and specifications for the following minimum improvements and with preparation of the final plat. Prior to the construction of any improvements required or to the submittal of a performance guarantee, the subdivider shall furnish the city inspector all plans, information, and data necessary to determine the character of such improvements. All plans and/or specifications shall have the approval of the city council. 
1.	Specifications and permits for construction within dedicated rights-of-way referred to in this article are available from the office of the city clerk. 
2.	No construction including utilities shall be initiated without the approval of the city council. 
b.	Prior to the start of construction, the subdivider shall file with the city council: 
1.	A performance guarantee such as a performance bond, a bond executed by an owner of real estate of sufficient value (said owner being a resident of the county), a financial statement, irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement, cashier's check or certified check conditioned to secure construction of the improvements required and within a time period specified by the city council, such period not to exceed two years. No performance guarantee shall be accepted unless enforceable by or payable to the city in a sum equal to the cost of construction as estimated by the city inspector and in a form approved by the city attorney; or 
2.	The requirements of this section may be satisfied by the approved contractors installing improvements in the subdivision furnishing a performance bond which shall name the city as a principal equally with the owner and shall be worded to include in its coverage the one-year maintenance warranty period following acceptance of the improvements by the city. 
(2)	Streets and related improvements. 
a.	Street grading. All street rights-of-way shall be cleared and graded to the standards of the city and the county. These standards referred to in these regulations are on file in the offices of the public works department, the health department, and the city hall. 
b.	Street paving. 
1.	All streets and roads in each subdivision and any public road on which houses of any subdivision are to be built, shall be paved according to the standards adopted by the county. 
2.	Each street in a subdivision shall have a right-of-way of at least 50 feet with paved width of not less than 20 feet. 
c.	Curb and gutters. 
1.	Curb and gutters are not required by these regulations for subdivision development in the city. 
2.	If curb and gutters are not planned, there shall be adequate drainage of said lots as determined by the city council (inspector). 
3.	However, if curb and gutters are planned, they shall be two feet in width and of roll-back construction, and meet all standards required by the city and the county. 
(3)	Subterranean improvements. No underground work shall be covered or concealed until inspected and approved by the city inspector. Work shall be inspected within 48 hours after notification, excluding week-ends and holidays. 
(4)	Water supply. 
a.	The subdivider shall install or have installed a system of water mains and connections to each lot which shall be in accordance with adopted standards of the county water authority. 
b.	Where a public water system is not available, each lot in a subdivision shall be furnished with a water supply system approved by the health department, if such system consists of separate wells located on and serving individual lots; and any other nonpublic water supply system shall be approved by the county health department, and meet DNR/EPD Drinking Water requirements. 
(5)	Sanitary sewage disposal. 
a.	When in the opinion of the county water and sewer department, public sanitary sewers are available to the subdivision, the subdivider shall provided sanitary sewer services to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision. All sewer lines in the subdivision shall be installed by the subdivider. All sewer development must comply with the county water and sewer department standards. 
b.	When in the opinion of the county water and sewer department, a public sanitary sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot may be used when in compliance with health department regulations and requirements. The use of community sewage disposal systems may be considered; however, the county water and sewer department and the state DNR/EPD must approve such systems. The county water and sewer department reserves the right to retain consulting engineers to review proposed community sewage disposal systems. The cost associated with these reviews shall be paid by the developer. The city reserves the right to reject the use of these systems should the state require the city to own, maintain, operate, and/or hold the permit. The city also reserves the right to reject the use of these systems if in the opinion of the city council the installation of such system would have an adverse impact or would not be in keeping with the overall city land use plan. 
c.	When in the opinion of the city council and the county water and sewer department a development lies in a drainage basin that could be designated for sewer service, the city reserves the right to require easements for future sewer collection systems. 
d.	All septic systems require approval by the health department, and must comply with all local, state, and federal regulations concerning this type system. 
e.	No part of any septic tank drainage shall be closer than 150 feet to any impoundment which shall be used for human consumption. No part of any septic tank drain system shall be closer than 150 feet to a stream that has been designated for potential future water supply by the city, county, or state. No part of any septic drain system shall be located within 100 feet of any lake built on any stream designated by the city, county, or state. 
(6)	Sidewalks. Sidewalks are optional improvements, but if installed, they must be built to the following standards: 
a.	Construction shall be four inches thick and 3,000 mix concrete. 
b.	Compaction shall be a minimum of 95 percent. 
c.	Width of sidewalk may vary from four to six feet. 
d.	Sidewalks shall be so located that there will be a minimum of four feet of width between the outside edge of the curb (or drainage ditch) and the leading edge of the sidewalk. 
There will be a minimum of a two-inch fall in elevation from the outside edge of the curb to the back of the sidewalk, or vice versa, depending on drain slope. 
(7)	Removal of debris. In order to protect and preserve potential building sites, areas suitable for the installation of wells, septic tanks, and drain fields, and for other purposes, all stumps and other tree parts, brush, weeds, excess or scrap building materials or other debris shall be removed from the subdivision site and disposed of in accordance with law. No tree stumps, or other portions of tree trunks or limbs shall be buried or burned anywhere in the development. All dead or dying trees, standing or fallen shall be removed from the site. 
(8)	Traffic control devices. 
a.	Street name signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization, shall be provided by the subdivider/developer through payment of specified fees to the public works department, or required signs and devices shall be installed by the subdivider/developer in accordance with the requirements of, and subject to final approval by, the public works department and/or city council. The procedure to followed by the subdivider in achieving compliance with these requirements shall be directed by and at the option of the city council. 
b.	The installation/placement of all required signs and traffic control devices shall be completed prior to final plat approval and/or issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any development in the subdivision. 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02), art. V) 
Sec. 36-86. - County form for plat survey and dedication. 
STATE OF GEORGIA  HEARD COUNTY 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown thereon actually exist or are marked "future", and their location, size, type, and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Franklin, Georgia have been fully complied with. 

 

 

 
I, the owner of said property surveyed, do hereby join in the foregoing statement and do hereby certify that it was and is my intention to divide said land into lots as shown by said plat and by execution of this certificate I do hereby dedicate and convey for public use such streets, alleys, and public ground to the City of Franklin, Georgia as is shown on this plat and do warrant that title was vested in me as of the date of this dedication. 

 
(Code 1998, § 39-102; Ord. of 8-3-2006(02), app. A) 
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

Sec. 38-1. - Uniform rules of the road. 
(a)	Adoption by reference. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2 to 40-6-395 (except for O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-393 and 40-6-394), and O.C.G.A. §§ 40-2-20 and 40-5-20, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)	Punishment according to state law. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-5-121, the municipal court of the city shall be authorized to impose punishment in accordance with state law for convictions of driving while a license is suspended or revoked. 
(c)	Speed zones. The city council may establish maximum speed limits on any street or portion of a street within the city in accord with the provisions of state law, and shall post traffic signs as required by state law on those particular streets or portions of a street giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit. 
(Code 1998, § 11-101) 
Sec. 38-2. - Parking. 
Parking zones, no standing zones, and stop signs shall be as established by the mayor and council as they deem appropriate, and marked with signage designating the street or portion of a street as such according to state law. 
(Code 1998, § 11-102) 
Sec. 38-3. - Motorized carts. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three or more low pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars for steering control. 
Electric personal assistive mobility device or EPAMD means a self-balancing, two nontandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (one horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such propulsion system and ridden by an operator. 
Motorized cart means every powered motor vehicle having not less than three wheels and an unladen weight of 1,300 pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than 20 miles per hour, including golf carts and similar types of self-propelled vehicles. 
(b)	Operation regulations; equipment requirements. A license is not required for the operation of an electric personal assistive mobility devices within the city. Motorized carts may be operated within the city only by: 
(1)	Those persons who are 16 years of age and older and have a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(2)	Those persons who are 15 years of age, who have in their possession a valid instructional permit issued by the state pursuant to O.G.G.A. § 40-5-24, as may be amended, and have not had their instructional permit suspended or revoked, if accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(3)	No person under 15 years of age shall be permitted to operate a motorized cart on any public street within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)	Registration and decal required. Before any motorized cart may be operated within the city, the cart must be registered and receive a decal from the clerk of the city signifying its registration. A person desiring to register a motorized cart shall bring documentation setting forth a description of the cart to the clerk's office and complete an application for registration of the cart as provided by the city clerk. 
(d)	Installation of safety systems and charge indicator. Motorized carts and EPAMDs shall be equipped with, at a minimum, all factory installed safety systems and a charge indicator for low battery. 
(e)	Issuance and placement of decal. Upon registration, the clerk shall issue a decal to be applied to the rear of such cart so as to be plainly visible. The registration application shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Name and address of owner. 
(2)	Model, make, name and motorized cart identification number. 
(3)	Such other information which the city may require so long as such information is also required to register a motor vehicle pursuant to state law. 
The registration application shall be accompanied by a fee of $10.00. The issued registration shall be nontransferable from the cart for which it is issued. 
(f)	Emblem. Before any motorized cart may be operated within the city, the cart must have affixed thereto an emblem as required by O.G.G.A. § 40-8-4. 
(g)	Compliance to traffic regulations. All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the city streets and other areas accessible to such carts by the public in the city, including the uniform rules of the road contained in O.G.G.A. §§ 40-6-2 through 40-6-395. 
(h)	Rules of operation upon streets, crossings and trails. Motorized carts and EPAMDs which are in compliance with this section may be operated on any street within the city which is not specifically within the jurisdiction of the state department of transportation and having a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less, and may only cross streets or roads within the state highway system at intersections or crossings designated for that purpose by the department of transportation. Motorized carts may not be operated on sidewalks or multiuse trails, unless a portion of a sidewalk or multiuse trail is specifically designated for such use by the city public works department. 
(1)	Time of operation. All vehicles authorized by this chapter may be operated only during daylight hours between one-half hour before sunrise and one-half hour after sunset, unless equipped with two operating headlights, tail lights, brake lights, and turn signals which are visible from a distance of 500 feet. Such vehicles shall not be operated at anytime when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles on the street or roadway at a distance of 500 feet. 
(2)	Operation of all-terrain vehicles. No person shall operate or drive any all terrain vehicle upon any portion of the right-of-way of any public road, street or highway within the city. All-terrain vehicles (ATVs) shall be operated only on private property with the written consent of the owner of such property to be carried by the riders at all times and displayed to law enforcement officials upon request. 
(3)	Hazardous activities prohibited; special rules. 
a.	No individual or group utilizing motorized carts or EPAMDs shall engage in any dangerous, reckless, or hazardous activities on the city streets or other areas accessible by the public. Such activities shall include, but not be limited to, racing in any form, except for special events approved by the city, blocking of any public access, except for special events approved by the city, reckless or aggressive driving, loitering or parking on roads, bridges or in underpasses, and not issuing an audible warning when approaching pedestrians from the rear. 
b.	All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city shall also apply to drivers and occupants of motorized carts, all terrain vehicles and electric personal assistive mobility devices. 
c.	The number of occupants in a motorized carter shall be limited to the number of persons for whom factory seating is installed and provided on the golf cart. 
d.	All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during the movement and/or operation of the motorized cart and EPAMDs. No parts of the bodies of any operator or passenger shall extend outside the perimeter of the vehicle while it is being operated. 
e.	No driver shall operate a motorized cart or EPAMDs between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines of rows of vehicles. 
(4)	Liability. Every person using motorized carts and EPAMDs on city streets is liable for his own actions. Liability insurance coverage varies, and each person owning or operating a motorized cart or EPAMD on the city streets or in those areas accessible by the public should verify coverage. The city does not require mandatory liability coverage in order to operate any of the vehicles authorized in this chapter. 
(5)	Penalties. A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this Code. An owner, lessee or operator may be cited to appear in the municipal court. Upon finding by such court that an owner, lessee, or operator of any motorized vehicle authorized by this chapter has violated any provision of this chapter, such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00 for each offense, along with court costs and all other applicable surcharges. 
(6)	Revoking of permit. Permits will be revoked if it is found that: 
a.	The permit holder no longer has a valid driver's license. 
b.	Failure to abide by the rules and regulations of this chapter. 
c.	Failure to grant right-of-way to pedestrians and bicyclists. 
d.	The holder of the permit cannot safely operate the motorized cart or EPAMD on the designated path or roadway or pose a threat to the safety of others. 
(7)	Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
a.	Public safety officials while in the performance of their official duties. 
b.	The use of such vehicles in a safe and reasonable manner in a parade which has been approved by city officials. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 38-4. - Heavy motor vehicles, routes—Generally. 
No vehicle with more than six wheels shall utilize any roadway within the city limits for travel and/or access through the city, unless such roadway is clearly marked as a state or federal route, or has been designated as a truck route or alternative truck route by the city. However, vehicles exceeding the restricted limit shall be permitted to travel on roadways not designated as truck routes only for the purpose of delivering or receiving goods and services to a specific destination along non-truck routes. If travel along non-truck routes is necessary for the above permissible purpose described in this section, then vehicles must use the nearest intersection for entering and exiting restricted roadways. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(4)) 
Sec. 38-5. - Designated truck routes; alternate truck routes. 
(a)	Vehicles exceeding the restriction shall be permitted to utilize the following routes as a means to travel through the city limits and shall be considered truck routes: 
(1)	U.S. Highway 27. 
(2)	State Route (SR) 34. 
(3)	State Route (SR) 100. 
(b)	Truck routes, other than clearly marked state and federal routes, shall be properly designated by signage in accordance with applicable laws and safety policies. The city may also post signage in problem areas designating "NO THRU TRUCKS IN EXCESS OF SIX WHEELS." 
(c)	In the case that the designated truck routes do not provide sufficient access through the city, a written petition describing why the designated truck routes are insufficient and suggesting proposed additional or alternative truck routes may be submitted along with a certified traffic study for both the existing truck route and the proposed alternative truck routes to the city requesting a designation of alternative truck routes. Upon receipt of such petition, the mayor or his designee shall consider such request and designate alternative truck routes if it is found necessary and proper. Alternatively, the mayor or his designee may develop such alternative routes if the mayor or his designee makes a finding on the city's own accord that such alternative routing is necessary and proper. 
(d)	The city clerk shall maintain an accurate and current list of truck routes and/or alternate truck routes. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(4)) 
Sec. 38-6. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to any police, fire, ambulance or other public safety vehicle; vehicles owned or operated by the city; or vehicles owned or operated by designated representatives or contractors of the city actively engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of city streets, street improvements or utilities within the city's rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(4)) 
Sec. 38-7. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by the chief of police, his designee or other sworn law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(4)) 
Sec. 38-8. - Violation and penalty. 
Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided for in Section 1-8 of chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2017(4)) 
Chapter 40 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Intent; purpose. 
(a)	The intent of this chapter is: 
(1)	To regulate: 
a.	The location, and use of buildings, structures, and land for residence, trade, industry, and other purposes, the height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures; 
b.	The use of buildings, and land for business, industry, residence, public activities and other purposes; and 
(2)	For dividing the incorporated area into districts for such purposes and establishing boundaries; providing for a planning and zoning board, defining its power and duties; 
(3)	The method of administration, amendment and enforcement; 
(4)	Prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions; and 
(5)	Repealing conflicting resolutions. 
(b)	The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the use of land and improvements in the city. The zoning regulations and districts herein established are designed to: 
(1)	Lessen congestion in the streets. 
(2)	Provide safety from fire, panic, and other dangers. 
(3)	Promote health, and general welfare. 
(4)	Provide adequate light and air. 
(5)	Avoid undue concentration of the population. 
(6)	Provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. 
(7)	Conserve the value of economy. 
(8)	Encourage the most appropriate use of land and structures. 
(9)	Promote quality of life for all citizens. 
(10)	Provide consistency with land use element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), art. 1, § 2.1) 
Sec. 40-2. - Rules of construction. 
(a)	Rules. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense includes the future; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular; the term "structure" includes the term "building"; the term "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(b)	Use of definitions. Any term not herein defined shall be as defined elsewhere in this chapter or, if not defined elsewhere in this chapter, as defined in Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language, Second College Edition, the said definition to be read in context with the purposes and provision of the part of the chapter it is being used to define. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), §§ 3.1, 3.2) 
Sec. 40-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure detached from the principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building. 
Accessory use means a use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use. 
Addition means, to an existing building, any walled or roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall, any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall is new construction. 
Administrator, zoning, means the city clerk and his duly authorized representative, whom the city council has designated as its agent for the administration of this chapter. 
Alley means a public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, columns, and girders, except such emergency change as may be required for safety purposes; any addition to a building; any change in use from one district classification to another; or, any movement of a building from one location to another. 
Animal hospital means a facility for the temporary boarding and treatment of domestic animals operated under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. 
Apartment. See Dwelling, multifamily. 
Basement means the area below the first floor level in a building and having not more than one-half of its height above grade. 
Bed and breakfast inn means a building, not necessarily owner occupied, which offers transient lodging accommodations and breakfast for four or more guest rooms for compensation provided: 
(1)	Compliance with the same licensing, inspection and taxation requirements as hotels motels, and restaurant. 
(2)	If within a residential district, the building shall be residential in character. 
(3)	Breakfast is the only meal served and only to overnight guests. 
(4)	The owners may have employees. 
(5)	The owner shall provide one off-street parking space for each rental room and one space for each employee. 
(6)	In a residential district, signage shall be limited to one sign and maximum size of two square feet. 
Berm means a mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a mound. A berm is usually two to six feet high and is used to shield, screen, and buffer undesirable views or to separate incompatible land uses. In traffic work, the term "berm" refers to the raised area between the curbline and right-of-way line. 
Buffer means a portion of a lot set aside for open space and/or screening purposes, to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances; to block physical passage to dangerous areas; or, to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt and litter. A buffer may contain a barrier, such as a berm, wall or fence, where such additional screening is necessary to achieve the desired level of buffering between various activities and/or land uses. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the highest grade adjacent to the highest point of roof surface of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height between eaves and ridges of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
Building line means a line parallel to the street right-of-way line at a distance from the right- of-way line equal to the depth of the required front yard for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
Building site means the portion of a lot, as defined elsewhere in this section, which shall meet or exceed the minimum area and other requirements specified herein for placement of a principal building and/or any necessary on-site septic tanks and drain fields, and/or wells for water supply. Such building site shall meet the minimum area requirements as specified for the zoning district in which it is located, exclusive of any land area located within the 100-year floodplain, and such building site shall meet all requirements as established by the county health department. 
Cemetery, private, means any plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure used for the burial of deceased persons of one collateral line of descent. 
Cemetery, public, means any plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure not located on property owned by or adjacent to a religious institution but used for the burial of deceased persons. 
Cemetery, religious institution, means a plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure owned by or adjacent to a religious institution and used for the burial of deceased persons who are generally members of that religious institution. 
Centerline of the street means that survey and monument line by the survey of the city or county shall be the centerline of the street, or if such a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs and ditches of a street, or the middle of the traveled roadway of the street. 
Child care facility means a building or portion of a building where care and supervision is provided to persons away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation; serves 19 or more persons and is licensed by the state; for children, the outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence of not less than four feet in height in the rear yard only. The term "child care" includes, but not be limited to, the terms "day care," "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school" and "preschool." 
Child care, group, means a building or portion of a building which provides care and supervision of persons away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours a day on a regular basis for compensation; serves seven to 18 persons and is licensed by the state. 
Child care home, family, means a customary home occupation which provides for six or fewer persons who are not residents of the premises; care and supervision by a state registered resident adult for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. 
Church means a building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, which by design and construction are primarily intended for conducting organized religious services and associated accessory uses. 
City council means the city council of the City of Franklin, Georgia. 
Clinic means an establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment on an outpatient basis by one or more physicians, dentists, other medical personnel, psychologists, or social workers and where patients are not lodged overnight. 
Club, private, means an establishment or premises owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational or recreational purpose but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a for profit business. 
Comprehensive plan means an all inclusive, long-range plan intended to guide the growth and development of a community or region which typically includes inventory and analytic sections leading to a recommendation for the community's future economic development, housing, recreation, transportation, community facilities and land use, all related to the community's goals and objectives for these elements. 
Development means: 
(1)	The subdividing a tract of land into two or more lots whether for sale or rental; 
(2)	The construction, erection or expansion of a structure, filling, grading, excavation or land disturbing activities affecting more than one acre; 
(3)	The recording a plat in the office of the clerk of superior court; or 
(4)	The location of a facility. 
District means a delineated section or sections of the city for which the zoning regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform. 
Dwelling means a building which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family, multifamily residential buildings, roominghouses and boardinghouses, manufactured homes and industrialized homes but not including hotels and motels. 
Dwelling, apartment. See " Dwelling, multifamily. " 
Dwelling, duplex, means a dwelling unit designed to provide two housing units. Duplex housing shall adhere to type I or Type II Appearance Standards. 
Dwelling, loft, means a dwelling unit, occupied by no more than six persons, and located only on the floor above a ground-level commercial business. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed as two or more separate units for or occupied exclusively by two or more families. 
Dwelling, single-family attached, means a building containing two or more dwelling units, each of which is deeded with separate ownership and has primary ground floor access to the outside and which are attached to each other by party walls without openings. The term "single-family attached dwelling" can include fee-simple townhouses and condominiums. 
Dwelling, single-family detached, means a residential building containing not more than one dwelling unit entirely surrounded by open space. The term "single-family detached dwelling" includes site-built houses, manufactured and industrialized houses. (A mobile home is not a single-family detached dwelling.) All single-family detached dwellings shall meet the appearance standards as provided in section 40-69. 
Easement means a grant of one or more property rights to and/or for a person, government agency, or public utility company to use public or private land owned by another for a specific purpose. 
Family means one or more individuals permanently occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a boardinghouse, group home, or hotel, as defined in this section. 
Flood means a rise in stream flow or stage that results in temporary inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel. 
Floor area, gross, means the gross heated areas of all floors, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of the building. 
Garage, private, means an accessory building designed or used for the storage of motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the buildings to which it is an accessory. 
Grade means the average level of the finished ground surface adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
Group home means a residence composed of non related individuals with one or more surrogate parents that function as a singular housekeeping unit. All group homes shall be approved and licensed by the state department of human resources. 
Group treatment facility means a dwelling unit which is used to provide assisted or supervised community living for persons with emotional, substance abuse or social difficulties. 
Hardship means an unusual situation present which affects an individual property owner and will not permit the owner to enjoy the full utilization of the property which is given to others in the community. A hardship exists only when it is not owner-created, or when it is not economic in nature. 
Health department means the Heard County Health Department. 
Home occupation means an occupation customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and operated in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
Industrialized home means any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the "Industrialized Building Act," 1982 Ga. Laws, pp. 1637—1643, O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2, article 2, part 1 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq.). 
Junk means any used article of commerce which is composed principally of iron, steel, brass, copper, or zinc, or their alloys, or any other base metal, and which is commonly bought for the purpose of resale and re-fabrication, either or both (see O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1); provided further, the term "junk" means worn out and discarded material that may be returned to some use, especially old rope, chain, iron, copper, parts or machinery, electrical and electronics equipment, and bottles gathered or brought up by trade persons called junk dealers; hence, rubbish of any kind; odds and ends provided further, the term "junk" does not include scrap or steel recovered from automobiles, etc., being cut to size with or without being baled to meet specifications of steel mills and foundries for remelting. 
Junk business means the pursuit, for profit, of purchasing old iron, brass, bottles etc., and selling them again in the condition in which they were purchased by said dealer. 
Junk dealer means any person, firm, or corporation having a fixed place of business, or officer, agent and employee of any person, firm or corporation who engages in the purchase of used articles of commerce principally composed of iron, steel, brass, copper, or zinc, or their alloys, or any other base metals, and which is commonly bought for the purpose of resale and re-fabrication, either or both (see O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1). 
Junkyard means an uncovered lot or part thereof, whether enclosed or not, used for the collection, storage, keeping, sale, abandonment, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper and other scrap materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of two or more disabled automobiles, not bearing current auto tags/decals, or other machinery, appliances or parts thereof. 
Kennel means any location where breeding, raising, boarding, caring for, and the keeping of more than five dogs or cats or other small animals or a combination thereof (except litters of animals not more than six months of age) is carried on for commercial purposes. 
Land disturbing activity means any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land, clearing of vegetation; and any construction, rebuilding, or alteration of a structure. The term "land disturbing activity" does not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions, or minor modifications to a single-family dwelling, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Livestock means and includes cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine, rabbits, poultry, ducks, geese, and other fowl customarily bred or raised in captivity, owned and kept for pleasure. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed or built upon. The term "lot" includes the terms "plot" and/or "parcel." 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot of record means a lot which exists prior to the first published notice or subsequent amendment of this chapter, as shown or described on a plat or deed in the records of the local registry of deeds. 
Lot, through, means a lot other than a corner lot abutting two streets. 
Lot width means the width of the lot at the front setback line. 
Manufactured home means: 
(1)	A structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
(2)	A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical system contained therein; except that the term "manufactured home" includes any structure which meets all the requirements and the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development complying with the standards established under this title. A manufactured home is a single-family detached dwelling and its placement in a residential district must meet or exceed the appearance standards as provided in section 40-69. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and no older than ten years from the date of manufacture. A mobile home is built on a steel undercarriage with necessary wheel assembly to be transported to a permanent or semipermanent site. The wheel assembly can be removed when placed on a permanent foundation, and the steel undercarriage remains intact, as it is a necessary structure component. It will usually have tongue and axles intact, but not always. It will usually have metal or low pitched roof and almost always have metal or vinyl siding. 
Modular home means those homes that meet local building codes and are subject to standard regional or state building codes for modular construction. Although a modular house can be on a steel undercarriage, the undercarriage is generally not a permanent and necessary component, and can be removed when placed on a foundation. It will usually have a hip roof with single asphalt roofing, permanent foundation and exterior siding usually of wood paneling or vinyl. 
Motel means a permanent building or group of permanent buildings in which overnight sleeping accommodations are provided for travelers and having a parking space near or adjacent to the entrance of the room. Such use has 80 percent of the rooms occupied by a different registered guest every five days, provides patrons with daily maid service, 24-hour desk/counter clerk service, and a telephone service to receive incoming and outgoing messages, and shall comply with the applicable requirements of the county health department and O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq., and may provide additional services such as restaurants, retail gift shops, meeting rooms, swimming pools and exercise facilities. 
Nonconforming use means the use of any building or land which was lawful at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendment thereto, but which use does not conform, after the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendment thereto, with the regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
Parking lot means an open area used exclusively for the temporary parking of vehicles and bicycles and which no gasoline or vehicular accessories are sold or no other business is conducted. 
Parking space means a space, enclosed or unenclosed, having an area of not less than 108 square feet (nine feet by 12 feet) exclusive of access, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one vehicle and having access to the street. 
Permit means any written authorization for building, construction, alteration, development, occupancy, or other matter required by this chapter to be approved by a designated commission, board, official or employee. The person to whom such permit is issued shall be known as the permittee. 
Permitted use means any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
Personal care home means a building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals and personal care, for nonfamily ambulatory adults. The term "personal care home" shall be classified as: family personal care home, group personal care home, or congregate personal care home. This term "personal care home" does not include buildings which are devoted to independent living units which include kitchen facilities where residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. 
(1)	Family personal care home means a home for adults in a family type residence, noninstitutional in character, which offers care for two to six persons. 
(2)	Group personal care home means a home for adult persons in a residence or other type building, noninstitutional in character, which offers care for seven to 15 persons. 
(3)	Congregate personal care home means a home for adults which offers care to 16 or more persons. 
Planning and zoning board means the city planning and zoning board. 
Plat means a map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, lot, section, subdivision or development indicating the location and boundaries of properties. 
Principal building means a building where the main or principal use of the lot is conducted. 
Scale of development means the relationship of a particular project or development, in terms of size, height, bulk, intensity and aesthetics. 
Setback means the mean horizontal distance between the front street right-of-way line and the front line of the building or the allowable building lines as defined by the front yard regulations of this chapter. 
Setback line means the line which is the required minimum distance from any lot line and that established the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed. 
Sign means a name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed to, painted or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a building, structure, parcel or lot and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business located on the premises. The term "sign" shall not be deemed to include official court, governmental notices, traffic warning or control devices or street signs, flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, school or religion. 
Figure 1: Sign Types  
Special uses means a use not ordinarily permitted but which may be permitted with imposition of conditions related to the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding lands. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, restriction on land use; height, setback and other nonuse requirements; physical improvements, including infrastructure, to the property. 
Street means a public right-of-way, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane or other way, that is dedicated or devoted to the public pedestrian or vehicular use by deed, plat, and/or prescription, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
(1)	Major arterial means a street with access control channelized intersections, restricted parking, and that collects and distributes traffic to and from collector streets. 
(2)	Minor arterial means a street with signals at important intersections and stop signs on the side streets and collects and distributes traffic to and from collector streets. 
(3)	Collector street means a street that collects traffic from local streets and connects with minor and major arterials. 
(4)	Local street means a street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting property and to discharge through traffic. 
Figure 2: Street Types  
Temporary structure means a structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when the designated time period, activity or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
Variance means permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning ordinance. 
Yard means an open space that lies between the principal building or buildings and the nearest lot line. The minimum required yard as set forth in this chapter is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided this chapter. 
Yard, front, means a space extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. 
Yard, rear, a space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. 
Zoning means the delineation of districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings. 
Zoning map means the map which is part of this chapter and delineates the boundaries of zone districts. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 3.3; Ord. of 7-7-2011, art. 1) 
Sec. 40-4. - Minimum standards. 
The requirements of these regulations are minimum permissible standards; and it is expected that developers and the respective decision making authority will normally strive for quality developments which will exceed these minimum requirements. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 2.2) 
Sec. 40-5. - Comprehensive plan adopted. 
By this section, the comprehensive plan adopted by resolution of the mayor and council of the city is established as the official policy of the city concerning land uses. The incorporated areas of the city are divided into land use categories consistent with the future land use plan in the land use element of the comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan does not alter or affect the existing zoning districts in the city, does not effectuate an amendment to the official zoning maps, and does not itself permit or prohibit any existing land uses. The land use element of the comprehensive plan shall be amended on an annual basis to reflect changes in land use and to discover any inconsistencies zoning changes have caused in the future land use map. 
(Code 1998, §§ 39-101, 39-103; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 2.3) 
Sec. 40-6. - Updating land use element. 
The land use element of the comprehensive plan shall be updated once each year. This update shall be used to identify current uses of land, emerging growth patterns and any significant change in land use policy as identified by the future land use map of the comprehensive plan. This update shall also be used as policy in the city's consideration of proposed amendments to the zoning map or text of this chapter. All amendments to the city's comprehensive plan shall be in accordance with the minimum planning standards and procedures of the Georgia Planning Act. 
(Code 1998, §§ 39-101, 39-103; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 2.4) 
Sec. 40-7. - Use of land. 
No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 6.1) 
Sec. 40-8. - Use of buildings. 
No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building or structure is located. 
(1)	Location of buildings. Every building hereafter erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered shall be located on lots as herein defined unless they are first approved for rezoning of granted a variance. 
(2)	Height of buildings. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which it is located, unless they are first approved for rezoning of granted a variance, except for the following: 
a.	Chimneys; 
b.	Church spires; 
c.	Fire towers; 
d.	Flag poles; 
e.	Public monuments; 
f.	Silos; 
g.	Tanks; 
h.	Water towers; 
i.	Public and semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions and schools, may be erected to a height not to exceed 100 feet; churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, provided the required side yard and rear yards shall be increased by at least one foot for each one foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located. 
(3)	Dimensional regulations. No building or use shall be erected, converted, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the minimum space requirements (e.g., the lot area, floor area, building height, etc.,) for the district in which such building is located. 
(4)	Temporary buildings. Temporary buildings shall not be permitted in any district except when they are used in conjunction with construction work or pending completion of a permanent building. Such building shall be used for a period not to exceed one year and shall be removed when the construction of the permanent building is completed. Construction of the permanent building is said to be completed at the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 6.2) 
Sec. 40-9. - Interpretation and application. 
In interpreting and applying this chapter, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter. Except as hereinafter provided, this chapter shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of a lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, then the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 6.3) 
Sec. 40-10. - Zoning affects all land and buildings. 
No buildings, structures or land shall be used or occupied; and no building, structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 6.4) 
Sec. 40-11. - Principal building per lot. 
Unless provided for elsewhere in this chapter, there shall be no more than one principal building or structure upon any lot in any residential district. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 6.5) 
Sec. 40-12. - Required open space may not be used by another building. 
No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building, structure, or use by this chapter shall be considered to be part of a required yard, other open space or off-street parking or loading space for any other building or structure. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 6.6) 
Sec. 40-13. - Reduction of yards or lot areas. 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, no lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 6.7) 
Secs. 40-14—40-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 40-45. - Establishment of districts. 
In order to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following districts: 

 
(1)	Rural Development District (RD). This district is intended to permit a combination of low density residential uses of various types, agricultural activities and associated uses. The regulations of the district are designed primarily to encourage a compatible relationship between agriculture and low density, single-family rural residential development. 
(2)	Single-Family Residential (R2). The purpose of this district is to accommodate medium density single-family residences. Single-family dwellings are restricted to meeting type I appearance standards. 
(3)	Single-Multifamily Residential (R3). The purpose of this district is to provide high density single-family residences and multifamily residences. Single-family and duplex dwellings shall meet type I or type II appearance standards. Multifamily residences shall meet type II or type IV appearance standards. 
(4)	General Commercial (GC). The purpose of this district is to provide appropriate locations for a wide variety of commercial activities which will serve a large market area. This district will generally be located along the major arterial highways or where these highways meet. Emphasis is on creating commercial nodes rather than strip developments. 
(5)	General Industrial District (GI). The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for warehousing, distribution, manufacturing and other intensive activities of an industrial nature. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 4.1) 
Sec. 40-46. - Zoning district map. 
The boundaries of zoning districts are shown upon the map designated as the "Zoning District Map." The zoning district map and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon are a part of this chapter and have the same force and effect as if the zoning district map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described in the text of this chapter. This zoning district map is properly attested and is on display at city hall. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 4.2) 
Sec. 40-47. - District boundaries. 
(a)	The district boundaries shown on the zoning district map are generally intended to follow streets, alleys or lot lines; where the districts designated on said map are bounded by such street, alley or lot line, the centerline of the street, alley or lot line shall be the boundary of the district unless such boundary is otherwise indicated on the map. In all other cases, the district boundary line shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning district map. 
(b)	When the boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract held in single ownership at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the boundary line may be allowed to extend a distance of not more than 50 feet to the least restrictive zone district. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 4.3) 
Secs. 40-48—40-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS AND PERMITTED USES 

Sec. 40-68. - District lot area, yard and height standards. 
The requirements regarding lot size, building size, and building placement on the lot for each zone district shall be met as indicated in table 40-68: zoning district area yard and height requirements as follows: 
TABLE 40-68  ZONING DISTRICT AREA YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

 
*Note: These distances are distance from the right-of-way. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 5.1) 
Sec. 40-69. - Appearance standards. 
Appearance standards shall apply to all single-family detached dwellings including site-built housing, industrialized housing, and manufactured homes. Certificate of occupancy shall be granted upon the finding that such development shall meet or exceed the appearance standards as shown on table 40-69: appearance standards for single-family detached dwellings. 
TABLE 40-69  APPEARANCE STANDARDS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS 

 
Notes: 
(1) The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or other materials approved by the building inspectors. 
(2) The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance. 
(3) Permanent foundation (including manufactured homes) shall meet the requirements of standard building codes for manufactured homes. The pier foundation shall be 24 inches by 24 inches by 16 inches by deep concrete footing. The underpinning for manufactured homes shall be eight inches by eight inches by 16 inches masonry block on a foundation ten inches wide and six inches deep, unpierced, except for the required ventilation and access, which must be installed so that it encloses the area under the manufactured home to ground level. 
(4) For manufactured homes, a front landing area is required of at least 100 square feet with a side to side dimension of at least eight feet, on a poured concrete footing, no less than 12 inches by 12 inches by 12 inches. All other landings to be a minimum of five feet by five feet on not less than a fabricated masonry footing. 
(5) Manufactured homes are required to remove all towing devices. 
(6) Manufactured homes locating in existing, nonconforming manufacturing home parks, under type III appearance standards, shall use skirting and vegetation to make towing devices as inconspicuous as possible. All double wide manufactured homes not located in a manufactured home park must be approved by the planning and zoning board. 
(7) Multifamily units facade should blend with the surrounding single-family housing. 
(8) Minimum floor area for multifamily units shall be in compliance with life safety codes. 
(9) Multifamily units shall consist of not less than four dwelling units per structure and a minimum of 30 feet between structures. Structures shall be placed on a lot in such a way as to prevent the back of one structure facing the front of another structure on the parcel. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 5.2) 
Sec. 40-70. - Permitted uses. 
No principal building, structure or land use shall be permitted except in the zoning districts indicated and for the purposes permitted in table 40-70. Each use is mutually exclusive and does not include other uses listed in the table. A principal use denoted by the letter "S" is permitted only if a special use permit is granted by the city council. For uses not included in this list where the building inspector is unable to determine clear placement, application shall be made to the planning commission for interpretation. 
TABLE 40-70  PERMITTED USES 

 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 5.3; Ord. of 7-7-2011, art. 1) 
Secs. 40-71—40-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 40-99. - Lots of record. 
(a)	Generally. Any lot of record which is legal on the date of the first published notice of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be used subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
(1)	Use of substandard lots. Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived does not own sufficient area and width to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this article may be used as a building site for a structure or use permitted in the zone in which it is located; provided the owner has the approval in writing of the county health department (approval of the health department is required to ensure parcel is large enough to handle septic tank and drain field lines), the city planning commission and city council. Owner shall provide the planning commission and city council with a site plan so orientation of all principle and accessory structures shall be clearly delineated. 
(2)	Residential use of substandard lots. In addition to subsection (a)(1) of this section in any residential district, any lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which has a width or area less than that required by this article may be used as a building site for a single-family dwelling only. 
(b)	Side yard variance request. In the case of such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width single-family dwelling, the planning commission is empowered to hear the request for a side yard variance provided there is a ten-foot side yard. If a minimum ten-foot side yard is not possible, then a minimum width for single-family dwelling may be requested. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 7.1) 
Sec. 40-100. - Area, yard and height regulations. 
(a)	Lot area. Hereafter, no lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width, size of yards or lot area per parcel requirement of this section is altered except when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
(b)	Yards and open space. 
(1)	Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, one-half of the alley width may be considered as a portion of the required yard. 
(2)	Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky so that projections such as sills, window air conditioning units, chimneys, cornices and ornamental features may not extend into a required yard. 
(3)	Other provisions of this article notwithstanding, fences, walls, hedges, driveways and buffer areas may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard provided that no fence, wall or hedge along the street sides of corner lots shall violate the corner visibility provisions of this article. 
(c)	Front yards. 
(1)	Where an official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
(2)	On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each street. 
(3)	Corner lots shall meet the minimum front yard requirements on the side adjacent to both streets and the remaining yards shall be considered side yard requirements. 
(4)	Open, unenclosed porches, platforms or paved terraces, which are not covered by a roof or canopy and do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend or project into the required setback area if it is six feet or less. 
(5)	Within the same block and zoning district, when 25 percent or more of the existing buildings are located within 200 feet on each side of a lot have less than the minimum required setback, the required front setback of such lot should not exceed the average of the existing front setbacks. 
(d)	Side yards. 
(1)	For the purposes of the side yard regulations, a group of commercial buildings separated by common or party walls shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
(2)	The minimum width of side yards for schools, libraries, churches and other public or semi-public buildings in residential districts shall be 25 feet. Where a side yard is adjacent to a business or commercial district, then the width of that yard shall be as required for the district in which the building is located. 
(e)	Fences and walls. No fence or freestanding wall in a required yard other than a retaining wall shall be more than eight feet in height. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 7.2) 
Sec. 40-101. - Corner visibility. 
No sign, fence, wall, hedge, planting or other obstruction to vision, extending to a height in excess of three feet above the established street grade, shall be erected, planted or maintained within the area of a corner lot that is included between the lines of the intersecting streets and a straight line connecting them at points 25 feet distant from the intersection of the street lines. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 7.3) 
Sec. 40-102. - Accessory uses and structures. 
(a)	An accessory structure shall not be permitted in any required front yard, except as specified in subsection (h) of this section. 
(b)	No accessory building or structure shall be erected beyond a required yard line along any street. 
(c)	Residential accessory uses such as garages, greenhouses or workshops, shall not be rented or occupied for commercial purposes. 
(d)	All residential accessory buildings must be located at least ten feet from the principal building. 
(e)	Areas in which the accessory storage of a boat, boat trailer or travel trailer is permitted shall not include the required front yard. 
(f)	Gasoline station pumps and pump islands where permitted may occupy the required yards, provided that they shall not be less than 15 feet from street lines; canopies, whether attached or detached from the principal building must be at least 14 feet in height and the outermost edge shall be five feet from any property line. 
(g)	All nonresidential accessory buildings shall only be used by the owners, employees, lessees or tenants of the premises, and shall meet the setback requirements of the principal building. 
(h)	An open or unenclosed swimming pool may occupy a required rear or side yard, provided that the pool is not located closer than six feet to a rear lot line or ten feet to an interior side lot line. A three-foot-wide walk space shall be provided between pool walls and protective fences or barrier walls. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 7.4) 
Sec. 40-103. - Residential home occupations. 
(a)	The conduct of business in R-2 districts may be permitted under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of this section to ensure the following: 
(1)	Compatibility of home occupations with other uses permitted in residential zoning districts; 
(2)	Maintaining and preserving the character of residential neighborhoods; and 
(3)	To provide peace, quiet and domestic tranquility within all residential neighborhoods within the district; 
in order to guarantee all residents freedom from excessive noise, traffic, nuisance, fire hazard, and other possible effects of commercial uses being conducted in this district. 
(b)	Residential home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements: 
(1)	A home occupation is subordinate to the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes. No more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit may be used in connection with a home occupation or for storage purposes in connection with a home occupation. 
(2)	No more than two home occupations shall be permitted within a single dwelling unit. 
(3)	A home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal use. No home occupation nor any storage of goods, materials, or products connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in accessory buildings or garages which are attached or detached. 
(4)	The residential home occupation is limited to employment of residents of the property and not more than one additional person. 
(5)	A home occupation shall produce no noise or obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes, or electrical interference detectable to normal sensory perceptions outside the principal structure. 
(6)	No traffic shall be generated by such home occupations in greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met by providing off-street space and located in rear or side yard. 
(7)	On the premises, retail sales are prohibited except for the retail sales of products or goods produced or fabricated on the premises as a result of the home occupation. 
(8)	There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal use. 
(9)	No on-street parking of business related vehicles (either marked or commercially equipped) shall be permitted at any home. No business related vehicles larger than a van, panel truck or pick up truck is permitted to park overnight on the premises. 
(10)	Permitted residential home occupations. 
a.	Architectural services. 
b.	Art studio. 
c.	Consulting services. 
d.	Data processing. 
e.	Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Jaffra, Mary Kay, Tupperware etc.) provided there is no production on premises. 
f.	Drafting and graphic services. 
g.	Dressmaking, sewing, tailoring, contract sewing (one machine). 
h.	Electronic assembly. 
i.	Engineering service. 
j.	Financial planning or investment services. 
k.	Flower arranging. 
l.	Home office. 
m.	House cleaning service. 
n.	In-home child care, but not more than six children at a time, including the care giver's own pre-school children. 
o.	Insurance sales or broker. 
p.	Interior design. 
q.	Laundry and ironing service. 
r.	Locksmith. 
s.	Real estate sales, broker or appraiser. 
t.	Telephone answering, switchboard call forwarding. 
u.	Tutoring, including all indoor and outdoor instructional services limited to two students at a time. 
v.	Writing, resume services, computer programming. 
(11)	Prohibited residential home occupations. 
a.	Ambulance service. 
b.	Restaurants, food preparation. 
c.	Automobile repair, parts sales, upholstery, or detailing, washing services. 
d.	Veterinary services (including care, grooming and boarding). 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 7.5) 
Sec. 40-104. - Rural home occupations. 
(a)	Rural home occupations in the rural development districts shall be permitted under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of the section to ensure the compatibility of rural home occupations with other uses permitted in the rural development (RD) districts; maintain and preserve the agricultural or rural character of the area and not create a nuisance for residents in the area by exceeding traffic, smoke, noise or be a fire hazard. 
(b)	The purpose of rural home occupations is to provide a means for residents in the larger lot rural development districts to participate in the type of businesses permitted in residential districts, be able to conduct the home occupation in an accessory building where necessary, and to park, on-site, vehicles required for home occupations. Rural home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements: 
(1)	The minimum lot size is two acres. For lots less than two acres, the home occupation is limited to the provisions of section 40-103. 
(2)	The rural home occupation shall be clearly subordinate to the principal use of the parcel and shall not change the residential and agricultural character of the area. No more than 25 percent of the floor area of the principal dwelling shall be used in connection with the home occupation or storage purposes. 
(3)	The rural home occupation shall be conducted within a dwelling or within an accessory building provided all structure uses are harmonious in appearance with the zoning district in which rural home occupation is located. 
(4)	One accessory building not exceeding 1,000 square feet may be used in connection with the rural home occupation. 
(5)	The business of selling stocks of merchandise, supplies or products shall not be conducted on premises except under the following circumstances: 
a.	Orders previously made by telephone or at sales parties may be filled on premises; and 
b.	Incidental retail sales may be completed which are in connection with the permitted home occupation. 
(6)	The existence of the rural home occupation shall not be apparent outside the dwelling or accessory building in which the rural home occupation is conducted, except that one display sign limited to nine square feet of sign area shall be permitted. The display sign added to all other signs on the parcel shall not exceed the maximum signage allowed in the district. 
(7)	No outside storage of equipment or materials used in the conduct of the rural home occupation, other than trade vehicles, is permitted. 
(8)	The rural home occupation is limited to residents of the property and not more than two additional persons. 
(9)	No additional points of access to any street shall be permitted, unless necessary to provide safe and proper access to the proposed use. 
(10)	Permitted rural home occupations. 
a.	All occupations permitted in section 40-103(b)(10). 
b.	Appliance repair. 
c.	Auto repair. 
d.	Barbershops/beauty shops (limited to two stations). 
e.	Cabinet making. 
f.	Ceramics. 
g.	Contracting, masonry, plumbing or painting. 
h.	Tow truck services. 
i.	Upholstery. 
j.	Veterinary services. 
k.	Antique shop. 
l.	Small scale garden plants for sale to retail commercial gardening and supply stores. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 7.6) 
Sec. 40-105. - Special density lots for the use of family homesteads. 
In order to perpetuate the family homestead in rural areas, each parcel in single ownership may be subdivided for use solely as a homestead by an individual who is the grandparent, parent, stepparent, adopted parent, sibling, child, stepchild, adopted child or grandchild of the person who conveyed the parcel to said individual, at a density not to exceed one unit per acre. This provision supersedes other land use district density requirements, except that it may not be used within a platted subdivision. In order to qualify for the use of family homestead the following criteria shall be met: 
(1)	The property being transferred must be used as the primary residence of the grantee. 
(2)	The deed for transferred property must state the relationship of the grantee to the grantor. 
(3)	Transferred property may be deeded in the heirs (grantee) name or jointly deeded in the grantor/grantee names. The transferred property may not be deeded solely in the grantor name. 
(4)	This special density provision may be utilized on only one occasion per eligible individual grantee. The grantor may exercise this special density provision for other eligible individual grantees, so long as the maximum allowable density for the property transferred from the original parcel can be met. 
(5)	An individual wishing to obtain a manufactured home or conventional building permit under these special density provisions shall make application to the city clerk. Upon verification of the eligibility of the applicant, by the planning commission, a permit may be issued. 
(6)	Should the transferred property be subsequently sold or otherwise transferred to another party, including nonfamily party, these special density provisions shall remain. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 7.7) 
Sec. 40-106. - Medical hardship secondary detached dwelling. 
A manufactured home which meets type III appearance standards may be parked and occupied as a residence in a residential area where a medical hardship exists after application of a special use and approval of same from the city mayor and council. 
(1)	Definitions. The term "medical hardship," as used in this section, is defined as a health or mental condition necessitating attention and supervision from the occupants of either the primary dwelling or the manufactured home. 
(2)	Occupants. Occupants of the primary dwelling shall provide proof to the planning commission that a secondary detached dwelling unit is necessary for the physical care and well-being of the infirm person (doctor or medical facility affidavit, nursing home recommendation, etc.). The occupants of the primary dwelling shall also provide approval by the county health department of proper sewer and water facilities. Before any permit shall be issued the applicant must show and state in signed affidavit that the primary dwelling located on the lot does not contain sufficient facilities to accommodate the proposed occupant of the secondary detached dwelling, that present facilities in the primary dwelling are inadequate, and that the occupant of the secondary detached dwelling is a member of the immediate family of the occupant of the primary dwelling. 
(3)	Permit expiration. Once the state of medical hardship is removed, the land use permit for manufactured homes shall expire and the manufactured home shall be removed in a timely manner, but in no case longer than six months. 
(4)	Manufactured home secondary detached dwelling permit. A manufactured home permit that is issued under this section shall expire 12 months from the date it is granted. A renewal of the permit must meet all requirements of a new application, however, no advertisement or posting of a sign shall be required. However, this manufactured home shall not be used for any other purpose than to provide assistance in the case of medical hardship. This manufactured home shall not be used for storage, commercial, home occupation or rented for economic gain by the home owner. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 7.8) 
Sec. 40-107. - Cemeteries. 
All proposed cemeteries whether public, private or in conjunction with a religious institution shall not be located in a floodplain area as delineated by FIRM maps for the city. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 7.9) 
Sec. 40-108. - Property maintenance. 
To ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city the following regulations shall be established for the maintenance of property in the city: 
(1)	Nonfunctioning appliances shall be stored in an enclosed accessory or principal building. Any nonfunctioning appliances such as refrigerators, freezers, stoves, etc., shall have doors removed prior to storage. 
(2)	Any major auto repairs such as building motors, transmissions or heavy body work shall be done in an enclosed accessory building or on a section of property not visible from the public street. 
(3)	Nonlicensed and/or inoperable vehicles shall be stored in an enclosed accessory building. No more than two non-licensed and/or inoperable vehicles shall be stored on the property. 
(4)	Yard sales shall last for a specified duration only. There shall not be any continuous yard sales in the city. Storing of yard sale items shall be in an enclosed accessory or principal building and shall not be on display in any yard except during the hours of the yard sales. Yard sales may last eight hours a day no more than three days a week at the same residence. This section does not preclude the city ordinance governing yard sales. 
(5)	No abandoned mobile or manufactured homes shall be used as a storage or accessory building. Abandoned mobile/manufactured homes shall be removed from property at owner's expense and upon notification by the city council that the said mobile/manufactured home is abandoned and is causing a health or safety hazard to surrounding property owners. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 7.10) 
Sec. 40-109. - Group treatment facilities. 
(a)	Group treatment facilities which house no more than six residents, excluding staff, may be established in the following zoning districts: 
(1)	R-2: Single-family residential as defined in article II of this chapter; 
(2)	R-3: Single multifamily residential as defined in article II of this chapter; and 
(3)	GC: General commercial as defined in article II of this chapter. 
(b)	Group treatment facilities are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	If required by state regulations, a group treatment facility must be approved by the appropriate state licensing agency; 
(2)	A group treatment facility must be located at least 3,000 feet from any other group treatment facility as measured in a straight line from property line to property line; 
(3)	All new construction or exterior alteration of existing buildings shall be subject to the appearance standards in table 40-69 in section 40-69; and 
(4)	The use of a parcel as a group treatment facility is permissible only by obtaining a special use permit. 
(c)	A special use permit shall be obtained using the procedures outlined in section 40-314. 
(1)	Any special use permit issued pursuant to this section shall become invalid if the appropriate permits or licenses required by the state are revoked or otherwise terminated. The special use permit shall become invalid if the facility is not operated for a continuous period of six months. 
(2)	Each facility shall be required to pay an annual permit fee of $20.00, said fee to be paid no later than March 1 of each year of operation. For a facility which begins operation after March 1, the permit fee shall be due in full for the remainder of the calendar year, in accordance with section 16-5. 
(d)	Any special use permit which may be issued after the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is enacted may be suspended or revoked for due cause as defined in this subsection, after a hearing has been held by the mayor and council to consider the suspension or revocation. At least five days prior to such hearing, written notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be given to the holder of the special use permit for which suspension or revocation is to be considered. 
(e)	Due cause for the suspension or revocation of a permit shall be any of the following: 
(1)	A violation of any laws, regulations, or ordinances applicable to group treatment facilities; 
(2)	Failure of the holder of the special use permit or his employees to promptly report to the city police department any violation of applicable laws, regulations or ordinances, or any disturbance, breach of the peace, or altercation which results in violence which may occur upon the permitted premises; 
(3)	A decision shall be given by the mayor and council within ten days of the hearing referenced in this subsection. Appeal of such decision may be made to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 7-7-2011, art. 1) 
Secs. 40-110—40-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HISTORIC NEIGHBORHOOD OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 40-132. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Historic neighborhood means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development, listed and described within this article, and further delineated on the official zoning map of the city. 
New construction means the fabrication or placement of any building or other structure on a lot, or an addition to an existing building if such addition is visible from the street or streets and would increase the building's floor space. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 8.4) 
Sec. 40-133. - Intent. 
(a)	The purpose of this article is to protect the city's historic neighborhoods from incompatible development and to advance longterm plans for these areas. The community finds that its historic neighborhoods are important cultural and economic assets, critical to the city's development, heritage tourism and heritage education goals, and ultimately to the public's long-term interest. 
(b)	Zoning standards and regulations should protect these areas while advancing community development goals and furthering and protecting the public's health, safety and welfare. New construction in these areas should complement rather than interrupt, obscure, or otherwise damage or destroy the historic neighborhoods. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 8.1) 
Sec. 40-134. - Description of district. 
(a)	Historic neighborhoods shall be those areas listed and described herein and further delineated on the official zoning map of the city, which is incorporated and made a part of this chapter. 
(b)	Additional historic neighborhoods may be designated by amendment to the zoning ordinance, after public hearing. Proposals to designate additional historic neighborhoods may be introduced by the county historic preservation commission, the city planning and zoning board, city council, or owners of property in the city. Notice of the upcoming public hearing for designation of any historic neighborhood shall be mailed to owners of property within the proposed historic neighborhood, at the last known addresses of these property owners. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 8.2) 
Sec. 40-135. - Applicability. 
(a)	Within the designated historic neighborhoods, the provisions of this article shall apply to: 
(1)	New construction and building additions, if such additions will increase floor space; 
(2)	Relocation of existing buildings, into or out of the historic neighborhoods; 
(3)	Proposed demolition of existing structures; and 
(4)	Other applicable issues, if specified herein. 
(b)	Historic neighborhoods shall function as overlay districts. They may include, be contiguous with, or later become, local historic districts (adopted in accordance with Franklin's Historic Preservation Ordinance adopted June 6, 1989), designated national register properties or districts, or portions thereof. The regulations of such underlying districts and of the underlying zoning districts shall be maintained and not affected, except in the event of conflict or discrepancy between the historic neighborhood and the underlying district or districts. In that case, the more stringent requirements shall be observed, unless noted otherwise in this article. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 8.3) 
Sec. 40-136. - Conditions and compatibility standards. 
Within the historic neighborhood or neighborhoods, the following conditions and compatibility standards shall apply: 
(1)	New construction and building additions. 
a.	Size, scale and setback. New buildings shall be similar to nearby buildings in terms of height, width and setback from the street. 
b.	Materials. New buildings shall utilize exterior materials common to the exterior of the buildings in the historic neighborhood. 
c.	Shapes. Roof pitches and building shapes should be consistent with those within the historic neighborhood. 
d.	Rhythm. New construction shall respect the pattern of windows and doors of buildings in the vicinity. 
e.	Orientation or directional expression of front elevation. New structures shall be visually compatible with the orientation of the buildings, squares and places to which they are visually related. 
f.	Landscaping. Landscaping shall attempt to maintain the historic characteristics and be visually compatible with the overall environment of the historic neighborhood. 
g.	Appurtenances. Appurtenances related to a building (such as fences, stone walls, light fixtures, steps, paving, sidewalks, and signs) shall be visually compatible with the environment of the buildings, places, and squares to which they are related. 
h.	Modern design. Modern designs shall not be discouraged, if they are sensitive to the visual characteristics of the historic neighborhood. 
(2)	Demolition of existing structures. 
a.	Proposed demolition of existing structures within historic neighborhoods shall be subject to the prior review by the city historic preservation commission. 
b.	Upon receipt of any request to demolish a building, or any part thereof, the historic preservation commission shall review the circumstances and condition of the structure or part proposed for demolition and make an initial determination as to whether any of the following criteria apply to the structure: 
1.	Is the building of such architectural or historical interest that its removal would be to the detriment of the public interest? 
2.	Is the building of such old and unusual or uncommon design, texture and material that it could not be reproduced or be reproduced only with great difficult? 
3.	Would retention of the building help preserve and protect the historic neighborhood? 
4.	Would retention of the building promote the general welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values; generating business; creating jobs; attracting new residents; promoting heritage education; or making the city a more attractive and desirable place to live? 
c.	Should the historic preservation commission determine that none of the criteria listed above are applicable, then permission to demolish the building shall be granted, no later than 45 days after the property owner's written request to demolish the building. 
d.	If the city historic preservation commission, instead, should determine that at least one of the criteria in subsection (2)b of this section is applicable, then the city shall notify persons or groups interested in historic preservation who may wish to work with the owner in an effort to preserve the structure, or locate purchasers who would agree to preserve the building in accordance with the Secretary of Interior Standards for Historic Properties. 
e.	If efforts to preserve the building in accordance with subsection (2)d of this section have failed, 180 days after the owner's written request for demolition, permission to demolish the building shall be granted. 
(3)	Building relocation. Buildings shall be retained on their present sites whenever possible. Relocation shall be considered only as an alternative to demolition. 
a.	For buildings to be moved into the historic neighborhood, or relocated within the historic neighborhood, new construction standards shall apply (subsection (1) of this section). 
b.	For buildings to be moved out of the historic neighborhood, demolition standards shall apply (subsection (2) of this section). 
(4)	Ordinary maintenance. Property owners shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 8.5) 
Sec. 40-137. - Administration of this article. 
(a)	Provisions of the overlay district shall be administered by the city historic preservation commission. 
(b)	The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the administration of this article, such as issuance procedures and forms, and detailed design guidelines and criteria, as appropriate. The historic preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt administration rules and standards without an amendment to this chapter. The final decision on any application brought before historical preservation commission shall be made by the city council. 
(c)	The historic preservation commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(d)	A public record shall be kept of all resolutions, proceedings and official actions taken in accordance with this article. 
(e)	Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(f)	On matters of new construction or building additions, failure of the historic preservation commission to act within 45 days after receipt of property owner's duly submitted application shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(g)	On matters of new construction or building additions, permits or certificates issued by the historic preservation commission shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of issuance. Such permits or certificates shall be issued for a period of 18 months and shall be renewable. 
(h)	All work performed pursuant to an issued permit or certificate shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. If the work performed is not in accordance with such certificate, the historic preservation commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(i)	The city or its historic preservation commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any new construction, demolition or building relocation not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to the designated historic neighborhood or neighborhoods. 
(j)	On matters of building maintenance, if the historic preservation commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be subject to the noncompliance penalties of this chapter and, the city may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration of the property by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair by the city. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 8.6) 
Sec. 40-138. - Undue hardship. 
When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in an exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the historic preservation commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the historic neighborhood, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the historic preservation commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 8.7) 
Sec. 40-139. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a permit or certificate may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city within 15 days after the issuance of the determination or, in the case of a failure of the historic preservation commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the historic preservation commission action. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the historic preservation commission, if the city council finds that the historic preservation commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the county superior court in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the city ordinance violations. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 8.8) 
Sec. 40-140. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 8.9) 
Secs. 40-141—40-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 40-164. - Off-street parking spaces. 
There shall be provided on every lot of the following structures parking spaces of not less than nine feet by 20 feet. These parking spaces shall be provided by established structures, new construction and enlargement of established structures. Each space shall be accessible from a driveway or parking lot. Maneuvering and turning areas shall be provided so there are no vehicles required to back into a street. The minimum required number of spaces for specific uses are as follows: 
TABLE 40-164 

 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 9.1) 
Sec. 40-165. - Location of parking spaces. 
For commercial uses, if required off-street parking spaces cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot as principal use, such spaces may be provided on other off-street property, provided the spaces are within 400 feet of the main entrance to the principal use. Such parking spaces shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 9.2) 
Sec. 40-166. - Off-street loading spaces. 
All commercial loading and unloading spaces shall have access to a public alley or, if there is no alley, to a public street. Business, sales or industry shall provide spaces as follows for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley: 
(1)	Retail services. One space ten feet by 25 feet for each 500 square feet of floor or part thereof. 
(2)	Wholesale services or industries. One space ten feet by 50 feet for each 10,000 square feet of floor area or part thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 9.3) 
Secs. 40-167—40-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SIGNS 

Sec. 40-186. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to permit signs that will not, by their size, location, construction or manner of display, endanger the public safety of individuals; confuse, mislead or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety; or otherwise endanger public health, safety, or welfare; and to permit and regulate signs in such a way as to support and complement objectives set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 10.1) 
Sec. 40-187. - Location. 
The location of signs shall conform with state law. (See O.C.G.A. §§ 32-1-21, 32-50-51, 21-1-1, etc.) In general, except for government signs as allowed by state law, all signs shall be located on private property. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 10.2) 
Sec. 40-188. - General provisions. 
(a)	Corner visibility clearance. In any district no sign or sign structure (above a height of three feet) shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets, or of a street with a railroad right-of-way. 
(b)	Lighting restrictions. 
(1)	Lighted, neon or luminous signs giving off light resulting in glare, blinding or any other adverse effect on traffic shall not be erected. 
(2)	The light from illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(3)	No internally illuminated ground or pole signs shall be erected within 50 feet of any dwelling within a residential district. 
(4)	No sign shall be erected if it contains, or is illuminated by any flashing intermittent or moving light or lights except an electronic message board sign. 
(5)	No sign shall be erected which simulates an official traffic control or warning sign so as to confuse or mislead the traffic or hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal. 
(c)	Other restrictions. 
(1)	No sign shall be erected, attached, or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation or which prevents free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. 
(2)	No sign shall be erected, attached, painted or drawn on any tree, rock or other natural feature, retaining wall or utility post along the public right-of-way. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 10.3) 
Sec. 40-189. - Sign types and standards. 
The following sign standards apply to all districts except as specified elsewhere in this article. If any other standards in this section conflict with the standard in this article, the stricter regulation shall apply. 
(1)	Pole signs. Pole signs shall not extend over a public right-of-way. All signs abutting the right-of-way line shall have the display area ten feet or more above ground level measured from the grade at the right-of-way line. Signs with any portion of the display area less than ten feet above ground level must be erected ten feet from the right-of-way line. If the location of the sign structure is below the grade of the road, the height of the sign shall be measured from the nearest adjacent roadway. Pole signs shall not exceed 20 feet in height. 
(2)	Ground signs. Ground signs less than three feet high shall be set back at least three feet from the right-of-way line. Otherwise, such signs shall be set back ten feet from the right-of-way line. The maximum area of a ground sign shall be 40 square feet. 
(3)	Wall signs and flush-mounted canopy signs. Wall signs and flush-mounted canopy signs (including signs attached flat against the wall or canopy and painted signs) shall be securely fastened by metal supports to the building surface along the sign's greatest dimension. They may project from the building up to 12 inches; however, if they project more than four inches from the building surface, they shall maintain a clear height of eight feet above ground level. Wall signs may not extend more than four feet above the parapet wall. 
a.	Individual business. The total number of wall signs or canopy signs on all facades of a building is counted as one sign, and the total sign display area of each wall shall not exceed ten percent of the wall area up to a maximum of 200 square feet. 
b.	Multi-business/shopping center. The maximum display area of wall signs or canopy signs for each business shall not exceed ten percent of the front facade of each individual business. 
(4)	Hanging canopy signs. All hanging canopy signs shall not exceed six square feet in size and the lowest extremity of the sign shall not be less than eight feet above the ground. 
(5)	Roof signs. 
a.	Roof signs shall not project beyond the face of the exterior wall of the building on which they are located. 
b.	The highest point of a roof sign shall not exceed the ridge line of the roof. 
c.	Roof signs shall not be erected on building or structures with a flat roof. 
d.	The maximum size of a roof sign shall not exceed 64 square feet. 
(6)	Window signs. Each ground level business having glass directly orientated to a street may use that glass area as one allowable sign, but no single window shall be covered more than 25 percent. Window signs on or above the second floor are prohibited except when a business has no ground floor frontage. 
(7)	Banners. The maximum size of a banner shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 10.4) 
Sec. 40-190. - Use of signs permitted by districts. 
(a)	Business signs. Business signs are permanently mounted signs, that are permitted in all districts allowing business activity. Except as specified below, all business signs shall meet the standards according to section 40-189. The maximum number of business signs for an establishment or development is listed in section 40-186. 
TABLE 40-190a  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF BUSINESS SIGNS 

 
X Permitted by Right 
* One pole sign per individual business as one of the three allowed. However, pole signs are allowed only in the following businesses: 
1.	Service Station. 
2.	Convenience Store. 
3.	Post Office. 
4.	Shopping Center. 
5.	Industrial zoned areas. 
(b)	Nonbusiness signs. Nonbusiness signs are permanently mounted signs that are permitted in all districts and shall meet the requirements as shown on table 40-190b, maximum number of nonbusiness signs: 
(1)	Announcing signs. Announcing signs are signs used to announce activities to be held at any noncommercial place of public assembly. These signs may be ground or wall signs. 
(2)	Commemorative signs. Commemorative signs are tablets or plaques which identify a person, event, structure or a site of memorable public interest. These may be ground or wall signs. 
(3)	Directional signs. Directional signs are permanent off-premises, nonilluminated ground signs erected only by churches, government agencies and nonprofit organizations which provide direction to such church, organization, agency or related facility. 
(4)	Identification signs. Identification signs bear only the names or addresses of occupants of the premises and bearing no commercial message other than that of the use identified. These signs may be wall or ground signs. 
(5)	Instructional signs. Signs exclusive of any commercial messages, except the business name and/or logo, which convey instructions to the public such as entrance, exit, no trespassing, no dumping, no hunting, height clearance, etc., signs may be wall or ground signs. 
TABLE 40-190b  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF NON-BUSINESS SIGNS 

 
* Permitted Sign Types: Ground, wall or canopy signs only. 
(c)	Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be permitted in all districts. 
(1)	Temporary construction signs. Signs erected on the premises where construction is taking place which indicate the names of individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the construction of the structures or project. Temporary construction signs may be pole, ground or wall signs. 
a.	Only one sign shall be allowed per street frontage. 
b.	The maximum sign display area of each sign shall not exceed 40 square feet. 
c.	The period of existence of such signs shall be one month prior to commencement of construction through one month following completion. 
(2)	Temporary real estate signs. Signs erected by the owner, or his agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease or sale. Such signs shall be removed within 14 days of the sale, rental of lease of the property advertised; however, the use of a "SOLD" attachment to a sign pending the completion of a sales transaction shall not be construed as a sale. 
a.	All temporary real estate signs may be ground, window or wall signs. 
b.	Under no circumstances shall the display area of a temporary real estate sign exceed the following size: 
1.	Residential Unit: 16 square feet. 
2.	Residential Project: 32 square feet. 
3.	Nonresidential: 64 square feet. 
(3)	Temporary real estate directional signs. Off-premises signs which provide directions to properties for sale, lease or rent. 
a.	All temporary real estate directional signs shall be ground signs only. 
b.	The display area of each sign shall not exceed eight square feet. 
(4)	Temporary garage sale signs. 
a.	Temporary garage sale signs shall be ground signs only and their maximum size shall not exceed four square feet. 
b.	Signs may be erected two days prior to sale and shall be removed no later than midnight on the last day of sale. 
(5)	Special event signs. Special event signs announce special civic activities, events or shows to be held in the near future. Special event signs shall be banner signs or any permitted temporary signs provided that a temporary sign permit is obtained according to section 40-193(b)(2) prior to the erection of such signs. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 10.5) 
Sec. 40-191. - Prohibited signs. 
Any sign that will pose public safety hazards are prohibited. The following types of signs and displays, as they are defined herein, are unlawful to erect or maintain in all zoning districts: 
(1)	Abandoned signs. Signs that advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer being conducted or available on the premises on which the signs are located. The signs must be removed upon notification to the property owner and by order of the city council or their designee. 
(2)	Animated signs. Animated, series, lines or rows or electric, neon signs that involve motion. 
(3)	Projecting signs. Signs that project more than 12 inches from the building surface. 
(4)	Portable signs. All portable signs, including hot air balloons and gas/air inflatable signs. 
(5)	Temporary signs. Except as otherwise permitted by or exempted from these regulations. 
(6)	Moving signs. 
(7)	Pendants and streamers. 
(8)	Banners. Except as permitted in special events. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 10.6) 
Sec. 40-192. - Billboards. 
(a)	State codes. All billboards shall conform with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 (1967 Ga. Laws 1967, p.426, section 1; 1971 Ga. Laws, ex. sess., p. 5, section 1; 1973 Ga. Laws, p. 947, section 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, p.1086, section 1; 1980 Ga. Laws, p.1017, section 1) through O.C.G.A. § 36-6-97 (1971 Ga. Laws, ex. sess., p. 5, section 20; 1973 Ga. Laws, p. 947, section 1) on the erection of outdoor advertising, etc., in areas adjacent to right-of-way of roads in the state highway system, and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under the full reference provisions. Any billboard that advertises an activity, business, product or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six months of the discontinuance of said activity, business, product or service. 
(b)	Location. 
(1)	Billboards shall be permitted only in the general commercial (GC) and industrial (I) districts. 
(2)	No billboard shall be erected within 300 feet of the nearest property line of any public park, public playground, public school, recreational area, historic site, church or similar institution. No billboard shall be placed within 100 of a residential district. 
(c)	Size and number. No single billboard (display area and attached trim) shall exceed 300 square feet (12 by 25 feet) in size. No more than one sign per sign structure will be allowed to face the same direction. 
(d)	Linear spacing. No billboard shall be erected within 1,000 feet of another billboard on the same side of the street as measured along a line parallel to such street. 
(e)	Setback and height. All billboards shall be setback ten feet from the right-of-way line of any street or highway and shall be ten feet or more above the adjacent pavement level of the street or highway to which it is oriented. The total height of the billboard shall not be greater than 25 feet when measured from the grade level of the adjacent street or highway or at the grade of the sign site if such grade is above the grade of the street. 
(f)	Extrusion prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
(g)	Illumination. All illuminated signs shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photo-electric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights are prohibited. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 10.7) 
Sec. 40-193. - Administration. 
(a)	Construction and maintenance. 
(1)	All signs for which a permit is required, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in constant repair and unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, shall be periodically given a protective coating. The area immediately in front of all freestanding signs shall be maintained free of high weeds and debris. 
(2)	The provisions and regulations of this article shall not apply to the ordinary servicing, repairing, cleaning or changing of the message without a change in structure. 
(b)	Sign permit. 
(1)	General requirements. 
a.	A sign permit is required before a sign may be erected or attached to, suspended from or supported on a building or structure; and before an existing sign may be enlarged, relocated or materially improved to an extent of 60 percent of its total replacement value. The following listed signs are signs that require a permit: 
1.	Business signs. 
2.	Billboards. 
3.	Special event signs (temporary permit). 
4.	Temporary political signs (temporary permit). 
b.	A sign permit shall be issued by the city clerk when the plans, specifications and intended use of the applied sign or part thereof conforms to the applicable provisions of this article and the building code as certified by the city clerk. The application shall be accompanied by plans which identify the locations of signs and other applicable information that the city clerk may require in the exercise of sound discretion in acting upon the application. 
c.	Each application shall contain an agreement to indemnify and hold the city harmless of all damages, demands or expenses of every character which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. 
d.	A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six months after the date of issuance. 
(2)	Temporary permit. 
a.	Special event signs. The city clerk is hereby authorized to issue temporary permits for special event signs to be placed along the streets of the city whereby the public will be informed about an upcoming event or directed to the location of an event. Said temporary permit shall require a $200.00 cash bond and shall allow the signs to be posted no earlier than ten days prior to the event. 
b.	Temporary political signs. The city clerk is hereby authorized to issue a temporary permit for political signs to be placed along the streets of the city whereby the public will be informed about a candidate or directed to a political event. No political signs shall be erected prior to the candidates qualifying day as established by applicable federal and state law. Temporary political signs placed on property of residents shall have the permission of that resident. They need to be removed within seven days of the election and they cannot be placed on utility poles. 
(c)	Permit fee. No permit shall be issued until an application accompanied with a sign plan is approved by the city clerk and fee of $30.00 is paid in city hall to the city clerk. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 10.8) 
Sec. 40-194. - Nonconforming signs. 
Refer to article VIII of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 10.9) 
Sec. 40-195. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Violation. If any sign is erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article, the city council or their designee shall have the power to give the owner thereof written notice of such violation. The notice shall include a brief statement of the violation and remedy of said violation. If a sign has been registered with the city clerk, notice of violation to the registered owner or the person or firm receiving the permit shall be considered sufficient notification of the violation. If a sign has not been registered and the owner is not known, affixing a copy of the notice of violation to the sign, graphic structure or building for a period of ten days shall be sufficient and considered notification of the violation. 
(b)	Penalties. If such violation is not remedied within 30 days after such notice, the owner shall remove the sign immediately or be subject to a $100.00 a day fine for each day. 
(c)	Removal. If the sign is not removed by the owner, the city shall have the right to remove such sign at the expense of the owner thereof and to destroy or otherwise dispose of the sign. In addition to the provisions in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city may cause the sign or structure to be removed which: 
(1)	Is structurally unsafe; 
(2)	Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reasons of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment; 
(3)	Is not kept in good repair; or 
(4)	Is capable of causing electrical shock. If a sign is capable of causing electrical shock the sign is to be removed following notice of 24 hours to the owner at the expense of the owner and to destroy or otherwise dispose of the same. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 10.10) 
Secs. 40-196—40-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 40-216. - Purpose. 
In order to avoid individual hardship whenever reasonable and not in conflict with the general welfare of the city, and for purposes herein outlined, the provisions of this article apply to all zoning districts. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 11.1) 
Sec. 40-217. - Nonconforming lots. 
Any lots for which a plat or legal description has been recorded in the county clerk of superior court prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may, if vacant, be used for any of the uses permitted within the district by this article, or if occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged or extended; provided that in either case: 
(1)	Minimum requirements of the district for front, side and rear yard, height and floor area shall be complied with. 
(2)	A lot to be used for duplexes, multifamily dwellings, residential group development projects, or manufactured homes, when allowed within the district, only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 11.2) 
Sec. 40-218. - Land. 
The lawful use of any building or lot existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of this article. In addition, the following regulations apply to nonconforming uses: 
(1)	When a nonconforming use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any other nonconforming use. 
(2)	Nonconforming uses of land shall not be changed to any but conforming uses. 
(3)	A nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming. 
(4)	When any nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this article. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 11.3) 
Sec. 40-219. - Structures. 
Nonconforming uses of structures consists of structures used, at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, for purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located. In addition to the other requirements of this article, nonconforming uses of structures shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
(1)	An existing nonconforming use of a structure shall only be changed to a conforming use. 
(2)	An existing nonconforming use of a structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(3)	A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure which at the time the use became nonconforming were already erected and arranged or designed for such nonconforming use. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area, or volume of space occupied by the use. 
(4)	When any nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of one year, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this article. Vacancy and/or non-use of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 11.4) 
Sec. 40-220. - Signs. 
(a)	A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except when the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or replacement of removable letters and numbers on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
(b)	Repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted to maintain a safe condition and neat appearance so long as the sign remains substantially the same as it was on the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. However, no changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 11.5) 
Sec. 40-221. - Reconstruction of nonconforming structures. 
When a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use or nonconforming sign is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, or act of God, such structure or sign may be reconstructed as a nonconforming use only if the damage totals less than 50 percent of the value of the structure. If the nonconforming structure is damaged more than 50 percent, the structure may be rebuilt only if it conforms to the zoning ordinance as adopted. Nonconforming manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park may be replaced according to type III appearance standards. Nonconforming structures which do not conform to the yard requirements and have not received variance from the city shall also be governed by this provision. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 11.6) 
Sec. 40-222. - Restoration to a safe condition. 
Nothing in this article shall prevent the restoration of any structure or use to a safe or sanitary condition, nor shall the provisions prevent regular maintenance of any nonconforming use or structure. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 11.7) 
Sec. 40-223. - Abandonment. 
Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one year, such use shall cease and any further use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 11.8) 
Sec. 40-224. - Changes in zoning. 
Any nonconformance created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance regulations after the date of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall also be governed by the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 11.9) 
Secs. 40-225—40-241. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CRCP-CHATTAHOOCHEE RIVER CORRIDOR PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Sec. 40-242. - Description of district. 
(a)	The limits of the Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection (CRCP) District are hereby defined to be all areas within 100 feet horizontally of the river, measured from the river bank. This area shall remain in an undisturbed vegetative buffer. The 100-foot buffer is measured from the uppermost part of the river bank, usually marked by a break in slope. Although not within the buffer area, the area between the top of the river bank and the water's edge shall be included in the CRCP district. This district shall be further defined and delineated on the Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection District Overlay Map. The map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. 
(b)	Because these protective measures allow some latitude with land uses and because the district is not intended to prescribe a specific land use but rather, to define a range of acceptable land uses, the Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection District is designed as an overlay district. Within the range of land uses which can be located within the district, this article establishes performance standards which apply to development within the district. The regulations of the underlying zoning district shall be maintained and not affected, except in the event of conflict or discrepancy between the CRCP district and the underlying district. In that case, the more stringent requirements shall be observed. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 12.1) 
Sec. 40-243. - Intent. 
(a)	The intent of the regulations within this zoning district is to limit the use of the Chattahoochee River Corridor, in conjunction with other governmental entities along the Chattahoochee River Corridor, in order to: 
(1)	Ensure that the section of the river in the city will not become polluted and unsuitable as a source for potable water; 
(2)	Protect the river corridor by establishing a natural vegetative buffer area bordering the river; 
(3)	Preserve those qualities that make the river corridor suitable as a habitat for wildlife; 
(4)	Help control erosion and to absorb floodwaters. 
(b)	The further intent of this district is to protect and safeguard the health and welfare of all the citizens of the city by providing protection of the section of the river that is or may be used as a source of drinking water. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 12.2) 
Sec. 40-244. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste means solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 CFR 261.3. 
Land disturbing activity means any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; and any construction, rebuilding, or alteration of a structure. The term "land disturbing activity" does not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yards and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single-family dwelling, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Natural vegetative buffer or buffer area means a river corridor containing the flora native to that area. The natural floras for specific areas are described in Georgia Geologic Survey Bulletin 114, "the Natural Environments of Georgia." Habitats for endangered and threatened species may require human management of the river corridor in order to maintain those species. 
Perennial river means a river or a section of a river that flows continuously throughout the year. 
Protected river means any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. However, those segments of river covered by the Metropolitan River Protection Act or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act are specifically excluded from the definition of a protected river. 
Public utility or utilities means a service or services provided by a public utility company or a private entity which provides such service or services and all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services. 
River bank means the rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
River corridor means all the land, inclusive of islands, not regulated under the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-440 through 12-5-457), or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-80 through 12-5-93), in areas of a protected river and being within 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks. 
(1)	The 100-foot buffer shall be measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the river banks, usually marked by a break in slope. Although not within the measured 100-foot wide buffer, the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river shall be treated by the city in the same manner as the river corridor and shall be included within the CRCPD. 
(2)	Because stream channels move due to natural processes such as meandering, river bank erosion, and jumping of channels, the river corridor may shift with time. For the purposes of these standards, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the beginning of each review period for the city comprehensive plan. Any shift in the location of the protected river after the review period will be shown by revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of the next comprehensive plan review by the department of community affairs (DCA). 
Sensitive natural area means any area, as identified now or hereafter by the department of natural resources (DNR), which contains one or more of the following: 
(1)	Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
(2)	Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
(3)	Significant land forms, hydroforms, or geological features; or 
(4)	Other areas so designated by the DNR; and which are sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 12.3) 
Sec. 40-245. - Conditions and performance standards. 
Within the CRCP district, the following conditions and performance standards shall apply, in addition to the regulations of the original district on which the CRCP district is superimposed: 
(1)	Within the buffer area, single-family dwellings, including the usual appurtenances, are subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The dwelling shall be located on a tract of land containing at least two acres and meeting all other zoning regulations; 
b.	There shall be only one single-family dwelling on each two-acre or larger tract of land. For the purposes of these standards, the size of the tract of land shall not include any area that lies within the protected river, (that is, for the tracts of land that include portions of a protected river, the area between the river banks cannot be counted towards the two acre minimum size); 
c.	A septic tank or tanks serving such a dwelling may be located within the buffer area; however, septic tank drain fields shall not be located within the buffer. 
(2)	Construction within the buffer area is prohibited except as provided herein. 
(3)	The natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land disturbing activity. 
(4)	A natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained at all times in the river corridor, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(5)	Industrial and commercial land uses existing prior to the promulgation of the Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection District are exempt from these criteria, provided that: 
a.	Industrial and commercial uses shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water; 
b.	Industrial and commercial activity within the CRCP district shall meet all applicable state and federal environmental rules and regulations; and 
c.	Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited within the buffer area except as expressly provided in subsection (1) of this section. 
(6)	The construction of road crossings and utility crossings is permitted, provided that the construction of said crossings shall meet all requirements of the county soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance and the erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975. 
(7)	The following uses are permitted in the river corridor, provided that such uses do not impair the long-term functions of the protected river or the river corridor. Agricultural production and management, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Agricultural activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state soil and water conservation commission; 
b.	Agricultural activity shall not impair the water quality of the river water as defined by the Georgia Clean Water Act, as amended; and 
c.	Agricultural activity shall be consistent with all applicable state and federal laws, environmental regulations, and all regulations promulgated by the state department of agriculture. 
(8)	Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Forestry activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state forestry commission; and 
b.	Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking water quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(9)	Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
(10)	Wastewater treatment facilities. 
(11)	Natural water quality treatment or purification facilities. 
(12)	Recreational usages consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river-dependent recreation. For example, a boat ramp would be consistent with this criteria, but a hard-surface tennis court would not. Parking lots are not consistent with this criteria, but paths and walkways would be. 
(13)	Other uses as permitted by the state department of natural resources or under section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 12.3) 
Sec. 40-246. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses shall be prohibited in the CRCP district: 
(1)	Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous wastes. 
(2)	Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills. 
The standards and requirements in this article do not supersede those contained in the Metropolitan River Protection Act or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 12.4) 
Secs. 40-247—40-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

Sec. 40-271. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the article is to provide standards and regulations to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The city recognizes that manufactured housing meets the needs of many county residents for affordable housing and is compatible with site-built housing if developed in accordance with comparable standards. These regulations shall govern the use and operation of all manufactured homes on single lots or within parks used for permanent residential occupancy, as well as recreational vehicle parks used for temporary occupancy, in the incorporated areas of the city. It is the intent of these regulations to empower the city planning commission, the county health department, and the building inspections department to review the development of manufactured home sites, manufactured home parks, and recreational vehicle parks, within the incorporated areas of the city for the purposes stated in this article. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 13.1) 
Sec. 40-272. - Manufactured homes. 
(a)	Nonconforming use. Nonconforming mobile/manufactured home parks lawfully existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 90 days, the manufactured home park shall be made to conform with the requirements of these regulations prior to its being occupied again. Any expansion or addition to an existing manufactured home park shall be in compliance with these regulations, as amended. 
(b)	Location disclosure and decal requirement. Every person holding title to or possession of a manufactured home which is placed or located within the limits of the city shall report the location of, and obtain a location decal for, said manufactured home from the tax commissioner, of the county annually, no later than April 1 of each year. Such location decal shall be designed in such manner and affixed to the manufactured home in such manner as to cause it to be easily visible for inspection. 
(c)	Issuance of permit. Any owner of a manufactured home, whether locating or relocating said manufactured home, shall obtain a permit from the building inspector of the city indicating compliance with all applicable codes before any person or persons are authorized to occupy any newly installed manufactured home. 
(d)	Permit application procedures. A manufactured home permit to move a manufactured home into or within the county shall not be issued by the city building inspector until the following conditions have been met in accordance with established administrative procedures: 
(1)	A valid location decal must be issued from the tax commissioner's office and attached to the manufactured home. 
(2)	All manufactured homes must be located at an approved manufactured home space, or in an approved manufactured home park subject to the requirements of this article. 
(3)	For individual lots not approved under the manufactured home park regulations, a sanitary permit must be obtained from the county health department for on-site sewage disposal, or in the event that sewer will be provided, a letter shall be provided by the local government providing the service verifying they will allow public sewer hookup. 
(4)	For purposes of this section, the tax commissioner shall issue the aforementioned location decal, the building inspector shall issue the aforementioned building permit, and the health department shall mention the aforementioned sanitary permit. Upon issuance of the required permits, a manufactured home may be moved into the county or within the county and installed for occupancy. 
(5)	All manufactured homes located on individual lots will adhere to the appearance standards set forth in article III of this chapter. The type of appearance standard required will depend on the zoning district where the manufactured home is located. "No single wide manufactured home will be located in the city other than in an approved manufactured home park." 
(e)	Exception to the issuance of a building permit. A building permit shall be required to locate a manufactured home in the city except under the following condition: Manufactured homes may be brought in the city and located on a sales lot of a state-approved dealer as listed in the office of the state safety fire commissioner for sale without a building or sanitary permit. However, under no exceptions shall any manufactured home, which is located on a sales lot, be occupied unless all permit requirements in these regulations are met. Installation must comply with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, chapter 120-3-7, appendix A, made and promulgated by the state safety fire commissioner pursuant to authority set forth in state law. 
(f)	Provision for temporary power after the issuance of a building permit. The building inspector, after inspection, is authorized to permit the applicable power company to provide temporary power not to exceed 120 volts for the express purpose of completing necessary construction and installation of the manufactured home. This provision specifically does not authorize permanent power hookup or occupancy of the manufactured home. It shall be unlawful for temporary power to be utilized on a permanent basis or for occupancy of said home. 
(g)	Minimum construction standards. Each newly installed manufactured home in the city shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by U.S. Housing and Urban Development (HUD), as required by the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq., before that manufactured home is entitled to receive any utility service to said manufactured home. It is the intent of this section to prohibit moving manufactured homes into the city that do not conform to the applicable Housing and Urban Development Construction Standards, as expressed in 42 USC 5401 et seq., and regulations established pursuant to that Act. To that end, no manufactured home shall be allowed to locate or relocate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this county unless that manufactured home complies with the minimum construction standards required by HUD, which compliance must be evidenced by the affixation of a permanent label or tag certifying the compliance. Manufactured homes which do not display certification compliance shall not be eligible for a city building and/or occupancy permit. Any manufactured home in the city which legally exists at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that does display certification compliance shall not be required to have certification. However, any manufactured home which does not display certification shall be considered a nonconforming structure and shall not be relocated to any other site within the county. 
(h)	Installation requirements. All newly installed manufactured homes shall be permanently connected to water, sewerage and electrical service in compliance with applicable health codes and Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. r 120-3-7, Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, plus appendix A of this document, made and promulgated by the state safety fire commissioner. All manufactured homes shall be installed on an approved pier system and secured with approved tie-downs devices, an approved plumbing system, an approved electrical system and an approved landing at each exit as required by the aforementioned rules, regulations and in compliance with appearance standards for the appropriate zoning district. Each manufactured home shall be installed such that the finished floor level of the manufactured home shall not exceed an average height higher than 80 inches in elevation from the finished grades, in accordance with chapter 120-3-7 appendix A. All manufactured shall be installed to meet the manufacturer's regulations. At the time of inspection, the space beneath each manufactured home shall be enclosed, with the exception of ventilation and access openings, and according to the appearance in article III of this chapter it must be in compliance with (type I, II or III). The residential zone of each manufactured home will dictate which type it must meet (see permitted use Table 5.1). At the time of request for building permit number of ventilation openings shall be set by codes enforcement. The standards are more specifically explained in the rules and regulations for manufactured homes. The enclosing materials shall extend from the lower edge of the exterior walls of the manufactured home to the ground surface level of the pad on which it is located. All ventilation and access openings shall be covered with wire mesh screen or its equivalent. 
(i)	Inspection for manufactured homes. The following requirements shall pertain to the installation of manufactured homes on individual lots or in parks: 
(1)	Foundation. The building inspector shall require the foundation to be inspected to ensure compliance with the rules and regulations for manufactured homes, as may be subsequently revised. These rules and regulations for manufactured homes are incorporated as a part of this chapter by reference. Until the foundation is inspected and approved by the building inspector, no additional work will be approved. 
(2)	Plumbing. The building inspector shall require the external plumbing system to be inspected, including water and sewage hookups, to ensure compliance with rules and regulations for manufactured homes and the appropriate, applicable, accepted plumbing codes used by the building inspector for site built homes. Until the plumbing system is inspected and approved by the building inspector, no additional work will be approved. 
(3)	On-site sewerage. Where individual on-site sewerage systems are installed with public or community water systems, the minimum lot size shall be no less than required in the zoning district in which the home is located. All on-site sewerage systems shall be subject to the county health department approval. Where individual on-site sewerage systems are installed in conjunction with private water systems, the minimum lot size shall be no less than 40,000 square feet. 
(4)	Stairs and landings. The building inspector shall require stairs and landings to comply with section 1108, stairway construction of the state building code, as amended, and also to section P, appendix A of the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, as amended. 
(5)	Electrical. The building inspector shall require inspection of the electrical system to ensure compliance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes and the current National Electrical Code, as amended, and as adopted by reference by the city. 
(6)	Gas. The building inspector shall require inspection of the gas system to ensure compliance with the current International Fuel Gas Code, as amended, and as adopted by reference by the city. 
(7)	Compliance with codes. Until these inspections have been made and the manufactured home is found to be in compliance with all applicable codes, no permanent power may be installed, and no occupancy shall be permitted. Evidence of compliance will be shown by written documentation provided to the applicant and a sticker attached to the electrical meter base. 
(j)	Occupancy of recreational vehicles. No recreational vehicle shall be permanently occupied within any manufactured home park development nor connected to permanent water or electrical power and no manufactured home location permits shall be issued for recreational vehicles. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 13.2) 
Sec. 40-273. - Manufactured home parks. 
(a)	Procedures for development. All manufactured home parks developed after adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall meet the following site plan requirements: 
(1)	Site plan approval required. All manufactured home park developments shall require site plan approval by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures and requirements established herein. Site plans required herein for the placement of three or more residential units shall contain the seal of a state registered engineer or surveyor. No building permits shall be issued for sites within any development until final approval is granted subject to all park plan requirements. 
(2)	Park plan submittal requirements. All park plans shall be submitted to the building inspector or zoning administrator accompanied by the required fee payment as established by the city. 
(3)	The name of the proposed park, and the name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(4)	Location map and legal description of the manufactured home park, north arrow (designated magnetic or true). 
(5)	Complete plans to scale of one inch equals not more than 100 feet and specifications of the proposed park showing: 
a.	The area and dimensions of the tract of land; including topographic data at a contour interval of not more than five feet or an interval appropriate for decision making on the tract; and including the location and type of soils on the tract. Statement of accuracy signed by surveyor or engineer as applicable. 
b.	The number, location and dimensions of all manufactured home lots. 
c.	The location and width of streets; the location and size of drainage mechanisms proposed, including the size of each application drainage area. 
d.	The location of service buildings (laundry service, office, community building, etc.) and other proposed structures. 
e.	The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes. 
f.	Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and sewerage disposal facilities. 
g.	Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed with the park. 
h.	The location of street lights, if applicable. 
i.	The location of bulk refuse containers, perimeter walls, and park identification signs. 
j.	A soil erosion and sedimentation plan meeting the requirements of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act. 
k.	Certification from the appropriate authority on water and sewer acceptability. 
(6)	Development compliance. All required improvements, according to the site plan approved by the planning commission, shall be installed in each phase before the issuance of building permits. 
(b)	Regulations. 
(1)	Soil and ground cover requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home park shall adhere to the following: 
a.	All streets shall be constructed so as to reduce dust, and in accordance with stipulations as shall be required by the county engineer to ensure properly constructed streets. 
b.	All areas designated as yards shall be planted with grass or acceptable vegetative shrubs or flowers. 
c.	Any walkways to front or back entrances shall be covered with stone or other solid material capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating objectionable dust. 
(2)	Location and frontage. A manufactured home park development shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 100 feet on a public street. 
(3)	Site drainage requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every park site shall be graded and equipped to drain all water in a safe, efficient manner. 
(4)	Streets. All mobile manufactured home parks shall contain a street system designed to provide convenient circulation within the park, and shall have one unobstructed access to a public street or highway. The following requirements shall apply to the development of the park street system: 
a.	All internal streets shall meet the minimum requirements of the city for all paved drives. 
b.	All culs-de-sac shall be constructed with a minimum 50-foot radius. 
c.	All park streets shall be maintained a state of good repair at all times by the owner of the park. 
d.	Street design, base preparations, and surface construction materials shall meet the requirements of the county street and road standards. Written approval of the street system by the city shall be required before the first building permit is issued. 
(5)	Off-street parking requirements. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per lot shall be provided in all manufactured home parks for the use of park occupants and guests. 
(6)	Lot area and width. A manufactured home park development shall have a minimum area of five contiguous acres. Individual unit spaces shall comply with per unit minimum for multifamily districts as stated in table 40-68. 
(7)	Recreation and other community facilities. Not less than ten percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to recreation and other facilities for those parks containing 20 or more acres or 25 or more units. 
(8)	Setbacks required. 
a.	No manufactured home or accessory building or structure shall be located closer than 50 feet to any park perimeter property boundary. 
b.	Each manufactured home shall be setback from any other manufactured home by at least 40 feet. 
c.	There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between any individual manufactured home and an adjoining street, common parking areas or other common areas. 
(9)	Perimeter buffer required. An undisturbed buffer consisting of trees and other landscaping material at least 50 feet in width shall be provided and maintained around the entire exterior perimeter of a manufactured home park. Provided, however, any underground utilities may be placed within this buffer, but no closer than 25 feet from the perimeter of the park boundary. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the buffer, which shall be so maintained as to present a neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. 
(10)	Lighting. All manufactured home parks shall have lighting of height, spacing and intensity so that each home site's access and parking is appropriately illuminated. Mercury vapor or high or low pressure sodium lights shall be installed at not more than 200 feet intervals with a minimum height of 18 feet. 
(11)	Water supply. 
a.	Governmental water system. All manufactured homes parks shall connect to an existing public water system if such system is located within 1,000 feet of the proposed park. The availability and adequacy of a public water supply shall be confirmed by the applicable agency having jurisdiction. If the public water supply is determined to be unavailable or inadequate for service, the planning commission may waive the requirement and allow an alternative water supply source. 
b.	Nongovernmental water system. If a single well is proposed to serve 15 or more service connections, or 25 or more persons, then such well and water distribution system must meet the standards for a community water system in accordance with the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection division, chapter 391-3-5, "Rules for Safe Drinking Water," as amended (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-5). 
c.	Individual water system. If individual wells are used, each well may be permitted to serve up to four service connections, provided that the construction method of each well shall meet the standards in accordance with the Georgia Annotated Code 12-5-138 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-138), The Water Well Standard Act of 1991, as amended. 
(12)	Sewerage disposal and treatment. All manufactured home parks shall be required to provide either: 
a.	A public or community sewerage treatment system approved by the state department of human resources; or 
b.	An on-site sewerage management system approved by the county health department. 
(13)	Electrical. All electric installations shall meet the requirements of the current National Electrical Code, as amended, and as adopted by reference by the city. 
(14)	Refuse collection facilities. Each manufactured home park shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal. Collection facilities shall be either in the form of bulk containers (dumpsters) of sufficient size and adequately distributed throughout the park to meet the needs of the park residents, or at least two individually covered refuse containers having a capacity of 30 gallons of less for each occupied lot. Bulk containers shall either be enclosed with a minimum of four-foot-high chain link fence and placed upon a concrete pad, extending at least 18 inches around each container perimeter. If individual containers are utilized, stands must be provided to hold the refuse containers upright. Collection services shall be provided at least once weekly and conveyed to the nearest approved sanitary landfill. Refuse areas shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary manner so as not to attract, harbor or breed insects, rodents or any manner of vermin or pest. 
(15)	Service buildings. Accessory structures and community service facilities are hereby permitted for the convenience and well-being of park residents. Such structures shall conform to the state building codes adopted by the city, as amended, and may include, but are not limited to the following uses: 
a.	Park management offices, repair shops, and storage. 
b.	Community postal facilities. 
c.	Indoor community recreation areas. 
d.	Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for park residents. This shall include laundry services. 
(16)	Miscellaneous requirements. 
a.	Listings of manufactured homes required. Every person, or other entity owning or operating a manufactured home park, and each such entity engaged in the sale or rental of manufactured homes or lots upon which to place them, shall furnish the tax commissioner of the county on January 1 and July 1 of each year with a complete list of all manufactured homes parked or rented or otherwise located upon the property of the entity or in a park operated by an entity. 
b.	Restrictions on occupancy. A manufactured home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it has met the installation requirements in this chapter upon inspection by the city building inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 13.3) 
Sec. 40-274. - Recreational vehicle parks. 
RV Parks shall be allowed as a conditional use in the General Commercial (GC) zoning district, and shall comply with the regulations of this article and the regulations regarding special use permits. RV parks are for the convenience of tourists, transient visitors to the city and are not intended to provide permanent housing for citizens of the city. No space in a RV park shall be occupied by the same vehicle for more than two consecutive weeks. 
(1)	Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles are allowed as a temporary residence. Residents who own RVs shall not be allowed to rent RVs. Residents in single and multifamily residentially zoned districts may have visitors who temporarily reside in an RV but shall not be allowed to stay longer than two consecutive weeks using permanent residents water and electrical hookups. Any visitor to single or multifamily residentially zoned districts staying longer than two weeks shall be required to obtain a temporary use permit from the city clerk and temporary use permit shall be valid for no longer than an additional two consecutive weeks. RVs shall not be located in manufactured home parks (MHP) or rented by MHP as a permanent residence. 
(2)	Site plan requirement. Any proposed RV Park shall submit to the planning commission for approval a site plan which shall conform to the regulations set forth in section 40-273(a)(1) through (5). 
(3)	Development permit. A development permit shall be required prior to any grading, installation of facilities or advertising of proposed park. Development permits may be obtained from the city building department located in city hall for the city. The cost of the development permit shall be according to the fee schedule posted in city hall. 
(4)	Development standards. All RV parks located in the incorporated city shall conform to the following development standards: 
a.	Lot area. Each individual space for use by an RV shall be 1,000 sq. ft. The lot area shall be graded, surrounded on three sides by landscape timbers or other similar material, gravel shall be spread throughout the lot area, to ensure space provided for the RV to park is level and capable of sedimentation and erosion control. 
b.	Minimum parcel size. For the purposes of the development of an RV park, the minimum parcel size shall be ten acres. 
c.	Shower facilities. Any RV park shall provide one shower and restroom, with separate men and women facilities, for every six rental spaces. 
d.	Electrical. Each individual space shall provide electrical hookup for the RV in accordance with current National Electrical Code as amended, and as adopted by reference by the city. 
e.	Water. Each individual space shall provide a water source for the RV to fill water storage tanks. RV parks shall be required to tap on to the county water system. No individual well shall be allowed as a water source. 
f.	Individual spaces. Individual spaces in the park shall include a concrete picnic table, concrete benches and a charcoal grill constructed of wrought iron or other similar material, permanently attached to a concrete pad. 
g.	Streets. Streets which provide access to the individual spaces shall be constructed to city standards and shall be of paved construction. The street system shall be maintained by the park owner and not the responsibility of the city. 
h.	Solid waste. Each RV park shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal. Collection facilities shall be either in the form of bulk containers (dumpsters) of sufficient size and distributed throughout the park to meet the needs of the park residents or at least two individually covered refuse containers having a capacity of 30 gallons or more for each occupied lot. Individual refuse containers are to be placed in central location on pickup days. If bulk containers (dumpsters) are used they shall be placed on a concrete pad, extending at least 18 inches around perimeter of container. The park owner is responsible for maintaining refuse areas in a clean, sanitary manner, which prevents attracting, harboring, breeding of insects, rodents or other vermin. 
i.	Ingress and egress. The entrance and exit to an RV park from a major arterial, collector, or local street shall be no more than 80 feet wide. There shall be only one ingress and egress from a U.S., state, county or local road, with an internal street system providing access to individual spaces. 
j.	Frontage. The RV park shall position individual spaces so RVs shall be reverse frontage to U.S., state, county or local roads. Street system shall be constructed and maintained by park owner. Interior street system shall be constructed to city standards and approved by the city. 
k.	Wastewater treatment facility. All RV parks shall have a minimum of one wastewater treatment disposal system approved by the county health department. Each unit shall be a minimum of 1,000 gallon capacity. Wastewater treatment facilities shall be used exclusively by park residents during their stay at the park. Maintenance of the septic system shall be the responsibility of the park owner. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 13.4) 
Secs. 40-275—40-296. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 40-297. - Administrators. 
This article shall be administered by the secretary of the city planning and zoning board, in cooperation with the planning and zoning board, and the mayor and city council. 
(1)	Secretary to the planning and zoning board. There is hereby created the office of secretary to the city planning and zoning board. 
(2)	Duties and authority. The secretary to the planning and zoning board shall administer the provisions of the zoning regulations; and shall: 
a.	Serve as administrative secretary to the planning and zoning board. 
b.	Maintain public records concerning the administration of the zoning regulations, including all maps, amendments, certificates of zoning compliance, special uses, variances, and records of public hearings. 
c.	Collect data and keep informed as to the best zoning practices in order to be qualified to make recommendations to the planning and zoning board, all of which must be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.1) 
Sec. 40-298. - The city planning and zoning board. 
(a)	There is hereby created a city planning and zoning board whose purpose is to carry out provisions of the city zoning regulations assigned to it and within applicable provisions of the laws of the state. This zoning chapter, including the official zoning maps, may be amended by the city council on its own motion, on a petition, or on recommendation of the planning and zoning board, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning and zoning board for review and recommendation. 
(1)	Membership. Members of the planning and zoning board shall be appointed by the city council. The board shall consist of five members who are citizens of the city and who shall be appointed for five-year terms, beginning on January 5 through January 5 of each year, or until their successors shall be appointed. No member shall hold any elective public office within the city. Unexpired terms shall be filled by the city council. Members are removable for cause by the mayor and city council upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
(2)	Procedure. The planning and zoning board shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson, (who shall be acting chairperson in the absence of the chairperson) on an annual basis. 
(b)	The chairperson (or in his absence the vice-chairperson) shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the board and decide all points of order or procedure. The chairperson shall appoint any committees which may be found necessary. The chairperson or vice-chairperson if the chairperson is not present shall be the deciding vote in any vote ending in a tie. 
(c)	The secretary to the planning and zoning board shall: 
(1)	Conduct all correspondence of the planning and zoning board; 
(2)	Keep a minute book recording attendance, the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent, the failure to vote, indicating such fact; 
(3)	Keep records of examination and hearing and other official action; and 
(4)	Carry out such other official duties as may be assigned by the board. 
(d)	Meetings of the planning and zoning board will be on the third Tuesday of each month at 5:00 p.m. The secretary to the planning and zoning board shall inform the members of the meetings. 
(e)	Three members shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of all business. 
(f)	Neither the secretary to the planning and zoning board, nor any member of the planning and zoning board shall appear for or represent any person in any matter pending before the planning and zoning board. 
(1)	No member of the planning and zoning board shall hear or vote upon an appeal in which he is directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financial way. 
(2)	The order of business at the meeting shall be as follows: 
a.	Roll call. 
b.	Review and approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
c.	Report of committees (if any). 
d.	Unfinished business. 
e.	Hearing of cases. 
f.	New business. 
(g)	Failure to attend three consecutively called meetings or more shall be considered automatic resignation from the planning and zoning board, and upon such resignation by other means, or other vacancies occurring in office, the chairperson or secretary shall inform the city council of such occurrence as promptly as possible, so that the board may appoint a replacement to fill the unexpired term. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.2) 
Sec. 40-299. - Initiation of amendments. 
(a)	Applications to amend this chapter may be in the form of proposals to amend the text, or proposals to amend the official zoning map. An application to amend the official zoning map may be initiated by an individual property owner or his agent, the secretary to the planning and zoning board, or be submitted to the planning and zoning board by the city council. Unless initiated by the city council or the secretary to the planning and zoning board, all applications to amend the official zoning map must be submitted by the owner or his agent and shall be accompanied by an appropriate fee as posted in the city hall, set by the city council. Such authorization of property ownership shall be notarized and attached to the application. An application for an amendment to the zoning map affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months, said intervals to begin with the date of final decision by the city council. 
(b)	The 12-month interval shall not apply to applications initiated by the city council or secretary to the planning and zoning board, except for amendments to the zoning map which were defeated by the city council, in which case the interval required for the subsequent application shall be at least six months. However, an application to alter conditions of rezoning may be submitted at any time. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.3) 
Sec. 40-300. - Application for amendments. 
(a)	Each application to amend this chapter or the official zoning map shall be filed with the city clerk and deemed submitted to the planning and zoning board when the clerk has notified the chairperson of the board that an application for amendment has been filed. Initiation of all amendments must be submitted by written request whether the request originates from the city council, secretary to the planning and zoning board or/and individual property owner. Applications shall be submitted in compliance with the following: 
(b)	Text amendment applications shall include the following: 
(1)	Name and address of applicant. 
(2)	Current provisions of text to be affected by amendment. 
(3)	Proposed wording of text change. 
(4)	Reason for amendment request. 
(c)	Map amendment applications shall include the following: 
(1)	A legal description of the tract to be rezoned, including the street address and subdivision, if any, or area in which the tract is located. 
(2)	Two copies of a plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district; the dimensions, acreage and location of that tract; floodplain and flood hazard areas; unusual topographical features; current zoning of subject tract and all adjacent properties; and existing structures. This plat shall be prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect, a planner with an AICP certification or land surveyor whose seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
(3)	When any applicant or his attorney for a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of that applicant's application for the rezoning action, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official who will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the applicant to file a disclosure report with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
a.	The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
b.	The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each contribution. 
The disclosure required by this section shall be filed at the time of application for the rezoning action. 
(4)	The names and addresses of the owners of the land and their agents, if any; together with a written notarized authorization for the owner agents, if any, to seek rezoning. 
(5)	A letter of intent indicating specifically how the property is to be used. 
(6)	The name and address of abutting property owners as indicated by city or the county tax records. 
(7)	Each zoning map amendment application, whether submitted by local government, or by a party other than local government shall include with it to be complete a written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed rezoning with respect to each of the following matters: 
a.	Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
b.	Whether the zoning proposal would adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
c.	Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
d.	Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause and excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
e.	Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive land use plan. 
f.	Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(8)	Submitted application. Applications shall be submitted at least 50 days prior to the date on which it is to be considered by the city council and in sufficient time so as to permit advance advertising and notice of any public hearing pursuant to the terms of this section and the Zoning Procedures Act. Each application for an amendment to the official zoning ordinance text or map shall be assessed a fee as posted in city hall in the city to defray administrative costs. a fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the board or secretary to the planning and zoning board. 
(9)	An application may be withdrawn by the applicant after the legal advertising as required by this section shall have first appeared but the rezoning application fee shall be forfeited. An applicant may also withdraw an application before legal advertising and in writing to the secretary to the planning and zoning board. If application is withdrawn before legal advertising is published a full refund of application fee shall be available to the applicant. 
(10)	An applicant may file site plans, renderings, construction specifications, written development restrictions, and other conditions which the applicant proposes as binding conditions upon the development and use of the property involved in the application provided, however, that any such conditions or alterations or changes thereto shall be filed with the planning and zoning board at least seven days prior to the public hearing before the planning and zoning board. If any such conditions or alterations or changes thereto are proposed by an applicant and have not been filed as required by this subsection, the planning and zoning board, at the time of the public hearing on the application, may defer any action on such application to a specific meeting date. The date designed for action on the application shall be set at a time which will allow the applicant to comply with the filing requirements of this subsection. 
(11)	If, after one year from rezoning, the approved use has not been developed as stated in the rezoning application or building permit has not been issued, the rezoning shall become invalid. A lot or parcel may revert to previously zoned status only after notification in writing to the applicant from the planning and zoning board. Explanation of the delay shall be in writing from the applicant to the planning and zoning board within five business days of receiving written notification that the year deadline for development has occurred. After review of the explanation from the applicant, the planning and zoning board may extend the rezoning or require a new application for rezoning to be filed with the planning and zoning board. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.4) 
Sec. 40-301. - Planning study. 
(a)	The planning and zoning board, upon receiving an application to amend the official zoning map, shall do the following: 
(1)	With respect to an application to amend the official zoning map, consider and evaluate each of the matters set forth in section 40-300(c)(7). 
(2)	Consult with other departments of the city and any county offices which may be impacted by the zoning change, to fully evaluate the impact of any land use or zoning district change upon public facilities and services including, but not limited to schools, drainage, traffic, and related facilities. 
(3)	Conduct a site review of the property and surrounding area. 
(4)	A written record of the investigation and recommendations by the planning and zoning board, shall be a matter of public record. 
(b)	The planning and zoning board may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the zoning district requested, or recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, and the health, public safety, and general welfare secured. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.5) 
Sec. 40-302. - Planning and zoning board action. 
The planning and zoning board shall hold a meeting on each application on an as needed basis. Any recommendations on each application shall be submitted to the city council. In addition, the planning and zoning board shall, with respect to each application, consider each of the matters set forth in section 40-300(c)(7). As to each application, the planning and zoning board shall make a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, denial, deferral, withdrawal without prejudice or no recommendation. The planning and zoning board's action may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, or recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, health, public safety and general welfare secured. A written report of the planning and zoning board's investigation and recommendation shall be submitted to the city council and shall be public record. The failure of the planning and zoning board to take any action as to a particular petition within 60 days of the public hearing will be tantamount to an approval recommendation thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.6) 
Sec. 40-303. - Public notification. 
(a)	Legal notice. Due notice of the public hearing before the city council shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation for the city in which is carried the legal advertisements of the city by advertising the application and date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearings at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the first hearing conducted by the city council. If the application is for amendment to the official zoning map, then this notice also shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
(b)	Signs posted. An application to amend the official zoning map, which originates by a private property owner and not the planning and zoning board or the city council, the secretary to the planning and zoning board (or a designee) shall post a sign (no smaller than 22 by 22 inches) at least 15 days and no more than 45 days in advance of the public hearing, in a conspicuous place on the property for which an application has been submitted, a sign or signs containing information as to the current and proposed zoning, date, time, and place of the public hearing. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.7) 
Sec. 40-304. - Standards for the exercise of zoning power. 
In addition to the standards enumerated in other sections of this chapter, the planning and zoning board and city council shall consider the following matters in reference to any rezoning application: 
(1)	The existing land use patterns. 
(2)	The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts and not in conformance with the future land use map. 
(3)	The population density pattern and possible increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and streets. 
(4)	Whether the proposed change will adversely influence living conditions in the neighborhood. 
(5)	Whether the proposed change will create or excessively increase traffic congestion or otherwise affect public safety. 
(6)	Whether the proposed change will create adverse environmental impacts to water, erosion and sedimentation control regulations. 
(7)	Whether the proposed change will adversely affect property values in the adjacent area. 
(8)	Whether the proposed change will seriously reduce light and air to adjacent areas. 
(9)	Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing zoning. 
(10)	Whether the change suggested is out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or the city. 
(11)	The extent to which the proposed change is consistent with the comprehensive plan, adopted by the city council. 
(12)	Any other factors relevant to balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of property. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.8) 
Sec. 40-305. - Conflict of interest and disclosure rules. 
(a)	Any city councilmember who knows or reasonably should know that he has: 
(1)	Any direct ownership in any real property to be affected by a rezoning action under consideration by the city; 
(2)	A ten percent or more direct ownership interest in the total assets or capital stock in any business entity which has any direct ownership in any real property affected by a rezoning action under consideration by the city; or 
(3)	A spouse, parent, sibling or child with any interest as described in previous subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section shall disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the city council as soon as he knows of its existence. Such an official, which shall include members of the city council, or planning and zoning board also shall disqualify himself from voting on the rezoning action and shall not take any other action on behalf of himself or anyone else to influence action on the rezoning action. Any written disclosures made pursuant to this section which result in the inability of the city council to obtain a quorum for the purpose of making a final decision when considering a rezoning action, the city council shall initiate the special master process set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-5, as amended. Moreover, questions of interpretation as to the application of this statute should be resolved by reference to the state law governing campaign contribution disclosures, O.C.G.A. § 36-671-1 et seq., as amended. 
(b)	When any opponent of a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the rezoning action being opposed, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official of the local government which will consider the application, and it shall be the duty of the opponent to file a disclosure with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
(1)	The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
(2)	The dollar amounts and description of each campaign contribution made by the opponent to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each such contribution. 
(c)	The disclosure required by this section shall be filed at least five calendar days prior to the first hearing by the local government or any of its agencies on the rezoning application. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.9) 
Sec. 40-306. - Procedures for public hearing. 
The mayor (or his designee) and city council shall open the hearing with an explanation of the purpose of the hearing and a description of the general rules for the conducting of the hearing. The mayor or his delegate may describe the authority and role of the city council in any zoning decision. The mayor or his delegate shall chair the hearing and shall determine the relevance of any proposed comment or presentation to the council in the hearing and is authorized to rule any individual or a portion of any presentation out of order if not relevant to the published purpose of the hearing. Any person addressing the mayor and council shall respond to questions by the mayor and the city council. Remarks shall be made to the mayor only and not to other members of the council or audience. Any portion of allotted time unused by either the applicant or opponent shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. The following rules of procedure govern the public hearing on rezoning or similar matters (special uses) before the city councilpersons. These rules apply to all such public hearing items appearing on any agenda: 
(1)	Procedures relating to application, notice, and advertisement of items on the public hearing agenda shall conform to the requirements of state law and the city codes. 
(2)	Exercise of the zoning power shall conform to the standards expressed in this chapter, as most recently amended, as well as with the comprehensive land use plan. 
(3)	The secretary to the planning and zoning board shall provide a limited number of copies of the policies required by O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., which copies shall be available on request to interested members of the public. 
(4)	Individuals desiring to address the city council regarding an agenda item are required to contact the city clerk. Applicants and/or proponents of an item on the public hearing agenda shall be heard first and shall have a maximum of ten minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Failure of the applicant or his representative to be present for the hearing shall result in automatic termination of any proceedings on the amendment and a negative recommendation on the proposed amendment by the city planning and zoning board. Opponents of the issue may respond and shall have a maximum of ten minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Applicants or proponents may use any unused portion of their ten minutes for rebuttal. No new issues shall be brought forth during the rebuttal by either the applicant or opponent. 
(5)	In the event there is more than one speaker per side, speakers must divide their time or designate a spokesperson in order to complete their full presentation within the time allotment. 
(6)	Any remark amounting to an attack on the character or personal integrity of another individual, comment not factually supportable, comment in the form of an emotional outburst, comment not directed at the mayor, shall be considered to be nonrelevant to the purpose of the hearing and shall be ruled out of order. 
(7)	The mayor or his delegate shall enter into the record after the presentation of the applicant or his representative any written comment, petition, or similar written statement received by the mayor and council prior to the hearing and the same shall be considered by the governing body along with comments and other relevant information of the hearing in making any zoning decision concerning the proposed zoning amendment. At the public hearing, the city council shall review the reports prepared by the planning and zoning board. 
(8)	When proponents and opponents of the proposed zoning amendment have been heard in accordance with the foregoing procedures, the mayor or his delegate shall declare the public hearing closed. No further public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment shall be required prior to the zoning decision. 
(9)	Copies of these procedures shall be provided at each public hearing. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.10) 
Sec. 40-307. - Action by the city council. 
(a)	The city council shall consider the standards in section 40-300(c)(7) in evaluating each application. So that the purpose of this chapter will be served, health, public safety, and general welfare secured, the city council may approve the application, reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, add or delete conditions of the application, deny an application, or defer consideration of an application to acquire additional information. An action by the council to defer the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application and no further notice, is required. The final decision by the city council shall be reduced to writing and mailed to the applicant. 
(1)	After the presentation of positions by members of the public at the public hearing, and at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, a recommendation from the city staff, planning and zoning board, and any county official (building official) that may have comments or recommendations, shall be heard by the city council. 
(2)	Following the staff recommendation, city councilmembers may ask of anyone present questions pertinent to the issue. 
(3)	Following questions and/or comments by councilmembers, a motion for action on the issue will be in order. A majority of affirmative votes of a quorum of the council is required to pass any motion. 
(4)	So that the purpose of this chapter will be served, health, public safety and general welfare secured, the mayor and city council are authorized the following action with respect to any motion pending before it consisting of one of the following: approval, approval with conditions, denial, withdrawal, or deferral to a time and date specified in minutes of meeting. No official action shall be taken until there is a majority vote of a quorum of the council. 
(b)	Appeals from decisions of the council shall be taken to the appropriate courts. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.11) 
Sec. 40-308. - Enforcing officer. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city building inspector. His duties shall include inspecting premises, and issuing building permits and occupancy permits for uses and buildings that meet the requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.12) 
Sec. 40-309. - Building permit required. 
(a)	No building or other structure shall be located, erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a building permit issued by the building inspector. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation or filling of any lot for construction of any building until a building permit has been issued for such work. 
(c)	No permit shall be required for any repairs or modernization of any building which does not increase the floor area of such building, providing that no encroachment into any required yard area is built and that the modernization does not include the installation of new heating and air conditioning systems. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.13) 
Sec. 40-310. - Application for building permit. 
(a)	Generally. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans or sketch in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the sizes and locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use and location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered, setback distances, any parking spaces, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. If no substantial construction progress has been made within six months of the date of the issuance of the building permit, the permit becomes invalid and a new building permit shall have to be issued. 
(b)	Permit required for making improvements or remodeling, moving or contructing a new building. Anyone building a new building within the city, or anyone making improvements to or remodeling or adding onto a building already within the city, or anyone moving a building into the city, shall, when the total costs of any of such operations exceeds $250.00, apply for and secure a building permit before starting construction or beginning said operation. 
(c)	Application for permit. Application for a building permit shall be made to the city clerk by the owner or agent of the property to be improved, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)	Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)	Address of building or lot to which or upon which the construction work is to be done; 
(3)	One accurate scale drawing of the plans, specifications, and method of construction as well as a scale drawing of the site showing all relevant structures and site features; 
(4)	Name of person, firm, corporation or association carrying out the construction; 
(5)	Such other information as the mayor and council shall require to show full compliance with this chapter and all other city ordinances. 
(d)	Compliance with city construction codes. No permit shall be issued to any applicant who refuses to agree in writing to comply with all city construction codes as provided in chapter 8. 
(Code 1998, §§ 33-302—33-304; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.14) 
Sec. 40-311. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)	The building inspector shall sign and issue an occupancy permit if the proposed use of a lot or building is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter, and if the building as finally constructed, complies with the plans or sketch of the plan submitted for the building permit. 
(b)	A certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector after approval by the city council is required in advance of the use or occupancy of: 
(1)	Any lot or a change in the use thereof. 
(2)	A building hereafter erected, altered or a change in the use of an existing building. 
(3)	Any nonconforming use that is existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter or an amendment thereto that is changed, extended, altered, or rebuilt thereafter. The certificate of occupancy shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use fails to meet the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or building or structure complies with all provisions of this chapter. 
(d)	A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and a copy shall be furnished on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.15) 
Sec. 40-312. - Conditional zoning. 
(a)	In order to maintain the health, safety, welfare, and morality of the citizens of the city the city council may impose conditions on rezoning requests. Conditions placed on the property as a part of approval of a rezoning application shall remain in force until such time as an appeal has been granted. Conditions shall be in writing and purpose for the conditions shall be established. 
(b)	Conditions placed on property at the time of rezoning shall become a written part of the minutes of the council meeting and shall be attached to the amendment to the official zoning map. The conditions imposed shall be part of the rezoning application and kept in the office of the city hall. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.16) 
Sec. 40-313. - Appeal process for conditional zoning. 
Appeals for relief of conditions placed on rezoned property may be heard by the city council only when the reason for the placement of conditions has been altered to allow the use of the property without the conditions. Appeals shall follow the same procedure as that of a rezoning application. Public hearings are required before any conditions placed on property may be dissolved. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.17) 
Sec. 40-314. - Special uses. 
(a)	The planning and zoning board shall review and the city council shall approve or deny special uses which are specifically authorized by this chapter. Public hearing are required. (See hearing requirements.) 
(b)	Conditions and limitations. The planning and zoning board shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation which may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and carry out the provisions of this chapter in its review and the city council may impose conditions, requirements or limitations it deems necessary. If at any time after a special use permit has been issued, the building official finds that the conditions imposed and the agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a special use permit, the permit shall be terminated. The applicant shall file an acceptance of conditions form, provided by the city, and the certificate shall be notarized. 
(c)	Procedure. Application for a special use shall be filed with the office of the city clerk, and the planning and zoning board shall have 30 days within which to consider each request and make written recommendations to the council. A public hearing is required by the council (see public hearing requirements). Upon receiving recommendations from the planning and zoning board or after the 30-day period has expired, the council shall schedule the proposed special use to be voted on at the next regularly scheduled board meeting. Each application shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of the site, showing the following: 
(1)	General location of existing structures and property lines. 
(2)	Present zoning of adjacent property. 
(3)	Existing use of adjacent property. 
(4)	Location of proposed buildings and land use. 
(5)	A legal description of the property. 
(6)	Setbacks. 
(7)	Parking spaces if applicable. 
(d)	Specifically, in order to grant approval of a special use, the city council must find the following standards have been met: 
(1)	The available existing street system is adequate to efficiently and safely accommodate the traffic which will be generated by the proposed use or development. 
(2)	The existing public utilities, facilities and services are adequate to accommodate the proposed use or development. 
(3)	The use or development will not generate or cause conditions such as noise, light, glare, odor or similar objectionable features which would reduce the value, use or enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(4)	The use would not have a detrimental environmental impact on the surrounding area. 
(5)	The use would not adversely affect the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community. 
(6)	Fee. Each application for a special use shall be assessed a fee according to fee schedule posted in city hall and set by the city council to partially defray administrative and notification costs. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.18) 
Sec. 40-315. - Variances. 
(a)	Generally. A variance will be authorized upon appeal, in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon finding by the planning and zoning board that: 
(1)	There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
(2)	The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create unnecessary hardship; 
(3)	Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
(4)	Such conditions are not a result of any action of the property owner; 
(5)	Relief, if granted, would not cause a substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
(b)	Conditions and limitations. The planning and zoning board shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation which may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and carry out the provisions of this chapter. If at any time after a variance has been issued, the city council find the conditions imposed and the agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a variance, the variance shall be terminated. 
(c)	Procedure. Applications for variance shall be filed with the city clerk, and the planning and zoning board shall have 30 days within which to consider each request. Each application shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of the site, showing the following: 
(1)	General location of existing structures and property lines. 
(2)	Present zoning of adjacent property. 
(3)	Existing use of adjacent property. 
(4)	Location of proposed buildings and land use. 
(5)	A legal description of the property. 
(6)	Setback distances. 
(7)	Parking spaces if applicable. 
(d)	Action by the planning and zoning board. The planning and zoning board shall consider the request for a variance at a meeting within 30 days of the submittal of the application. The planning and zoning board shall approve or deny the application for a variance. If the request is denied the applicant may appeal the decision in a due process hearing with the city council as the ruling body. The appeal process shall include a due process hearing. 
(e)	Procedures for due process hearing. Procedures for an appeal hearing before the city council shall be: 
(1)	The hearing shall be chaired by the mayor or his delegate. 
(2)	Evidence shall be produced by the applicant why the variance is necessary. 
(3)	A member of the planning and zoning board or city clerk may be called upon to testify to the rules and regulations in this chapter. 
(4)	The applicant and the city council has the right to question witnesses. 
(5)	The city council may uphold or reverse the decision by the planning and zoning board. If additional information is needed the hearing may be continued to another date. 
(6)	If the applicant disagrees with the decision of the city council regarding the appeal of the decision rendered by the planning and zoning board the applicant may go to the proper courts. 
(f)	Fee. Each application for a variance shall be assessed a fee according to fee schedule posted at city hall to defray administrative and notification costs. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.19) 
Sec. 40-316. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person, firm, or corporation violating a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished for each violation, according to the laws of the state. Each day such a violation continues shall be deemed separate offense. 
(b)	In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, lot, or acreage is used in violation of this chapter, the council, or any other appropriate authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent said violation in the case of each such building or use. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.20) 
Sec. 40-317. - Compliance with zoning procedures law. 
This article, as from time to time amended, is intended to set forth and constitute the policies, procedures and standards required under O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and copies of same shall be available to the public upon request. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 15.21) 
Secs. 40-318—40-337. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - LEGAL STATUS 

Sec. 40-338. - Abrogation and greater restrictions of chapter. 
This chapter is not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. However, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or by private easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require greater restrictions than those required by this chapter, such ordinances or parts of ordinances shall govern. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 16.1) 
Sec. 40-339. - Conflicting regulations. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances, regulations, or laws passed by the city council, in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed. All ordinances or parts of ordinances not specifically in conflict herewith are hereby continued in force and effect. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 16.2) 
Sec. 40-340. - Effective date. 
(a)	Enforcement of these regulations shall be administered and become effective on the day of August 3, 2006. 
(b)	All amendments, rewording for clarity and other changes included in this edition were approved and adopted, following a public hearing on advertised in The News and Banner, by the city. The zoning ordinance from which this chapter is derived was adopted at a regular meeting on and became effective on August 8, 2006. 
(Code 1998, § 39-101; Ord. of 8-3-2006(01), § 16.5) 
Secs. 40-341—40-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - WATERSHED PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 40-351. - Purpose. 
It is essential that the quality and supply of public drinking water be reasonably protected. This ordinance provides for the establishment of buffer zones around streams, specifies allowable impervious surface densities within watersheds, and requires the use of best management practices for land use within the water supply districts. Natural protection such as buffer areas are best able to filter rainfall and storm water runoff prior to that water flowing into perennial streams, which lead to water supply reservoirs. Minimizing the transport of pollutants and sediments to the water supply reservoirs guarantees a healthy yield from the, water supply watersheds. This protection is necessary for the enhancement of public health, safety and welfare as well as to assure that surface sources of drinking water are of high quality and reasonably 'free from contaminating sources in order to be treated to meet all State and Federal drinking water standards. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 40-352. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of this article, certain words or terms are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory. The work "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. The work "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designated to be used or occupied." 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. Specific buffer uses may include agricultural and forestry uses as long as the uses are consistent with the criteria established by this ordinance. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas and other setback areas specified in sections 40-357 and 40-358 of this article. 
City means City of Franklin 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface, which prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools or patios. 
Large water supply watershed means a watershed having 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a United States Geologic Survey, ("USGA"), quadrant map. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Small water supply watershed means a watershed having less than 100 square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Utility means a public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems and railroads or other utilities identified by the City. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water system. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
Water supply watershed protection plan means a land use plan prepared and adopted by local governments for the protection of the quality of drinking water obtained from the watershed. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 40-353. - District delineation. 
The protected water supply watershed, overlays are hereby designated, and shall consist of the land areas that drain to the public water supply intake or water supply reservoir. The boundaries of these overlays are defined by the ridgelines of the respective watersheds and the boundary of a radius of seven (7) miles upstream of the respective public water supply intakes. These overlays shall be further delineated and defined on the Water Supply Watershed Protection District Overlay Map, ("Overlay Map"), of the City of Franklin Official Zoning Map. The Overlay Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor of the City Council, attested to by the Clerk of the City 1, together with the seal of the City and the date of the resolution that the City Council recognizes the Overlay Map. The Overlay Map is also incorporated into and made a part of this ordinance by reference. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 40-354. - Non-conforming uses. 
(a)	Existing uses. An existing use of land existing at the effective date of this article may be continued, as herein provided. A non-conforming tract, parcel or lot may build, repair and/or expand such structure without having to conform to the provisions of this article, so long as such improvements to the structure(s) use best management practices to manage stormwater runoff from said tract, parcel or lot. All septic tanks, however that are constructed after the effective date of this article shall conform to the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Abandoned uses. An abandoned nonconforming use, which has been razed, damaged, destroyed or demolished through any act, may be replaced, rebuild or reestablished after destruction or loss, However, if said nonconforming use is not reestablished for a continuous period of one year, the same shall not be reestablished. Any future use after such abandonment shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 4-355. - Identification of existing and future water supply watersheds. 
(a)	Existing small water supply watersheds: 
(1)	Centralhatchee Creek Watershed. 
(2)	Hillabahatchee Creek Watershed. 
(b)	Future water supply watersheds large or small: 
(c)	Withdrawals. All proposed withdrawals for public water supply must be approved by the department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 40-356. - Exemptions. 
(a)	Existing uses. Land uses existing at/or prior to the date of enactment of this article and land uses existing prior to any management agreements as specified in subsections 40-357(3) and 40-358(c) [Note sections 40-364(d) and (e)]. 
(b)	Mining activity. Mining activity under the following conditions: 
(1)	Receipt of an appropriate variance from the City of Franklin City Council; and 
(2)	Receipt of a permit from the department of natural resources under the Surface Mining Act, as amended. 
(c)	Utilities. If the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibility be located outside these areas, then utilities shall be exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions of water supply watershed protection plans under the following conditions: 
(1)	The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible. 
(2)	The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
(3)	The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water, stream. 
(d)	Forestry and agricultural. Specific forestry and agricultural activities from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions of overlay districts under the following conditions: 
(1)	The activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or, the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 40-357. - Minimum criteria for large water supply watersheds. 
The stream corridors of the perennial tributaries of a large water supply watershed tributary to the water supply intake shall have the following specified minimum criteria: 
(1)	Corridors. The corridors of all perennial streams in a large water supply watershed tributary to a water supply reservoir within a seven-mile radius of the reservoir boundary are protected by the following criteria: 
a.	A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.	After the effective date of this article, no more than 25 percent of the land area of all tract, parcel or lot on which any structure or building is placed may be covered by impervious surface within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks and the reservoir boundary. 
c.	Septic tank and septic tank drain fields are prohibited within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks and the reservoir boundary. 
(2)	New facilities. New facilities located within seven-miles radius upstream of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by, the department of natural resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems are prescribed by the department of natural resources. 
(3)	Management agreements. The water supply reservoirs in large water supply watersheds are to be managed according to any agreements required by state law. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 40-358. - Minimum criteria for small water supply watersheds. 
(a)	Stream corridor criteria. 
(1)	The perennial stream corridors of a small water supply watershed within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir are protected by the following criteria: 
a.	A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.	After the effective date of this article, no more than 25 percent of the land area of any tract, parcel or lot on which any structure or building is placed may be covered by impervious surface within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks and the reservoir boundary. 
c.	Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks and reservoir boundary. 
(b)	Additional criteria. The following criteria apply at all locations in a small water supply watershed. 
(1)	New sanitary landfills are allowed only if they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(2)	New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(3)	The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to 25 percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
(4)	New facilities, which handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by the department of natural resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the department of natural resources. 
(c)	Management agreements. The water supply reservoirs in small water supply watersheds are to be managed according to any agreements required by state Law. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 40-359. - Variance from standards. 
The city council, with respect to Georgia Law shall have authority to grant an application for a variance in cases where strict adherence to setback, separation or other standards will cause an applicant special difficulties that includes one or more than the following: 
(1)	A landowner or applicant demonstrates a hardship relating to the land which is peculiar to that owner and not shared by other in the district; 
(2)	Granting the variance should not result in a detriment to the public good or the purposes under this article; and 
(3)	If requested by the city council, applicant shall set forth the inconsistent provisions, contrary regulations, and/or hardship upon the applicant in detail and present the same in writing to the city council. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 40-360. - Administrative review procedure for variances. 
(a)	Submitting applications. All applications for variances shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning department of City of Franklin. When an application is received, the planning and zoning department shall set a time and place for a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission and a place for a public hearing before the city council. Notice of the hearings must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Franklin at least 15 days before the hearing where the decision is made. Any person may appear at the hearing or have a representative attend instead. 
(b)	Procedure. All applications for variances shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall prepare and conduct a public hearing on the variance application. The planning commission shall have 45 days following the date of filing within which to review the variance application, and submit a recommendation to the city council. A review of an application may be extended an additional 30 days by the planning commission if just cause is shown that further time is needed to study the variance application, and the city council is notified of said extension in writing. If the planning commission fails to forward its recommendation to the city council within the time period stated, the city council may assume that the planning commission has approved the proposed application. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 40-361. - Criteria for approval. 
Approval of a request for a variance in the overlay district shall be narrowly construed and shall be based upon the consideration and weight of one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)	The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by the applicant's encroachments; 
(2)	The dangers that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others; 
(3)	The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these streams to avoid causing disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions; 
(4)	The susceptibility of the proposed use to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the owner; 
(5)	The importance of the proposed use to the community; 
(6)	The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding, for the proposed use; 
(7)	The compatibility of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program in the area; 
(8)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program in the area; 
(9)	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; or 
(10)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwater expected at the site. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 40-362. - Action by city council. 
The City Council shall prepare and conduct the public hearing on the variance application in a manner similar to that set forth in section of the Zoning Regulation of City of Franklin, as amended. The city council shall then make an official decision on the proposed amendment. The official decision shall be made within 45 days from the date of receipt of the planning commission's recommendation. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 40-363. - Appeals. 
If the city council denies the application after the final public hearing, the applicant shall appeal by certiorari to the superior court. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 
Sec. 40-364. - Legal status provisions. 
(a)	Noncompliance. Noncompliance of characteristics of structures and site development created by the application shall not in any way limit the legal use of the property, nor in any manner limit the repair, maintenance or reconstruction of a non-complying characteristic or feature; however, in no instance shall the degree of noncompliance be increased except as otherwise permitted by this article. 
(b)	Notice. Notice of violations will be sent by registered mail to the owner and he will have 30 days from the date the notification is issued to make repairs. The owner will notify the city clerk that the repairs have been made, and as soon as possible thereafter, another inspection will be made and the owner notified of the results. 
(c)	Violations. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)	Interpretation. The overlay districts shall extend and cover other zoning districts on the official zoning map; as identified in the Zoning Regulations of City of Franklin, Georgia, as amended. The overlay districts are not designed to replace the districts formerly occupying that space but, instead, add a new layer of control. Each parcel of land within the overlay districts, subject to the exceptions and variances that may be granted herein, shall be subject to the provisions, regulations and restrictions of both the overlay districts and its underlying zoning district(s). It is not, however, the intention of this article to interfere with, abrogate or annual any covenant or other agreement between parties. 
(e)	Conflict with other laws. In the event of a conflict or discrepancy between the requirements of the overlay districts, the underlying zoning district(s), or any other ordinance or resolution, which has been enacted to establish measures to protect the quality of present and future water supply for City of Franklin and neighboring localities, the earliest date of enactment shall govern and determined the respective provision to be applied. 
(f)	Severability. In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, section, subsection, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The governing authority hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the article if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(g)	Repeal of conflicting resolutions. All ordinances and resolutions and parts of resolutions in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2014) 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1998 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1998 Code, as updated through July 7, 2012, which are included herein. Sections of the 1998 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 