THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA ____________ Published by Order of the Board of City Commissioners 2009 ____________ > OFFICIALS of the CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Willie Adams, Jr., M.D. Mayor ____________ Jon Howard Dorothy Hubbard Morris Gurr Roger Marietta Bob Langstaff, Jr. Tommie Postell City Commissioners ____________ Alfred D. Lott City Manager ____________ C. Nathan Davis City Attorney ____________ Sonja Tolbert City Clerk PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented through Ord. No. 07-111, adopted April 24, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of city commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Shelly Hayes, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Alfred D. Lott and city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. © Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. 2009. AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED 09-141 AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Albany, Georgia and it is hereby ordained by authority of same:     Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 64, each inclusive, is adopted.     Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 22, 2009 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.     Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.     Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of City Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.     Section 5. Ordinances adopted after September 22, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.     Section 6. The last sentence of Section 38-69(d) of the Code is changed to read "within five business days."     Section 7. The reference at lines 2 and 3 of Section 52-33 of the Code "but not less than semiannually" is deleted.     Section 8. There is added in alphabetical order to Section 60-127 of the Code "PTP means Pilot Testing Program."     Section 9. To the list of priority pollutants at Section 60-196(c) of the Code, there is added "Bis (2-chloroisopropyl) ether" and "1, 12-Benzofluoranthene" is deleted and in its place is "11, 12-Benzofluoranthene."     Section 10. The penultimate sentence of Section 60-131 (f) of the Code is changed to read "If no building permit is required, the appropriate charge shall be paid to the city at the time the water meter is installed or the size changed."     Section 11. The last sentence of Section 60-949(1) of the Code is changed to read "For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utility facilities is defined as a strip of land at least four (4) feet wide, but not wider than the width of the utility facility plus two (2) feet on either side thereof."     Section 12. This ordinance in no way changes any provisions of the City Charter and shall become effective upon its adoption. /s/         Dorothy B. Hubbard       Mayor Pro Tem   ATTEST: /s/         Sonja Tolbert       City Clerk   Adopted: December 15, 2009 Introduced by Commissioner:  Postell                       Date(s) read:  Dec. 15, 2009       
Chapter 40 - PARADES AND PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Cities are authorized to exercise power over parking facilities and traffic control devices, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4) and (11); power of local authorities with respect to uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 40-1. - Conduct generally.     All assemblies, parades and picketing shall be peaceful and unattended by noise and boisterousness, and there shall be no yelling, shouting, singing, chanting, clapping, or making any other loud noise by any means whatsoever whether by voice, handclapping, stomping or by mechanical means to such extent as to annoy or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of reasonable persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type residence, or any persons in the vicinity; provided, however, that the use of bands shall be permitted in parades. (Code 1975, § 25-1; Code 1985, § 17-31) 
Sec. 40-2. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road by reference.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, excluding O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-393 through 40-6-394, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited in this section. (Code 1985, § 15-21) 
Secs. 40-3—40-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
Secs. 40-22—40-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 40-46. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Parade means parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind moving along a fixed route from one point on any street, sidewalk, park or other place in the city to another point.     Parade permit means a permit issued under the provisions of this article. (Code 1975, § 25-21; Code 1985, § 15-91) 
Sec. 40-47. - Application of article.     The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: (1)  Funeral processions; (2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; (3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. (Code 1975, § 25-22; Code 1985, § 15-92) 
Sec. 40-48. - Public conduct during parades. (a)  Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. (b)  Driving through parades. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. (c)  Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. (Code 1975, § 25-23; Code 1985, § 15-93) 
Secs. 40-49—40-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
Sec. 40-70. - Required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the city manager. (Code 1975, § 25-31; Code 1985, § 15-101) 
Sec. 40-71. - Application. (a)  Filing; forms. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the city manager on forms provided thereby. (b)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the city manager not less than 72 hours before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. (c)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: (1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; (2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; (3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; (4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; (5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; (6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade, the type of animals and descriptions of the vehicles; (7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; (8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; (9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; (10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at such assembly area; (11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; (12)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the city manager a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on such person's behalf; (13)  Any additional information which the city manager may find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. (d)  Late applications. The city manager, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than 72 hours before the time such parade is proposed to be conducted. (Code 1975, § 25-32; Code 1985, § 15-102) 
Sec. 40-72. - Standards for issuance.     The city manager shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, the city manager finds that: (1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; (2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; (3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; (4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; (5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; (6)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; (7)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or commercial venture, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. (Code 1975, § 25-33; Code 1985, § 15-103) 
Sec. 40-73. - Notice of denial.     The city manager shall act upon the application for parade permit within three days after the filing thereof. If the city manager disapproves the application the city manager shall notify applicant of such disapproval. (Code 1975, § 25-34; Code 1985, § 15-104) 
Sec. 40-74. - Appeal from denial.     Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the board of city commissioners. Appeal shall be taken within ten days after notice. The board of city commissioners shall approve or deny the appeal within ten days after its receipt. (Code 1975, § 25-35; Code 1985, § 15-105) 
Sec. 40-75. - Alternative permit.     The city manager, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be required to tender a permit for a parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the city manager, file a written notice of acceptance with the city manager. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. (Code 1975, § 25-36; Code 1985, § 15-106) 
Sec. 40-76. - Copies to be sent to city officers.     Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the city manager shall send a copy thereof to the following: (1)  The chief of police; (2)  The fire chief; (3)  The director of engineering. (Code 1975, § 25-37; Code 1985, § 15-107) 
Sec. 40-77. - Contents.     Each parade permit shall state the following information: (1)  Starting time; (2)  Minimum speed; (3)  Maximum speed; (4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; (5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; (6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; (7)  Such other information as the city manager shall find necessary for the enforcement of this article. (Code 1975, § 25-38; Code 1985, § 15-108) 
Sec. 40-78. - Duty to comply; permit to be carried. (a)  A permit issued under the provisions of this division shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws, ordinances and the provisions of this Code. (b)  The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the parade. (Code 1975, § 25-39; Code 1985, § 15-109) 
Sec. 40-79. - Revocation.     The city manager shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this division upon application of the standards of issuance as set forth in section 40-72. (Code 1975, § 25-40; Code 1985, § 15-110) 
Secs. 40-80—40-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS 
Sec. 40-102. - Conduct generally.     All assemblies, parades and picketing shall be peaceful and unattended by noise and boisterousness, and there shall be no yelling, shouting, singing, chanting, clapping, or making any other loud noise by any means whatsoever whether by voice, handclapping, stomping or by mechanical means to such extent as to annoy or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of reasonable persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type residence, or any persons in the vicinity; provided, however, that the use of bands shall be permitted in parades. (Code 1975, § 25-1; Code 1985, § 17-31) 
Sec. 40-103. - Use of sidewalks and streets.     Picketing and demonstrations shall be conducted only on the public sidewalks maintained by the city, and only in such manner and on such locations on the sidewalks as not to interfere with the free passage of traffic on the sidewalks. No picketing or demonstrating will be conducted on those portions of the city streets used primarily for vehicular traffic. (Code 1975, § 25-2; Code 1985, § 17-32) 
Sec. 40-104. - Use of placards and signs.     Picketers or demonstrators shall carry only cardboard or paper placards or signs. The placards or signs shall not be more than 36 inches in length and not more than 36 inches in width. (Code 1975, § 25-4; Code 1985, § 17-34) 
Sec. 40-105. - Prohibited in certain places.     There shall be no picketing or demonstrating in front of any building in which the following are located, affecting the normal operations thereof, while the following are in use: (1)  A church; (2)  A fraternal order; (3)  A school; (4)  A hospital, nursing home or rest home. (Code 1975, § 25-5; Code 1985, § 17-35) 
Sec. 40-106. - Notice of proposed picketing or demonstrating.     The chief of police is to be given at least five hours' notice by any person planning to picket or demonstrate. This written notice shall include the name of the organization or organizations planning to picket and also shall include the names of the places of business or public facilities which will be picketed and the hours that the picketing or demonstrating will be conducted. (Code 1975, § 25-6; Code 1985, § 17-36) 
Sec. 40-107. - Duty to disperse as directed by police.     Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move on when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to so disperse or move on when so directed by a police officer. (Code 1975, § 25-7; Code 1985, § 17-37) State Law reference— Obstructing highways, streets, sidewalks and other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Sec. 40-108. - Use of vehicles for picketing or demonstrating.     No vehicles shall be used in any picket or demonstrating line, and all picketers or demonstrators shall be afoot. (Code 1975, § 25-8; Code 1985, § 17-38) 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
Sec. 40-109. - Definitions.     Words and terms used in this article are defined as follows:     Permit: A permit as required by this article.     Private Function: A gathering of individuals that is not advertised; is by invitation-only; and is without charge for admission to which the general public is neither invited nor allowed to attend. The guests and attendants are served in an area designated and used exclusively for the private function or event. The private function is normally booked, or set, in advance by a single contact person with the number of guests appropriate for the area. It is normally composed of a cohesive group whose members are individually invited by the host of the private function. If alcohol is involved, only those invited members may consume alcohol and they are not charged for the cost of the alcohol. The exception is when a cohesive group pools money to fund the private function, as opposed to a cover charge or entrance fee. A cover charge or entrance fee precludes a function from meeting the definition of a private party. Examples of qualifying groups as "private functions" include, but are not limited to, wedding receptions, family parties, corporate and company functions. It does not include an open invitation by a licensed establishment or business to the general public for a gathering at which the individual invitees are expected to pay for their food and beverages or for their admission to the function.     Promoter or sponsor: An individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, organization or other entity that plans for, hosts, produces, conducts and/or carries out special events.     Special event: Any private, for-profit or non-profit activity, ceremony, exhibition, show, concert, pageant, march, rally, block party, carnival, circus, fair, demonstration parade or assembly other than the normal day to day or seasonal operations open to the general public free of charge or for an entry fee and taking place or otherwise impacting or potentially impacting government services (e.g. police responses to noise complaints)either fully or in part on public streets, rights of way, thoroughfares, parks, squares, public property (with approval of city or county, respectively), semi-public parking facilities as defined in 6-13(a) or outdoors on private property. This includes an organized group that: moves from one location to another upon any city street, sidewalk, park or other city-owned right-of-way; has a common purpose, design, destination or goal; and consists of persons, animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof. (Ord. No. 13-127, § 1, 9-24-2013) 
Sec. 40-110. - Special events committee established.     There is hereby established a special events committee composed of the chief of police, the fire chief, the public works director, engineering director, downtown manager, code enforcement director, and the parks and recreation director, or their designated representatives. The downtown manager or another staff member designated by the city manager shall be the chairperson of the committee. (Ord. No. 13-127, § 1, 9-24-2013) 
Sec. 40-111. - Special events committee responsibilities and authority. (a)  Responsibilities. (1)  Establish the application and its content. (2)  Review and approve or disapprove all applications for permits governing special events. The committee chairperson is the approving authority for said permits on behalf of the committee. He/she may authorize another member to act in his/her absence. (3)  Review requests for public entity support services. (4)  Provide oversight when applicable. (5)  Provide technical assistance and information to sponsors, promoters and planners. (6)  Recommend appropriate health, safety and risk management techniques. (7)  Administer all special events agreements and permits. (8)  Regularly meet with prospective special event holders or promoters. (9)  Promulgate rules and regulations to implement and carry out the provisions of this chapter. (b)  Authority. (1)  Approve, deny or defer to the mayor and board of commissioners applications for special events. (2)  To issue and revoke permits to hold special events. (3)  Grant exceptions to section City Code section 6-13, open containers, under City Code section 6-13(c)(1), by allowing outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages during approved special events. (4)  Grant special administrative permits (amplified sound) under the noise control ordinance under City Code sections 36-179(g) and 36-193(9). (5)  Determine and require event promoters or sponsors to provide essential services and/or follow guidelines, including but not limited to: a.  Safety and traffic control. b.  Fire protection. c.  First aid stations. d.  Health sanitation and cleanup. e.  Indemnification of the city, its officers, employees and agents from any and all liability of any kind arising from or in any way related to the special event. f.  Establishment of controls such as fencing and gating, wristband and other procedures when deemed necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare, such as when alcohol is part of the event. g.  Review vendors that the promoter proposes to use in the event. (6)  Identify, report, and ensure the collection of costs that the city will incur in response to items a., b., d. and f. (Ord. No. 13-127, § 1, 9-24-2013) 
Sec. 40-112. - Permit required; special events policy and procedures. (a)  Permit required. No person, club, organization, individual, or any other unincorporated or incorporated entity, shall conduct, operate, produce, direct, conduct, manage, institute, carry on or cause to occur, engage in, or host any special event without first obtaining a permit. No person or entity shall promote, advertise, encourage or solicit attendance or otherwise participate in any way in a special event for which no permit has been issued, or for which such permit has been suspended or revoked. (b)  There shall be a $25.00 non-refundable fee to process said application. (c)  An application developed by the committee in regard to special events shall be obtained from the city manager's office by the sponsor of a special event. The application shall be completed in full by the event sponsor, signed and submitted to the city manager's office, setting forth the date, time and place of the event, and the city's services and facilities required for the staging of the special event. (d)  The event sponsor shall provide a copy of the declaration page of a general liability insurance policy showing coverage as determined by the special events committee, and naming the City of Albany and its agents as an additional insured. The event sponsor will also provide a hold harmless and indemnity agreement in favor of the city in regard to injury to persons or property. (e)  The applicant, prior to the issuance of a permit, shall: (1)  Accept the terms and conditions set by the city. (2)  Accept the estimated costs and reimbursement methodology. (3)  Make any necessary deposits of escrow required by the city. (f)  Revocation of permit. The city manager, chief of police, fire chief, director of code enforcement or their designated representatives shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued hereunder instantly if a problem is not remedied immediately upon any violation of the City Code, conditions, or standards of issuance of the permit as set forth herein, where the health, safety or welfare of the community is involved. For example, if the committee determines first aid station(s) are a necessary part of the special event, the failure of same is a ground for immediate revocation. (g)  Grounds for denial. Grounds for denial shall be based on the preservation of the public peace, health, safety or welfare of the public; past events violations may be used to increase requirements or to recommend denial of the event application; the activity or location of the event is such as to interfere with or unreasonably obstruct the free flow of vehicular traffic or other means of travel on any public street, or with pedestrian traffic on the sidewalks; the event will interfere or conflict with another event for which a permit has already been issued, or will interfere or conflict with another event for which no permit is required. (h)  Notice of denial. Should the application be denied, the committee chairperson shall notify the applicant by personal delivery or certified mail within seven working days of the completed application, unless circumstances warrant a delay for a reasonable time thereafter. This notification shall include the reasons for the denial of the permit and shall advise of the appeal procedures. (i)  Appeals. (1)  Any applicant aggrieved by the special events committee shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit or revocation of permit to the city manager. The appeal shall be taken by the applicant within five days after receipt of the notice of denial by filing a written notice with the committee chairperson. The city manager shall review the appeal request and issue a decision within ten business days of receipt of notice of such appeal unless circumstances warrant a delay for a reasonable time thereafter. (2)  Any applicant aggrieved by the city manager shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit or revocation of permit to the mayor and board of commissioners. The appeal shall be taken by the applicant within ten business days after receipt of the notice of denial by the city manager by filing a written notice with the city clerk. the city clerk shall schedule an appeal hearing to be held within 30 days after receipt of notice of appeal or a date mutually agreed upon in writing by the appellant and the city clerk. The hearing provided for in this section need not be a regular or official meeting of the board of city commissioners, but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice, provided that four members of the board of city commissioners shall constitute a quorum for conducting the hearing. The board of city commissioners shall then make its findings within 30 days of the appeal hearing, based on its judgment and discretion and deemed warranted under the facts. (j)  Business entities must possess a current occupation tax certificate prior to and during a special event. (k)  Penalties for offenses. Any person or agency violating any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided by sections 1-17 and 1-18. For each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (l)  Applicants shall abide by the rules and regulations of this Code and all other applicable local, state and federal laws, e.g. alcohol ordinances and laws, street closing ordinances and regulations, food service laws and regulations. (m)  Filing period. An application for a permit shall be filed not earlier than 180 calendar days before and not less than 60 calendar days before the date and time which the proposed special event is to take place. However for just cause the city manager or his/her designee may waive the 60 day minimum filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if after consideration of the date time place and nature of the special event the number of participants and the necessity for city services which will be required in connection with the special event the city manager or his/her designee reasonably deems it appropriate to waive the filing period. In doing so the chief of police and fire chief shall determine that such waiver will not present a hazard to the public's safety by reducing the amount of time available to process the application. If the proposed special event is associated with freedom of speech the minimum filing period is seven days in which case the application shall be walked through the review process by the applicant. (n)  Permit posting. It shall be the duty of every sponsor or promoter to post and keep posted, in a conspicuous place, at the event site, their special event permit. (Ord. No. 13-127, § 1, 9-24-2013) 
Sec. 40-113. - Exceptions.     Any or a combination of any of the following are exempt from the requirement to obtain a permit, however an event promoter, organizer or sponsor of an activity exempted pursuant to this subsection is required to comply with general regulations governing public safety or health: (a)  Funeral processions. (b)  Lawful picketing. Public Assemblies, meetings, marches, parades, demonstrations, or other like events, either fixed or processional in any public place. (c)  Any bona fide athletic event or contest which is scheduled and sponsored by any school system situated within the city or by the City of Albany Recreation Department so long as during such special event no fireworks shall be used exploded or displayed. (d)  Is held on any property owned by the board of regents of the state or other colleges. (e)  An outdoor event occurring on private property, with an expected attendance of fewer than 75 people where there is no involvement with public property or semi-public parking facilities other than lawfully parking attendees' vehicles, provided that the event does not require additional city services, a special administrative permit exceed the sound level limits of section 36-192 of this Code, or a temporary road closure. (f)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in education classes, provided this conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities. (g)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its function, subject to the provision of reasonable notice to the committee and so long as the event does not require additional city services or a temporary road closure(s). (h)  A private function that does not require special public services or would otherwise require approval or exception by this Code, or would not take place on private property and either fully or in part on public streets, rights of way, thoroughfares, parks, squares, public property (with approval of city or county, respectively), semi-public parking facilities as defined in 6-13(a) or private property. (Ord. No. 13-127, § 1, 9-24-2013) 
Sec. 40-114. - Right of businesses to operate.     Nothing herein shall in any way impinge on the right of businesses properly holding an occupation tax certificate pursuant to section 16-23 to operate in the manner permitted by the occupation tax certificate and law. (Ord. No. 13-127, § 1, 9-24-2013) 
Sec. 40-115. - Severability     If any section, provision or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to effect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. (Ord. No. 13-127, § 1, 9-24-2013) 
Chapter 42 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5); authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 42-1. - Trespassing upon grass plots.     It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, lead, operate or park any vehicle or animal upon or across any grass plot in any street, park, side park or other public property. (Code 1975, § 17-3; Code 1985, § 18-3) 
Sec. 42-2. - Animals restricted.     It shall be unlawful for any person to take any animal into property upon which any zoo is located without obtaining authority from the director of the zoological park. (Code 1975, § 17-4; Code 1985, § 18-4) 
Sec. 42-3. - Paper, rubbish, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place any paper, stones, bottles, broken glass or crockery or any offensive or injurious things, litter or rubbish of any kind, or any building material in or upon any park or other public property within the city. (Code 1975, § 17-5; Code 1985, § 18-5) 
Sec. 42-4. - Playing games prohibited; exception.     No football, baseball or other game shall be played in any park, square or grass plot, nor shall the same be played in any public playground, except at such times and under such conditions as may be permitted by the director of recreation which permit shall be granted as any other permit given by the director, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. This section shall not apply to designated athletic areas owned by the city and county. (Code 1975, § 17-6; Code 1985, § 18-6) 
Sec. 42-5. - Bonds to repair damage.     All persons to whom permits have been issued for any purpose which may change, deface, injure or destroy any portion of any park or other public property shall execute a bond with adequate security in double the sum of the cost to repair any damage which may be caused by any action taken under such permit. The amount of such cost shall be determined by the city. (Code 1975, § 17-7; Code 1985, § 18-7) 
Sec. 42-6. - Fees for use of facilities.     The fees and charges assessed for the use of any park or recreation facility owned or operated by the city shall be as determined from time to time by the board of city commissioners, which fees shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1975, §§ 17-8, 17-9, 17-13; Code 1985, § 18-8) 
Sec. 42-7. - Advertising upon city athletic and recreational facilities. (a)  Specifications. Except as otherwise provided in this section, upon application to the director of recreation, and upon approval thereby, sponsors of events taking place on city athletic and recreational facilities may display a temporary banner or poster or other advertising device advertising the sponsor's business or product at the site of the event which is being sponsored. The type, size and style of the banner or poster or advertising device, its location and method of erection, and the content of the advertising material, must have the prior approval of the director of recreation, and such display shall be permitted only for the duration of the event sponsored. (b)  Charge to outside agencies. Where outside agencies or individuals rent city athletic or other recreational facilities for the purpose of holding activities or events which are not a part of the operation of the city recreation department, the board of city commissioners reserves the right, upon the recommendation of the director of recreation, to establish a reasonable charge for displaying advertising for the particular event. (c)  Team sponsors may not advertise. Subsections (a) and (b) of this section apply only to sponsors of events and activities, and does not apply to sponsors of teams. Sponsors of teams in events sponsored by the city in its general recreation program, such as adult softball games, are not permitted to display advertising as provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. (d)  Erecting permanent facilities. Whenever prospective advertisers desire to place or erect permanent facilities on parks, golf courses, athletic areas or other athletic or recreational facilities, such as benches, tables or shelters, or other facilities lending themselves to advertising, the director of recreation may, if he/she deems it in the best interest of the city, permit the placement or erection of such facilities, cause specifications therefor to be prepared, and shall afford opportunity to the public for bidding on the placement or erection of such facilities, with advertising rights, in accordance with the city's regular bidding policy, and contracts will be let in accordance with such policy. (e)  Little league exception. This section shall not apply to little league activities or to the athletic fields upon which such activities take place. (Code 1985, § 18-9; Ord. No. 84-116, §§ 1—4, 3-13-1984) 
Sec. 42-8. - Regulations for Chehaw Park adopted by reference. (a)  Those certain regulations for Chehaw Park, a copy of which is incorporated into this chapter by reference as fully as if set forth verbatim, are hereby approved and adopted. (b)  Any violation of any rules and regulations contained in such regulations shall constitute a violation of this section. (Code 1975, § 17-12; Code 1985, § 18-10) 
Secs. 42-9—42-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PORTABLE BLEACHER SEATS 
Sec. 42-39. - Prerequisites.     The provisions of this article are hereby established as prerequisites for the use of city-owned portable bleacher seats by persons and organizations other than the city. (Code 1975, § 17-21; Code 1985, § 18-21) 
Sec. 42-40. - Use discretionary.     Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, use of city-owned bleacher seats by persons or organizations shall be at the discretion of the director of recreation and parks, and compliance with the requirements of this article shall not entitle any person or organization to use the same as a matter of right. (Code 1975, § 17-22; Code 1985, § 18-22) 
Sec. 42-41. - Application.     All requests for the use of city-owned portable bleacher seats shall be in writing, addressed to the director of recreation and parks and delivered or mailed to him/her. Such requests shall show the time and date applicants desire to obtain the bleachers, and the time and date the bleachers may be picked up by the city. (Code 1975, § 17-23; Code 1985, § 18-23) 
Sec. 42-42. - Use outside county prohibited.     No applications for the use of city-owned bleacher seats outside the county will be granted, and it shall be unlawful for any person or organization using the bleachers to transport them outside the county. (Code 1975, § 17-24; Code 1985, § 18-24) 
Sec. 42-43. - User's responsibility.     Persons and organizations granted the use of city-owned bleacher seats shall be responsible for and shall pay the city for any damage to the bleachers sustained while in their possession from any cause whatsoever. (Code 1975, § 17-25; Code 1985, § 18-25) 
Sec. 42-44. - Insurance.     Permission to use city-owned bleacher seats shall be conditioned upon applicants' first furnishing the city with a policy or certificate of public liability insurance naming the city as an insured and insuring against all liability of applicants and the city for damages on account of injuries to persons or property. The policies shall be for a minimum coverage of $50,000.00 for any one person and $300,000.00 for any one accident or occurrence. (Code 1975, § 17-26; Code 1985, § 18-26) 
Chapter 44 - PLANNING[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Home rule power to adopt local land development plans, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; municipalities authorized to establish and implement coordinated and comprehensive planning in order to protect the environment and natural resources, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 44-1. - Southwest Georgia Planning and Development Commission.     There shall be a third member of the Southwest Georgia Planning and Development Commission, which shall be from the county, appointed by all of the participating governments in the county, shall be from among the minority population of the county, selected in consultation with and on recommendation of representatives from organizations which represent the minority population of the county. The term of office for the third member representing the minority population shall be two years. (Code 1975, § 20-1; Code 1985, § 20-1) 
Sec. 44-2. - Adoption of land use plan; revisions; repeal of other plans and conflicting provisions. (a)  The "Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission Land Use Plan Element, Revised November, 1988" and the future land use map are hereby approved and adopted as the revised comprehensive land use plan for the City of Albany and Dougherty County, Georgia. (b)  The Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission, or its successor, is hereby instructed and directed to make a continual review and update of said plan and said map. Not less often than once every three years, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing, after giving adequate public notice of the time and place thereof, for the purpose of receiving public input, suggestions and comments about the plan. Within 30 days thereafter, the planning commission shall report to the board of commissioners of the city and to the board of commissioners of the county the substance of the input, suggestions and comments received at the hearing, along with the results of its own reviews and studies, and shall make recommendations to these two bodies respecting proposed changes in and revisions to the plan, and as to any further studies that may be needed. (Code 1985, § 20-2; Ord. No. 88-176, §§ 1—3, 11-8-1988) 
Secs. 44-3—44-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALBANY-DOUGHERTY PLANNING COMMISSION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Section 1 of Ordinance No. 85-167, adopted May 30, 1985, abolished the Albany planning commission and the Metropolitan planning commission as derived from Ordinance No. 1951, §§ I—V, enacted Nov. 15, 1973 and Ordinance No. 1950, §§ I—VI, adopted Nov. 5, 1973, respectively, which provisions were formerly included in Ch. 20 of the 1975 Code as art. II, §§ 20-21—20-25, and art. III, §§ 20-41—20-46, and which previously were included in this Code as art. II, §§ 20-16—20-20, and art. III, §§ 20-31—20-35. Sections 2—7 of said Ordinance No. 85-127 enacted provisions relative to the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission, which is the successor to both of these commissions. 
Sec. 44-23. - Creation; assumption of unfinished business.     There is hereby established an Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission, herein called commission, to succeed to the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Albany Metropolitan Planning Commission, the city planning commission, and the county planning commission, the membership and the specific powers, responsibilities and duties of said commission to be as hereinafter more fully set forth. All acts, decisions and determinations heretofore made by any of said abolished commissions are hereby ratified and confirmed, and shall remain in force and effect until changed. Unfinished business of all of the abolished bodies, including any scheduled hearings or hearings in progress, shall be assumed, continued and carried out by the commission. (Code 1985, § 20-16; Ord. No. 85-167, § 2, 5-30-1985) 
Sec. 44-24. - Membership.     The commission shall consist of ten members, five to be appointed to the commission by the governing authority of the city, and five to be appointed to the commission by the governing authority of Dougherty County, Georgia. All of said members shall serve for terms of three years and until their successors are appointed. (Code 1985, § 20-17; Ord. No. 85-167, § 3, 5-30-1985) 
Sec. 44-25. - Compensation.     All members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. (Code 1985, § 20-18; Ord. No. 85-167, § 4, 5-30-1985) 
Sec. 44-26. - Organization rules, staff, officers and finances. (a)  The commission shall elect from its members a chairman and a vice-chairman, each to serve for a term of one year and until a successor is elected. The commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairman, and at such other times as the chairman or a majority of the members of the commission shall determine. The commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its meetings and the transaction of its business, and shall keep records of its resolutions, motions, transactions, findings, determinations, and recommendations, which records shall be public records. The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it deems necessary for its work, within the budget provided for its operation by the respective governing authorities, or other funds lawfully available to it. In the performance of its duties, the commission may cooperate with, contract with, and accept funds from federal, state, local, public or semi-public agencies or private individuals or corporations, and may expend such funds and carry out cooperative undertakings and contracts with any of same within its lawful powers. The commission is authorized to make expenditures for the purchase of required equipment and supplies, all, with the exception of gifts to said commission, or contract receipts, to be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing authorities of the local units of general government represented by appointees on the commission. (b)  The commission may designate an executive committee to be composed of the chairman, the vice chairman, and one member elected annually by the commission, and may delegate to said committee such powers as the commission shall see fit. Two members of the executive committee shall constitute a quorum of the executive committee. (Code 1985, § 20-19; Ord. No. 85-167, § 5, 5-30-1985; Ord. No. 86-176, § 1(2), 6-26-1986) 
Sec. 44-27. - Powers, duties and responsibilities. (a)  It shall be the function and duty of the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission, subject to the direction and control of the respective governing authorities, to make surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, general welfare, efficiency and economy in the development of the city and the county. In particular, the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission shall have the power and duty, subject to the direction and control of the governing authorities, to: (1)  Prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the city and the county. (2)  Prepare and recommend to the appropriate governing authorities for adoption amendments to or revisions of zoning ordinances and zoning maps for the city and the county. (3)  Prepare and recommend to the respective governing authorities of the city and the county for adoption, regulations and amendments thereto for the subdivision of land within the political jurisdiction of the respective bodies, and to administer such regulations as may be adopted. (4)  Prepare and recommend to the respective governing authorities of the city and the county for adoption of a plat, or an official map, and amendments thereto, showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened, or narrowed streets, public open spaces or public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings and other structures within such lines, within the city or the county or specified portions thereof. (b)  The function and responsibility of the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission shall be advisory only. (c)  The Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission shall have such additional duties and responsibilities and shall perform such additional functions and services as may be called for from time to time by the city and the county, or by either of them. (Code 1985, § 20-20; Ord. No. 85-167, § 6, 5-30-1985) 
Sec. 44-28. - Signatures required on checks and orders.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, all checks or other orders of the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission for the withdrawal of money from banking institutions shall be signed by all three of the following: The city manager of the city, or the city manager's designated representative; the county administrator, or the county administrator's designated representative; and the director of the Albany Dougherty-Planning Commission, or the director's designated representative; provided, however, that the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission may authorize the issuance of checks in the amount of $500.00 or less upon only one signature, to be designated by said planning commission. (Code 1985, § 20-21; Ord. No. 85-167, § 7, 5-30-1985; Ord. No. 86-176, § 1(1), 6-26-1986) 
Chapter 46 - RAILROADS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Railroad companies generally, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 46-1. - Jumping on or off cars, trains, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person, except employees of a railroad company, to jump off or on any moving railroad train, car or engine within the city or its police jurisdiction. (Code 1975, § 26-3; Code 1985, § 22-1) 
Sec. 46-2. - Bridges and crossings; to build or repair, etc. (a)  In all cases in which a railroad company is required or liable by law to build bridges in the city or to keep bridges and crossings in repair, on or across a street crossed by the tracks of the railroad company, such railroad company shall, when the building of a new bridge or the repairing of such crossings is declared by the board of city commissioners to be necessary or proper, be notified by the director of the code enforcement department to commence the building of such bridge or repairing of such crossings within ten days and prosecute the same in good faith to completion. (b)  The notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be in writing and served by the chief of police on the principal officer of the railroad company in the city or at the principal office of the company in the city. (c)  Should a railroad company, notified as provided in subsection (a) of this section fail or refuse to commence in good faith the building or repairing of a bridge or the repairing of a crossing within the time specified in such notice and in accordance with the foregoing provisions, then and in that event, the city will proceed to such work of building or repairing such bridge, or crossing, at the charge and expense of such railroad company, and within five days after the completion of such work by the city, the city engineer shall report in writing to the city clerk the amount and value of the work performed and expense incurred in such work. Whereupon, the city shall issue execution as other executions are issued by the city, for the amount of such value or expense and the cost of the proceedings against such defaulting railroad company. (d)  To such execution a defense may be made and filed as in the case of illegality, on oath to the board of city commissioners and heard by them on five days' notice to such railroad company, such notice to be in writing signed by the city clerk and served by the director of the code enforcement department. (Code 1975, § 26-8; Code 1985, § 22-5) State Law reference— Maintenance of grade crossings by railroad, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-190. 
Chapter 47 - RIVERFRONT DISTRICT 
Sec. 47-1. - Purpose and intent.     The purpose of the Riverfront District is to support and enhance Downtown Albany as the cultural and historic crown of the city, with a focus on the Flint River as its most sparking jewel. The elements of the Riverfront District must influence the shape and scope of a new, updated and redefined Downtown/Riverfront Master Plan. The district is bounded by, and includes properties along both sides of, the following demarcation lines or streets: Broadway/Radium Springs Road to the East, Mercer Alley to the South, Jefferson Street to the West and Residence Alley to North, approximately .81 square mile.     The Riverfront District is intended to establish a pedestrian-oriented, high-density, cultural and tourism district within downtown; providing an environment where individuals and families can live, work, play and discover. Emphasis will be on establishing a regional center for commerce and tourism with a mix of cultural, entertainment, retail, office, institutional, and residential uses that reflect Albany's rich local history and culture. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 47-2. - Definitions.     In addition to the definitions found in Title 1 of the City of Albany and Dougherty County Zoning Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:     Build-to line. The build-to line is the line along which the building street facade or street wall is permitted to be located. The distance between the build-to line and the nearest street curb or edge of street is equal to the sidewalk area width requirements, except where public or private open space is adjacent to the sidewalk area, the build-to line shall extend around the perimeter of such open space.     Building street facade. The exterior wall of a building, not including extruding structures such as porches, stoops or bay windows, which is located along the build-to line or street without an intervening building or street wall.     Front street area. That area along both sides of front street within the Riverfront District extending from Mercer Alley on the South, extending to Booker Avenue on the North.     Habitable space. Usable floor area, utilized for any principal permitted use except parking, storage, digital industry switchboards, power generators, and other relay equipment.     Open space. Private open space and public open space appropriately improved for pedestrian use and amenity and not including areas used for vehicles, except for incidental service, maintenance or emergency actions only. Open space shall be exterior and computed as the total square footage of said spaces. Open space shall meet the requirements of at least one of the following types. (1)  Private open space. Open space that is private courts, lawns, gardens, terraces, or balconies, which restrict access to residents of adjacent development. (2)  Public open space. Park, plaza, or hard surface trail that is open to the public during normal city park hours, street medians and islands and sidewalk area requirements located on private property. (3)  Park. A public open space that provides recreation amenities and gathering places. A park shall have streets along a minimum of 50 percent of its perimeter and shall have no more than 20 percent of its area covered with impervious surfaces, with the exception of hard surface trails. (4)  Plaza. A public open space that is fronted by buildings, either civic, or private, and is available for public activities, but may have public access limited for the purposes of providing outdoor dining areas. A plaza shall have streets along a minimum of 50 percent of its perimeter and a landscape consisting of durable pavement, trees and other plant materials. (5)  Square. A plaza that has streets along 100 percent of its perimeter and may or may not consist of durable pavement. (6)  Street medians and islands. A public open space that is surrounded by a street and located entirely within a public right-of-way and not intended for active or passive use. Such area is landscaped and may contain sculpture, fountains, flags or similar features. (7)  Hard surface trail. Proposed new multi-use trails and recreational trails as indicated on the Riverfront District Plan. Such trails shall be concrete or asphalt with a minimum width of 12 feet with green space on either side for use by pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles. Boardwalks, bridges, and pervious concrete are permitted within floodplains and stream buffers as approved by the city.     Patio home. A single-family dwelling placed on the lot such that there is a side yard on only one side of the dwelling and the other side of the dwelling has a side yard setback of zero, or nearly zero. Patio homes are not permitted.     Planned street. Proposed new streets as indicated on the Riverfront District Plan.     Residential treatment. An architectural treatment that: (1)  Is provided on a building street facade. (2)  Provides habitable space for a minimum of the first ten feet in depth of the entry level floor behind the street facade. (3)  Provides equally sized vertical windows where the top of which and the bottom of which shall be no higher and no lower than to the top of the door frame and the bottom of door frame. (4)  Provides windows for a minimum of 30 percent and a maximum of 60 percent of the total building street facade area, with the facade of each unit and each floor of a unit, being calculated independently. (5)  Provides an entry stoop or porch at a primary pedestrian building street facade entrance, when the residential treatment is provided on the street entry level facade.     Sidewalk area. Begins at the street curb, including intervening driveways, and consists of a contiguous sidewalk landscape zone, sidewalk clear zone, and sidewalk supplemental zone as described below.     Sidewalk landscape zone. The portion of a sidewalk area adjacent to the street curb and reserved for the placement of trees, groundcover, and street furniture including utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, traffic control boxes, tree grates, newspaper boxes, bus shelters, sandwich boards as defined under the sign ordinance, bicycle racks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility.     Sidewalk clear zone. The portion of a sidewalk area that is reserved for pedestrian passage and is unobstructed by permanent objects to a height of eight feet, including but not limited to, steps and stoops, traffic control boxes, and utility structures. The sidewalk clear zone shall be adjacent and between the sidewalk landscape zone and the sidewalk supplemental yard and shall have a consistent cross-slope not exceeding two percent.     Sidewalk supplemental yard. The area between the back of the sidewalk clear zone and the build-to line, adjacent to storefront treatments, sidewalk supplemental zones may be used for pedestrian amenity elements such as benches, merchandise display, potted plants, and decorative fountains. Outdoor dining is permitted only when adjacent to bars/eating premises and establishments. Elements that are prohibited in the sidewalk supplemental yard include: recreational areas and facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts; fences and walls greater than 40 inches in height; service elements such as dumpsters, loading docks and similar elements; mechanical features; and parking. Public access may be restricted only for areas adjacent to residential treatment, and for outdoor dining areas when adjacent to storefront treatments. No element shall be attached to the sidewalk supplemental yard in any way, with the exception of permitted porches, steps, and stoops adjacent to residential treatments.     Storefront treatment. An architectural treatment that: (1)  Is provided on the sidewalk entrance level of a building street facade. (2)  Provides habitable space for a minimum of the first 20 feet in depth behind building street facade. (3)  Provides a display window area consisting of: a.  A non-glass bulkhead or knee wall beginning at grade and extending to a point no less than eight inches but not more than 24 inches above the sidewalk area at the build-to line. b.  A glass display window a minimum of 75 percent of the length of the built portion of the build-to line beginning at the top of the bulkhead or knee wall, to a height not less than ten feet and not more than 12 feet above said sidewalk area at the build-to line below the base of the window. Such glass shall provide views into display windows that have a minimum depth of 2.5 feet into and are accessible from the building interior. The areas behind display windows shall be accessible from inside the building. c.  Primary pedestrian entrances on the street facade are recessed a maximum of seven feet from the exterior facade, remain unlocked during normal business hours, and have a surface area that is a minimum of 70 percent glass. d.  A glass transom located along the street facade of a structure above the glass display window and entry door shall have a minimum height of 24 inches and a maximum height of 36 inches. e.  No facade length shall exceed 20 feet without intervening glass display windows or glass doors. (4)  A cornice line above the sign band a minimum height of eight inches. (5)  Street address numbers, a minimum of six inches in height located above the primary pedestrian entrance. (6)  Recesses any sidewalk entrance level drop ceiling a minimum of 18 inches from the display window opening. (7)  Finished floor to finished ceiling height shall be a minimum of 14 feet. Finished ceiling slab height shall not be considered finished ceiling height.     Street wall. A wall no less than 75 percent opaque built along the build-to line and co-planer with the building street facade, often for the purpose of masking a parking lot from the street. Street walls shall be a minimum of 3.5 feet in height, and consisting of dense evergreen hedge or constructed of a material matching the adjacent building street facade. Street walls shall be discontinued no more than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. The street wall shall have other individual openings not exceeding four square feet in area and height of less than 3.5 feet.     Townhouse. Attached single-family residential structure where no residential unit is directly above or below another residential unit, in a building of three or more such single-family dwellings. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 47-3. - Open space requirements.     All open space requirements shall be subject to an administrative approval by the director. All developments shall be required to dedicate open space. Location of such open space shall be approved either within the confines of the development or at a proximate location. open space shall be public open space except that residential development shall provide either public open space or private open space. The minimum requirement for open space is 20 percent of the lot area.     In addition to the definition requirements, open space shall be dedicated, designed and constructed pursuant to the following: (1)  The following shall be counted towards open space requirements: a.  Required public sidewalk areas, when constructed on private property. b.  Balconies, terraces, rooftop gardens, and similar space improved for passive or active use and enjoyment, which is not covered and is walled on no more than one side. c.  New public streets that connect at least two other public streets, and which are constructed on private property as approved by the director. d.  Public hard surface trails. e.  Any areas that meet the definition of open space and are constructed on private property. (2)  Public hard surface trails shall be permitted to count twice the area of the trail towards open space requirements subject to each of the following as approved by the director. a.  The minimum trail width, including a two-foot wide landscaped shoulder on each side, is 16 feet, or as required by the Riverfront District Plan. b.  Trail connections are provided to any adjacent trail or any planned trail alignment. (3)  Detention ponds and required stream buffers shall not be used in open space calculations. (4)  The owner shall submit a maintenance agreement establishing a mechanism for maintaining open space dedication located within subject development, as otherwise approved by the director. (5)  Open space requirements shall be constructed or dedicated as part of the first phase construction, at a minimum in an amount equivalent to the first phase proportion of the total development. (6)  Where parks, plazas and squares are not indicated on the Riverfront District Plan, open space dedication shall be guaranteed through bonds, conservation easements, land donation or permanent deed restriction. In lieu of open space dedication, cash value contribution shall be provided to the city's open space bank, which contribution shall be equivalent to the square footage value of subject land multiplied times the square feet of such open space. (7)  Nonresidential development shall provide public open space, which shall be open to the public during daylight hours and other hours as determined by the city. Open space shall be created and preserved to be used as family friendly space suitable for concerts and other district events. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 47-4. - Parking, driveway, and access requirements. (1)  No parking shall be permitted between a building and the street without an intervening building. (2)  Developments are permitted a maximum of one curb cut per block face or one curb cut per 400 linear feet of block face, whichever is greater. For the purposes of this section, two curb cuts serving two one-way driveways shall only be counted as one curb cut. (3)  No curb cuts, driveways or circular drives shall be permitted on retail streets or when access can be provided from a side or rear street. Circular drives are prohibited, with the exception of hotel and hospital uses. (4)  Curb cuts shall be limited to a one-way a maximum width of 12 feet or a two-way maximum width of 24 feet. (5)  Any parking not screened from the street by a building shall have a minimum seven-foot wide landscaped area between such parking and the street. Such landscaped area shall have a minimum of one shade tree per 50 linear feet, groundcover, and an evergreen hedge at a maximum of 36 inches or decorative wall or fence with a minimum height of 30 inches. Trees shall be planted and street lighting placed in line with the stripes of adjacent parking spaces. Existing parking lots that are not part of the redevelopment of a site and have limited space, may use a street wall to provide screening, when approved by the director. (6)  Where the end of a parking space has a permanent concrete or masonry curb and abuts a landscaped area that is a minimum width of six feet, the required minimum depth of such space shall be reduced by two feet. (7)  Commercial parking lots are not permitted except where individual businesses lease spaces under a shared parking arrangement. (8)  Paving materials used for parking and loading areas other than asphalt or concrete shall be subject to an administrative approval. (9)  Required parking may be provided off-site within 1,000 feet of the use it serves. (10)  Angled on-street parking shall be permitted on both sides of new streets or as otherwise permitted by an administrative approval. Forty-five-degree angled parking shall require parking space length of 19 feet and two travel lanes width of ten feet. Sixty-degree angled parking shall require parking space length of 20 feet and two travel lanes width of 11 feet. Ninety-degree angled parking shall require parking space length of 18 feet and two travel lanes width of 12 feet. (11)  Reduction of parking requirements may be permitted, subject to a shared parking arrangement under the following criteria: a.  The minimum number of parking spaces for a development where shared parking is proposed shall be determined by a study prepared by the applicant following the procedures of the Urban Land Institute (ULI) shared parking report or Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shared parking guidelines. The actual number of parking spaces required shall be based on well-recognized sources of parking data such as the ULI or ITE reports. If standard rates are not available or limited, the applicant may collect data at similar sites to establish local parking demand rates. If the shared parking plan assumes use of an existing parking facility, then field surveys shall be conducted to determine actual parking accumulation. If possible, these surveys shall consider the seasonal peak period for the combination of land uses involved. b.  All shared parking spaces shall be clearly marked as such; and c.  An applicant shall submit the following information as part of an application to reduce parking requirements and avoid conflicting parking demands: 1.  A to-scale map indicating location of proposed parking spaces; 2.  Hours of business operation of nonresidential parking users; 3.  Written consent of property owners agreeing to the shared parking arrangement (when provided off-site); 4.  Copies of parking lease agreement, easements for parking, or notarized letter or sworn affidavit as to the intent of lease agreement, including renewed leases, shall be filed with the director of planning and zoning, or designee. Lapse of a required lease agreement, or failure to file leases, shall terminate approval for shared parking. (12)  Rear alleys shall be provided to access townhouse and multifamily garages, single-family dwelling garages, and commercial loading and service areas, where such access is feasible. See street type table - alley requirements. (13)  All required off-street parking for townhouses and multifamily dwellings, and accessory dwelling units, shall be met on-site or in an adjacent garage or parking structure. (14)  Bicycle or moped parking spaces are required as follows: a.  All new non-residential uses shall provide one such space for every 20 automobile spaces and new multifamily uses shall provide one such space for every five units provided that no such uses shall have fewer than two such spaces or be required to exceed 30 spaces. b.  Such spaces shall be located within the sidewalk landscape zone a maximum distance of 100 feet from the primary pedestrian entrance, or shall be located at least as close as the closest automobile space, except for handicapped parking spaces. c.  Bicycle parking spaces shall include a bike rack with a metal anchor sufficient to secure the bicycle frame when used in conjunction with a user-supplied lock. (15)  Garages and carports shall not face adjacent streets except where alley access is not feasible, in which case such garages and carports shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from the building street facade and a minimum of 18 feet from the required sidewalk. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 47-5. - New street requirements. (1)  Every effort shall be made to restore and maintain the historic street grid pattern within the Riverfront District west of Front Street. (2)  Whenever a development five acres or greater is to be developed or redeveloped, block sizes shall not exceed a total perimeter of 2,000 linear feet as measured from the edge of street and a total of 600 feet on any one side. The property owner is responsible for the dedication of the right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of the land development ordinance. The entire dedicated right-of-way shall be shown as such on a final survey plat that is submitted to and approved by the city. Measurements involving minimum lot standards shall be made at the edge of the full right-of-way. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO) for any new development on such lot, the street shall be either constructed or guaranteed through bonds to the standards established herein. Alleys shall be provided to serve parking and service areas at the rear of building. (3)  New streets shall be minor streets. (4)  Dead-end and cul-de-sac streets are prohibited. (5)  All streets shall meet sidewalk area requirements. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 47-6. - Alleys. (1)  Alleys in the Riverfront District are for service and parking area access only and, except for private alleys, will not be used for ordinary street traffic. (2)  Alleys will accommodate delivery and waste removal where reasonable, so as not to impede motor vehicles or pedestrians on principal streets. (3)  Loading and service. Where alleys provide inadequate space and access to accommodate service and delivery, curb space may be marked to accommodate delivery and service vehicle; such request must be reviewed and approved by the director of the city engineering department, or designee. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 47-7. - Sidewalk area requirements.     In addition to the city's general sidewalk requirements, special requirements for streets in the Riverfront District apply. Such requirements may result in a reduction of curb to curb street width or traffic lane width as approved by the city. Where practical and reasonable, the Riverfront District will accommodate bike and non-motorized vehicle traffic and parking. (1)  A sidewalk area shall be located along all streets and shall consist of a sidewalk landscape zone with street trees, an unobstructed sidewalk clear zone, and a supplemental yard with width requirements as indicated on the street type table-sidewalk area and hard surface trail requirements. (2)  Any paving, including concrete, special or decorative paving, within the sidewalk landscape zone, sidewalk clear zone, or sidewalk supplemental yard shall continue across any intervening driveway, at width equal to the sidewalk area paving. (3)  Within the sidewalk landscape zone: a.  Street trees are required as indicated in the street type table - sidewalk area and hard surface trail requirements. street trees shall be planted a maximum of 50 feet on center and spaced equal distance between streetlights and in line with stripes of parallel parking spaces. All newly planted trees shall be a minimum caliper of 3.5 inches measured 12 inches above ground, shall be limbed up to a minimum height of seven feet and shall have a minimum mature height of 40 feet. Trees planted in front of storefront treatments shall be limbed up to a minimum height of ten feet and have a minimum mature height of 50 feet. Trees shall have a minimum planting area of 40 square feet. b.  Tree planting areas shall be planted with evergreen ground cover such as Liriope Spicata, Mondo Grass, or other evergreen ground cover as approved by the city. c.  All street furniture and pavers, where installed and all street trees shall have a location and type subject to approval by the director, or designee, including but not limited to the following: benches, waste receptacles, bicycle racks, newspaper stands, tree grates, and pedestrian lights. Generally, tree grates, where permitted, shall be a minimum of eight feet by five feet; and decorative pedestrian lights shall be placed a maximum of 50 feet on center and shall be spaced equal distance between required street trees. d.  Street tree requirements within the sidewalk landscape zone may be met or exceeded through landscape bulb-outs between on-street parking spaces and behind sidewalk extensions at street intersections on streets that have on-street parking, with an administrative approval by the director. (4)  Within the sidewalk clear zone: a.  The paving type shall extend across any intervening driveway at the same width as the sidewalk clear zone, and handicapped access across driveways shall be provided within the clear zone area. b.  Buildings with no adjacent sidewalk supplemental yard and that existed before October 1, 2007, may have outdoor dining areas encroach a maximum of two feet into the sidewalk clear zone, measured from the building street facade. c.  Nothing shall be placed on the surface of the sidewalk clear zone except as otherwise specifically permitted. (5)  Within the sidewalk supplemental yard: a.  The maximum depth that terraces, porches and stoops, not including stairs, permitted to encroach shall equal 60 percent of the total zone depth. b.  Terraces, porches, and stoops that are not a required "accessible route into and through the dwelling unit", as established by Section 804. [42 U.S.C. 3604](3)(C)(iii)(I) of the Fair Housing Act shall have a minimum finished floor height of 24 inches above the sidewalk area finished grade. c.  Adjacent to sidewalk level residential treatments, landscaping shall be provided for a minimum of 40 percent of the horizontal area. d.  Adjacent to storefront treatments, paving shall be provided for a minimum of 80 percent of the horizontal area. e.  Sidewalk supplemental yard width requirements may be administratively reduced where the sidewalk landscape zone is increased to a minimum width of ten feet for purposes of locating outdoor dining. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 47-8. - Building street facade requirements.     All property with street frontage on retail streets, as indicated on the Riverfront District Plan, shall have a continuous building street facade along such streets, except that the building street facade may be interrupted as needed for approved intervening driveways. Where these requirements are satisfied by existing principal buildings, additional principle buildings shall be exempt from these requirements.     Along the building street facade of all new and renovated buildings and structures the following shall apply. Where a historic structure is being renovated and these requirements are not in keeping with historic elements of such building, such historic elements may be administratively approved by the director. In addition to these building street facade requirements, additional guidelines for facade are set forth by the Albany Dougherty Inner City Authority. (1)  The first two stories of building facades shall be brick, cast stone, concrete siding such as Hardiplank, natural wood or stone, with the exception of pedestrian entrances and windows. On buildings along Front Street such requirements shall apply to the entire building street facade and along building street facades seen from Front Street. (2)  Exposed building foundation materials shall be masonry, stone, or hard-coat stucco. (3)  Awnings shall be of fabrics, canvas, fixed metal, or similar material. Internally lit awnings and canopies that emit light through the awning or canopy material are prohibited. (4)  Blank, windowless walls are prohibited. All building stories with the exception of storefront treatment shall have windows and doors that equal a minimum of 30 percent and maximum of 60 percent of the total facade area with each story being calculated independently. (5)  All windows shall be vertically shaped with a height greater than width, including display windows but not transoms or decorative attic windows. (6)  Glass panels in windows and storefronts shall be clear and unpainted, and shall not be tinted such that views into the building are obstructed, with the exception of transoms, which may be prism glass. (7)  Window trim shall not be flush with the exterior wall and shall have a minimum relief of ¼-inch from the exterior wall. (8)  Doors and windows that operate as horizontal sliders are prohibited except where renovating a historic building with this window type. (9)  Window frames shall be recessed a minimum of two inches from the exterior facade. (10)  Stoops and entry-level porches shall not be enclosed with screen wire or glass. (11)  Porch and arcade columns shall be a minimum width of eight inches. (12)  Residential porches shall be covered and have a minimum depth of five feet, a minimum length of six feet and a minimum area of 40 feet. (13)  Exterior entry steps shall have enclosed risers. (14)  Parking structures shall conceal automobiles from visibility; shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building on all levels; shall be faced in brick, stone, cast stone, poured-in-place rubbed concrete, or pre-cast concrete faced in or having the appearance of brick or stone. (15)  The minimum building height as measured along the build-to line shall be 18 feet. (16)  All buildings shall have building street facades with continuous storefront treatment or residential treatment requirements as indicated in the building facade and materials requirements table. (17)  Building facade materials shall be combined only horizontally, with the heavier below the lighter. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 47-9. - Building entrance requirements. (1)  Sidewalk level uses, including but not limited to dwelling units, multifamily lobbies, individual business establishments, and public institutions, shall have a primary pedestrian entrance, which shall face and be visible from, and directly adjoin the required sidewalk area or adjoining open space. Where an individual use has a building street facade on more than one street, such entrance requirement shall apply along a retail street. Where a historic structure is being renovated, such entrance locations may reflect the historic entrances to such structure. (2)  All buildings with more than four sidewalk area level residential units along a single street shall have individual entrances to such units directly accessible from the required sidewalk area or adjoining open space. All walkways providing such access shall be shared between no more than two adjacent units. (3)  The primary pedestrian entrance to all sidewalk level retail, and bars/eating premises and establishments shall remain unlocked during business hours. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 47-10. - General site and building requirements. (1)  Chimneys shall extend to the ground. (2)  All visible roofs shall have a minimum 25-year roof and no visible roll roofing. (3)  The height of fences and walls located between the street facade of principal structures and a street shall not exceed 40 inches and in other areas shall not exceed six feet. (4)  Brick piers shall not be utilized for fences. (5)  Fences and walls located along the alley right-of-way line or adjacent property line shall be a minimum height of six feet and 75 percent opaque. (6)  The use of barbed wire, razor wire, chain link or similar elements shall be prohibited. (7)  Loading docks and dumpsters shall be entirely screened from view of any public open space or sidewalk area, with vertically enclosed opaque walls. (8)  Utilities shall be placed underground or in alleys wherever feasible. (9)  Building mechanical and accessory features: a.  Shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure or on rooftops and shall not be visible from any public open space or sidewalk area. b.  When located on rooftops shall be incorporated in the design of the building and screened with materials similar to the building. (10)  Balconies, awnings and bay windows may encroach into any sidewalk supplemental zone or required setback a maximum depth of five feet. (11)  Walkways with a minimum width of four feet shall be provided from the closest public sidewalk clear zone to the primary entrance of all buildings and structures not built to the sidewalk area, including parking structures. (12)  Each building shall have a sidewalk level story at each building street facade, which shall have a minimum floor to finished ceiling height of 18 feet for storefront treatments and a minimum ceiling height of 14 feet for residential treatments. All other building stories above grade shall have a minimum floor to ceiling height of ten feet. (13)  New developments shall be served by an alley or private drive to off-street parking. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 47-11. - General use requirements. (1)  Proximity requirements for sale of alcoholic beverages. Business establishments selling alcoholic beverages for on-premises or off-premises consumption shall not be subject to any minimum requirements for distances between such businesses. All other proximity rules such distances between such businesses and schools and churches remain in effect, except as provided for below. The city commission will approve or disapprove all alcohol licenses based on recommendations from the downtown manager, the enforcement director, and policing officials, and shall consider in its deliberation other information and issues to include but not limited to the following: • Whether the proposed establishment will provide or is capable of providing live music; and how close this establishment is to other establishments that offer or are capable of offering live music. • Confirmation of the establishment's ability to comply with the Riverfront Districts noise ordinance, considering building location, design and sound retarding material uses in its design/redesign. • The impact of the proposed establishment on the mixed-use goals and plans for the district; each area must host retail and/or residential establishments, as well as entertainment amenities. • No area shall be exclusively bars, taverns, clubs or other liquor/alcohol selling/serving establishments. To meet this standard there shall be no more than three liquor selling establishments on any single side of a city block; no more than four in each facing block and no more than two that feature live or amplified sound. • The commission will not authorize alcohol sales in the front street area exclusive of the hotels, restaurants, the Civic Center and city sanctioned special events. The front area must remain both child and pedestrian friendly areas. (2)  Alcohol beverage licensees located within the Albany Downtown Riverfront District as provided in subsection (1) above shall not be subject to the provisions of subsections [6-3](a) and (b) and section [6-75] of this Code. (3)  Any church or school established in the district after the district is establish will not have benefit of the alcohol license proximity ordinance, in that an alcohol selling establishment maybe able to locate next door to the subject churches or schools without having violated district proximity ordinances. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 47-12. - Noise restrictions.     With the exclusion of special events approved by the city, such as city parades, festivals and ceremonies; and in addition to the general noise ordinances of the city, special Riverfront District noise requirements apply as follows. It is the intent of the Riverfront District regulations to ensure that the quality of life of residents, workers, visitors and tourist is not diminished by excessive or inappropriate noise from any source, whether amplified or not amplified. Additional fines may be levied for violations of noise restrictions in the Riverfront District, and violations may result in loss of alcohol or business licenses. Noise sources include boom boxes and car stereos or radios and similar devices audible outside of a vehicle at a distance greater than 20 feet in the Riverfront District, and such violations may be punished by greater fines, loss of driving license, and/or confiscation of vehicle. (1)  Amplified or live music from any source shall be permitted at a maximum of ten decibels above background sound level in the area, which shall be known as the ten-decibel rule. (2)  As a general rule amplified music shall be permitted only during the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday and to 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. Friday, Saturday and locally observed holidays. The following exceptions to the general rule for amplified music hours may be extended to 2:55 a.m. Friday, Saturday and locally observed holidays, when there are no proximate residences to the establishment and when the establishment has demonstrated that the music will not adversely affect residences because of distance. Additionally, the establishment will be permitted extend hours, if it is able to demonstrate that structural noise/sound impeding material has been included in the facility to ensure that amplified music/sound emanating from the structure can meet the "Ten decibels rule". (3)  External speakers are prohibited except at restaurants with outdoor seating, where they shall contain noise levels exceeding the ten-decibel rule to a 100 square foot area. Restaurants and bars which are located in the Riverfront District are specifically directed to manage the level of noise emanating from these businesses such that they do not impede traffic, or annoy neighboring business or residences. Restaurants and bars with live or amplified music may be required to include sound reducing material, so as to ensure that maximum sound levels do not exceed the ten decibel above background sound and/or 100-foot sound rule. (4)  Businesses that will or have provided for live and/or amplified, are required to report the same when applying for alcohol license or making occupational tax payment to the issuing office, the finance or marshal's office. Additionally, the noise restrictions will be considered and shall impact the approval of licensing of alcohol for such establishments that provide live or amplified sound. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 47-13. - General upkeep and care.     Because of the tourism, historic and entertainment nature of the Albany Riverfront District, it is particularly important that upkeep and care requirements be enforced. When these requirements are not met, more costly fines may be assessed when necessary. (1)  No trash cans will be located between a building and the street or shall be visible from any public sidewalk, except those that are specifically exempted by the city manager or his designated official and except for trash cans of homes not served by allies on days of trash pick-up until 7:00 p.m. (2)  Property owners are responsible for ensuring that daily clean up and removal of trash and debris in front and around their buildings is practiced by themselves, their tenants, or other designation persons. (Ord. No. 07-124, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
Chapter 48 - SECONDHAND GOODS AND MATERIALS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Pawnbrokers generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 48-1—48-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAWNBROKERS 
Sec. 48-19. - Definitions.     The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 ("Pawnbrokers—Definitions"), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130. (Code 1985, § 23-16) 
Sec. 48-20. - Requirements generally.     No license shall be granted to any person to engage in the business of a pawnbroker until the applicant shall have first applied therefor to the license inspector, paid the license fee prescribed, and obtained approval of such application from the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 27-41; Code 1985, § 23-17) 
Sec. 48-21. - Contents of application for license.     The application for a license under the provisions of this article shall state the location of the place of business and the names of the owners or parties interested directly or indirectly, and if a corporation, the names of all the officers and stockholders shall be stated. (Code 1975, § 27-42; Code 1985, § 23-18) 
Sec. 48-22. - Daily report to police department. (a)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent electronic record of its pawn transactions in which an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop can be transmitted to the city police department via an electronic automated reporting system. Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop and shall be made at the time of each transaction, and shall contain the following information: (1)  The date and time of the purchase, pawn or sale of the property. (2)  The name, address and telephone number of the customer making the pledge, trade or sale. (3)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card which contains a photograph of the customer. (4)  A description of the pledged or purchased property by serial, model or other number, if available, and by any identifying marks (e.g., brand name, color, style, etc.). (5)  The number of the receipt or pawn transaction issued for the property pawned or bought. (6)  The price paid or the amount loaned. (7)  The maturity date of the transaction, if a pawn. (8)  Right thumbprint of the customer will be obtained on the pawn slip at the time of the transaction. (9)  The signature of the customer. (b)  Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report to the police department of the described information in subsection (a) of this section in such form and manner as directed by the chief of police or the chief of police's designee of all property pledged, received, traded, bartered, bought or otherwise acquired by the pawnbroker during the 24 hours, ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of such report. This report is required via an Internet based system, in a manner directed by the chief of police or the chief of police's designee using such software compatible to that used by the city police department. (c)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, pawnshops and pawnbrokers will be notified as soon as possible. In this event, the pawnbrokers will be required to make records of transactions in paper form. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in subsection (a) of this section. Pawnbrokers shall maintain at least a three-day supply of these paper forms. (d)  Any duly authorized law enforcement officer may, during the ordinary hours of business or any other reasonable time, inspect any pawnbroker's electronic records at the pawnbroker's place of business to ensure compliance with this section. (e)  The chief of police or the chief of police's designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system. (f)  Pawnbroker's are hereby notified that failure or refusal to comply with these requirements is grounds for a forfeiture of the pawnbroker's license and occupation tax certificate. (g)  Records shall be maintained for at least the time period as required by O.C.G.A. § 44-12-134. (Code 1975, § 27-44; Code 1985, § 23-19; Ord. No. 08-138, § 2(23-19), 9-23-2008) 
Sec. 48-23. - Waiting period. (a)  Any pawnbroker who makes a loan on pledged goods or buys pledged goods on the condition that the seller may repurchase such goods, shall hold said goods for at least 30 days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Nonpledged goods bought under this section shall be held for at least 30 calendar days before disposition by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. (b)  Whenever the police department shall have probable cause to suspect any property listed in the daily report of the pawnbroker is stolen property or constitutes evidence of a crime, the police department shall notify the pawnbroker not to sell any such property or permit the same to be redeemed, for at least 48 hours in addition to the time provided for in subsection (a) of this section. Such hold can be extended in 30 day increments by the police department based upon probable cause to suspect such property is stolen or constitutes evidence of a crime. (Ord. No. 08-138, § 2(23-20), 9-23-2008) 
Secs. 48-24—48-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CLOSING OUT SALES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Fair Business Practices Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.; unlawful to misrepresent true ownership of business for purposes of liquidation sale, auction sale, or "going out of business" sale, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-425. 
Sec. 48-56. - Exceptions. (a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to commercial travelers or selling agents selling goods, wares and merchandise to dealers at wholesale. (b)  No provision of this article shall be applicable to trustees in bankruptcy, executors, administrators, receivers or public officials acting under judicial process. (Code 1975, § 27-22; Code 1985, § 23-36) 
Sec. 48-57. - Inventory list, etc., to be filed prior to sale.     Whenever any person desires to advertise, represent or hold or conduct any sale of goods, wares or merchandise that is to be advertised or represented as a closing out sale, a going-out-of-business sale, a quitting business sale, or a sale designated in any manner by which it is represented that the business of such person is being terminated or closed out, such person shall file with the license inspector of the city an inventory of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold. The inventory required shall contain a complete and accurate list of the stocks of goods, wares or merchandise to be sold, together with their wholesale price. (Code 1975, § 27-21; Code 1985, § 23-37) 
Sec. 48-58. - Original stock only.     It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer or expose for sale, or to include in the inventory provided for in section 48-57, any goods, wares or merchandise which are not an actual part of the original stock of goods of the applicant. (Code 1975, § 27-23; Code 1985, § 23-37) 
Sec. 48-59. - Sales restricted.     It shall be unlawful for any person at any sale under the provisions of this article to sell any goods, wares or merchandise not specifically described in the inventory filed with the city for such sale. (Code 1975, § 27-24; Code 1985, § 23-38) 
Sec. 48-60. - Additions.     It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a sale under the provisions of this article to make any replenishments or additions to such person's stock for the purpose of such sale. (Code 1975, § 27-25; Code 1985, § 23-40) 
Sec. 48-61. - Duration.     It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a sale under the provisions of this article to allow such sale to exceed 60 days; provided, however, in the event a longer time is necessary or required, the city commission may grant an additional 30 days upon the sufficient showing of such necessity. (Code 1975, § 27-26; Code 1985, § 23-41) 
Secs. 48-62—48-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SECONDHAND DEALERS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-104, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 26, 2010, deleted the former Art. IV, §§ 48-110—48-112, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to secondhand dealers and derived from Code 1985, §§ 23-81—23-83; Ord. No. 89-172, §§ 1—3, 10-24-1989. 
Sec. 48-110. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed:     Secondhand dealer means any person, corporation or other business organization or entity which is engaged in the business of buying, selling, bartering, or exchanging in any manner at retail or wholesale, or otherwise dealing for profit in, secondhand goods.     Secondhand goods means personal property previously owned or used, which is not regulated metals property and which is offered for sale, barter, exchange, bailment, or in any other such transaction as used property. Such secondhand goods shall be limited to stoves, refrigerators, air conditioners, and other household appliances; jewelry, gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals; watches; diamonds, gems and other precious stones; fishing rods, reels and tackle; audio and video electric equipment, including television sets, compact disc players, radios, amplifiers, receivers, turntables, tape recorders; video tape recorders; speakers and citizens band radios; computer equipment; radar detectors; depth finders; trolling motors; outboard motors; sterling silver flatware and serving pieces; photographic equipment, including cameras, video and film cameras, lenses, electronic flashes, tripods and developing equipment; firearms; tools, calculators; musical instruments; lawnmowers; bicycles; and typewriters.     Transaction means any purchase, trade, consignment or exchange of secondhand goods by a secondhand dealer. (Ord. No. 10-104, § 2, 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 48-111. - Reports required. (a)  Each secondhand dealer shall file daily written reports at 10:00 a.m. with the city police department's chief of police. The chief of police may delegate this authority to a deputy police chief or other official, as the police chief deems appropriate in connection with any transaction involving secondhand goods by such dealer within the preceding 24 hours. The report shall contain the following information: (1)  The name of the person or other entity whom the secondhand goods is purchased; (2)  The residence, address or place of business of such person or entity; (3)  Identification of such person or entity, including the driver's license number and vehicle license plate number; (4)  The date of birth and Social Security number of the person from whom the secondhand goods are purchased; (5)  A description of the secondhand goods (brand name, model and serial number) acquired in the purchase transaction; and (6)  A statement from the person stating he or the entity he represents is the lawful owner of the secondhand goods. (b)  Every secondhand dealer shall maintain a permanent record book, in English, in which all purchase transactions, shall be in ink and in chronological order. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The following information is required: (1)  The date of the transaction; (2)  The name and employee number of the person conducting the transaction; (3)  The name of the maker of each article, any identifying mark or number including the serial number, and a detailed description of the article to include, but not limited to, the type of material which the article is made of, any owner applied numbers or names on the article. In regards to articles of jewelry there must be the type of material, type of gems, weight/type stone cut for the gems, any identifying marks, i.e. Masons, named college, high school name, military branch, years, engraving, etc. (4)  The name, address, and age of the customer by whom same was pledged, pawned, or sold. (5)  The price paid or credited for each article and a total for the transaction. (c)  This record book shall be retained by such secondhand dealer for a minimum of two years following the date of recording of the purchase therein. (d)  This record book shall be made available for inspection by any federal, state, county or local law enforcement officer. The officer will show proper identification and the inspection will take place during the usual customary business hours of the secondhand dealer, at the normal place of business of the secondhand dealer. (Ord. No. 10-104, § 2, 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 48-112. - Waiting period. (a)  All secondhand transactions require the secondhand dealer to hold said goods for at least 30 days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. (b)  Whenever the city police department shall have probable cause to suspect any property listed in the daily report of the secondhand dealer is stolen property or constitutes evidence of a crime, the police department shall notify the secondhand dealer not to sell or otherwise transfer such property for at least 48 hours in addition to the time provided for in subsection (a) of this section. Such hold can be extended in 30-day increments by the police department based upon probable cause to suspect such property is stolen or constitutes evidence of a crime. (c)  Each secondhand dealer who (i) maintains a permanent electronic record of its transactions in which an accurate description of all property traded, purchased or sold to the secondhand dealer can be transmitted to the city police department via an electronic automated reporting system; and (ii) who complies with this subsection as well as subsections (d), (e), (f), (g) and (h) below is granted an exemption from subsections (a) and (b) above. Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property traded, purchased or sold to the secondhand dealer and shall be made at the time of each transaction, and shall contain the following information: (1)  The date and time of the purchase or sale of the property. (2)  The name, address and telephone number of the customer making the trade or sale. (3)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card that contains a photograph of the customer. (4)  A description of the purchased property by serial, model or other number, if available, and by any identifying marks (e.g., brand name, color, style, etc.). (5)  The number of the receipt or invoice issued for the purchased property. (6)  The price paid. (7)  Right thumbprint of the customer will be obtained on the receipt/invoice at the time of the transaction. (8)  The signature of the customer. (d)  Every secondhand dealer shall make a daily report to the police department of the above described information in such form and manner as directed by the chief of police or his designee of all property received, traded, bartered, bought or otherwise acquired by the secondhand dealer during the 24 hours, ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of such report. This report is required via an internet based system, in a manner directed by the chief of police or his designee using such software compatible to that used by the city police department. (e)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, secondhand dealer will be notified as soon as possible. In this event, the secondhand dealer will be required to make records of transactions in paper form. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in subsection (a) of this section. Secondhand dealers shall maintain at least a three-day supply of these paper forms. (f)  Any duly authorized law enforcement officer may, during the ordinary hours of business or any other reasonable time, inspect any secondhand dealer's electronic records at the secondhand dealer's place of business to ensure compliance with this section. (g)  The chief of police or his designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system. (h)  All secondhand transactions require the secondhand dealer to hold said goods for at least 15 days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. (Ord. No. 10-104, § 2, 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 48-113. - Exemption. This article shall not apply to purchasers of secondhand goods from: (1)  Any organization or entity registered with the state as a non-profit, religious or charitable organization, or any school-sponsored association or organization. (2)  A trustee in bankruptcy, executor, administrator, or receiver who has presented proof of such status to the secondhand dealer. (3)  A sale on the execution, or by virtue of any process issued by a court, if proof thereof has been presented to the secondhand dealer. The secondhand dealer shall keep such proof for two years. (4)  Any dealer who sells household personal property as an agent for the property owner or their representative pursuant to a written agreement at that person's residence. (Ord. No. 10-104, § 2, 1-26-2010) 