THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA ____________ Published by Order of the Board of City Commissioners 2009 ____________ > OFFICIALS of the CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Willie Adams, Jr., M.D. Mayor ____________ Jon Howard Dorothy Hubbard Morris Gurr Roger Marietta Bob Langstaff, Jr. Tommie Postell City Commissioners ____________ Alfred D. Lott City Manager ____________ C. Nathan Davis City Attorney ____________ Sonja Tolbert City Clerk PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented through Ord. No. 07-111, adopted April 24, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of city commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Shelly Hayes, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Alfred D. Lott and city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. © Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. 2009. AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED 09-141 AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Albany, Georgia and it is hereby ordained by authority of same:     Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 64, each inclusive, is adopted.     Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 22, 2009 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.     Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.     Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of City Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.     Section 5. Ordinances adopted after September 22, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.     Section 6. The last sentence of Section 38-69(d) of the Code is changed to read "within five business days."     Section 7. The reference at lines 2 and 3 of Section 52-33 of the Code "but not less than semiannually" is deleted.     Section 8. There is added in alphabetical order to Section 60-127 of the Code "PTP means Pilot Testing Program."     Section 9. To the list of priority pollutants at Section 60-196(c) of the Code, there is added "Bis (2-chloroisopropyl) ether" and "1, 12-Benzofluoranthene" is deleted and in its place is "11, 12-Benzofluoranthene."     Section 10. The penultimate sentence of Section 60-131 (f) of the Code is changed to read "If no building permit is required, the appropriate charge shall be paid to the city at the time the water meter is installed or the size changed."     Section 11. The last sentence of Section 60-949(1) of the Code is changed to read "For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utility facilities is defined as a strip of land at least four (4) feet wide, but not wider than the width of the utility facility plus two (2) feet on either side thereof."     Section 12. This ordinance in no way changes any provisions of the City Charter and shall become effective upon its adoption. /s/         Dorothy B. Hubbard       Mayor Pro Tem   ATTEST: /s/         Sonja Tolbert       City Clerk   Adopted: December 15, 2009 Introduced by Commissioner:  Postell                       Date(s) read:  Dec. 15, 2009       
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code.     The provisions in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances of Albany, Georgia," and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the "Albany City Code." (Code 1975, § 1-1; Code 1985, § 1-1) State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction.     In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of city commissioners, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise:     Board of city commissioners or city commission. The term "board of city commissioners" or "city commission" means the board of city commissioners of the City of Albany, Georgia.     Charter. The term "the Charter" means the Charter of the City of Albany, Georgia.     City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Albany, Georgia.     City limits. The term "the city limits" means the corporate limits or legal boundary of the City of Albany, Georgia.     Code. The term "Code" means this Code as designated in section 1-1.     Commissioner. The term "commissioner" means a member of the board of commissioners.     Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided in O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6, when a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty; however, when the following day is a Saturday or Sunday, the party shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty.     Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or" the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: (1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. (2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. (3)  "Either . . . or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination.     County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Dougherty County, Georgia.     Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, or granting some right of such person as such official it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty, or it shall grant to them such right, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise.     Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males.     Governing authority or governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the Board of Commissioners of City of Albany, Georgia.     Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.     Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" means and includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee.     May. The term "may" is always permissive and never mandatory.     May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition.     Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.     Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory.     Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.     Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing.     Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed."     O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A" means the latest edition of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended.     Office, officer, department, board, commission or other agent or agency. The naming of any office, officer, department, board, commission or other agent or agency shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Albany, Georgia." Any such reference shall be deemed to include any person authorized by law to perform the duties of any such office, officer, department, board, commission or other agent or agency.     Owner. The term "owner," applied to building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.     Person. The term "person" extends and shall be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.     Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as described in this section.     Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.     Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places.     Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property.     Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available or accessible to the public.     Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.     Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as such person's place of habitation, and to which, whenever such person is absent, such person has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed such person's residence.     Seal. The term "seal" means the city seal, the seal of the corporation.     Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory and never permissive.     Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.     Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person includes a mark when the person cannot write.     State. The term "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia.     Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city.     Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.     Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.     Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean seven days.     Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.     Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. (Code 1975, § 1-2; Code 1985, § 1-2) State Law reference— Rules of construction and definitions generally, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of Code.     Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the general restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. (Code 1975, § 1-2; Code 1985, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Liberal construction of Code.     All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the board of city commissioners may be fully carried out. (Code 1985, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Notes and catchlines of sections not part of law.     Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the descriptive headings or catchlines immediately preceding or within the text of the individual sections of this Code, except the section numbers included in the headings or catchlines immediately preceding the text of such sections, and title and chapter analyses do not constitute part of the law and shall in no manner limit or expand the construction of any section of this Code. All historical citations, title and chapter analyses, and notes set out in this Code are given for the purpose of convenient reference and do not constitute part of the law. (Code 1975, § 1-3; Code 1985, § 1-5) State Law reference— Historical notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-6. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.     The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same in substance as those of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Code 1985, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. (a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: (1)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; (2)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; (3)  Any ordinance assessing a fee, charge or fine, unless superseded; (4)  Any right or franchise granted by the board of city commissioners to any person, firm or corporation; (5)  Any ordinance pertaining to the operation of the Albany James H. Gray, Sr. Civic Center; (6)  Any administrative ordinance of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; (7)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city; (8)  Any ordinance, resolution, policy or procedure pertaining to the regulation, retirement or pensioning of city personnel; (9)  Any appropriation ordinance; (10)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; (11)  Any ordinance pertaining to rehabilitation grants in the community development plan; (12)  Any ordinance making any act or failure to do any act an offense against the city, when such ordinance is authorized under the state law; (13)  Establishing any one-way street, traffic device, signal or marking, any parking regulation, or any limitation placed upon the use of any specific street for vehicles or pedestrians; (14)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; (15)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the grades of any street in the city; (16)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for the same; (17)  Any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes, or providing for the levying or collecting thereof; (18)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; (19)  Any ordinance establishing city bus fares; (20)  Any ordinance pertaining to the zoning of airport property; (21)  Any ordinance annexing real property to the city or otherwise altering the boundaries of the city; (22)  Any ordinance pertaining to flood control or to the administration and enforcement of such ordinances; (23)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a board of zoning appeals, board of architectural review, or planning commission, including joint commissions; (24)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; (25)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision. (b)  All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. These ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. (Code 1985, § 1-7; Ord. No. 75-178, § 3, 7-22-1975; Res. No. 86-R220, § 1, 10-14-1986) 
Sec. 1-8. - Repeal not to revive former ordinance.     When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall itself be repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision unless it be expressly so provided and the former ordinance, clause or provision is set forth at length. (Code 1975, § 1-14; Code 1985, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Repeal of ordinance not to affect liabilities, etc.     Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified, either expressly or by implication, by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the ordinance repealing or modifying it shall go into effect unless therein otherwise expressly provided; but no suit, prosecution, proceeding, right, fine or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in anywise be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance or provisions had continued in force, unless it shall be therein otherwise expressly provided. (Code 1975, § 1-14; Code 1985, § 1-9; Ord. No. 75-178, § 3(a), 7-22-1975) 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code—Effect.     Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the board of city commissioners to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. (Code 1975, § 1-6; Code 1985, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Same—Manner; language. (a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the board of city commissioners. (b)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. (c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _______ of The Code of Ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. (Code 1975, §§ 1-7, 1-8, 1-10; Code 1985, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - Same—New material. (a)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Ordinances of Albany, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, or article, chapter or other designation as the case may be, to be numbered ___, which reads as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. (b)  In lieu of subsection (a) of this section hereof, when the board of city commissioners desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in this Code, which the board desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the board of city commissioners, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of The Code of Ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." (Code 1975, § 1-9; Code 1985, § 1-12) 
Sec. 1-13. - Same—Subject to general penalty.     In case of the amendment by the board of city commissioners of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-17 shall apply to the section as amended. In case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. (Code 1975, § 1-11; Code 1985, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-14. - Supplementation of Code. (a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of city commissioners. A supplement to the Code shall include substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of city commissioners or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. (b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. (c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: (1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; (2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; (3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; (4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; (5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. (Code 1975, § 1-12; Code 1985, § 1-14) 
Sec. 1-15. - Altering Code.     It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Albany, Georgia, to be misrepresented thereby. (Code 1985, § 1-15) State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-16. - Severability of parts of Code.     Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, if any title, chapter, article, part, subpart, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, item, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this Code is declared or adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining portions of this Code, which shall remain of full force and effect as if such portion so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were nor originally a part of this Code, since the board of city commissioners declares that it would have enacted the remaining parts of this Code if it had known that such portion hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. (Code 1975, § 1-13; Code 1985, § 1-16) 
Sec. 1-17. - General penalty; continuing violations. (a)  In this section the term "violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance" means any of the following: (1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. (2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. (3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. (b)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the guardhouse, city prison or other place provided, or by compulsory labor on the streets or public works not to exceed 180 days or by both fine and imprisonment or labor, or the fine may be imposed with an alternative of such imprisonment or compulsory labor, for each separate violation; provided further, that for violations of the Sewer and Pretreatment Ordinance of the city the maximum amount of a fine shall be $1,000.00. (c)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. (e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. (Code 1975, § 1-4; Code 1985, § 1-17; Ord. No. 83-121, § 1, 4-12-1983; Ord. No. 91-129, § 1, 4-9-1991; Ord. No. 17-111, § 1, 9-26-2017) State Law reference— Maximum sentences and fines which may be imposed for violation of municipal ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-18. - Punishment of corporation violating ordinances.     Whenever any corporation violates any of the ordinances of the city, a summons shall be issued directed to the corporation and served as in other cases, on any officer of such corporation to be found in the city, and if there be no such officer then upon any agent thereof in the city. The case shall be docketed and tried as in other cases, and if the defendant corporation fails to appear at the trial, or appearing, fails to plead, the presiding officer of the court shall cause to be entered a plea of not guilty and the trial shall proceed as though the defendant had appeared and pleaded. Upon conviction, the corporation shall be fined as provided for by the ordinance or by the section of the code violated, and execution shall issue for the same as provided in Charter section 24(12); provided, however, that to such an execution, such corporation shall have the right to file its illegality as provided in cases of executions for paving assessments. (Code 1975, § 1-5; Code 1985, § 1-18) 
Sec. 1-19. - Sentence involving labor—Delivery of convict to city authorities in charge of streets, etc.; records.     All persons who may be sentenced to work on the streets or other public works shall be delivered, by the chief of police or any officer designated by the court, into the custody of such officer as may be in charge of the streets or public works of the city, who shall be required to put such person immediately to work and shall confine such person to close and hard labor on streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public works for the full term to which such person may have been sentenced. The officer in charge shall make an entry, on all sentences delivered to him or her, of the date the convict was put to work and the date of discharge and deliver same to the city clerk to be preserved. (Code 1975, § 9-35; Code 1985, § 1-19) Charter reference— Authority to sentence persons to compulsory labor, §§ 18, 24(1), (10); power to organize and use a chain gang, § 34(12). 
Sec. 1-20. - Same—Copy of sentence to accompany prisoner, etc.     The chief of police shall make out and furnish a copy of the sentence to the officer in charge of streets or other public works, who shall retain the same. Upon the person working out the term of sentence, the officer in charge of streets or public works shall discharge such person. The officer in charge of streets or other public works shall not be compelled to receive any convict unless the written sentence accompanies the convict. (Code 1975, § 9-36; Code 1985, § 1-20) 
Sec. 1-21. - Same—Compulsory labor; confinement. (a)  All persons convicted and sentenced in the municipal court to work on the streets or other public works shall be under the direct control and management of the officer in charge of streets or other public works who shall have power to compel such persons to do such work and in such manner as may be deemed proper or expedient. All convicts may be confined in the jail or such other place as may be provided by authority of the board of city commissioners. (b)  The officer in charge of streets or other public works shall have full power and authority to use such means of confining such convicts as to him may seem proper and to use such means of compulsion as may be necessary in order to compel such person sentenced to work during the usual work hours of the day and to maintain order and discipline both while at work or while in the jail or place of confinement between work hours. (Code 1975, § 9-37; Code 1985, § 1-21) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-2 and 36-35-3. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 2-1. - City seal—Adoption; form.     There shall be and there is hereby adopted a corporate seal for the city, to be of substantially the following form: a circular device with the inscription "City of Albany, Georgia" around the outer edge of the circle, and "Artesian City" with a representation of a flowing artesian well in the inner part of the circle. The seal shall be procured by the mayor and by the mayor delivered to the city clerk and shall thereupon become the official seal of the city. (Code 1975, § 2-1; Code 1985, § 2-1; Ord. No. 00-114, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 2-2. - Same—Custodian.     The city clerk shall be the official custodian of the city seal, and shall keep the same in a safe place free from molestation. (Code 1975, §§ 2-2, 2-102; Code 1985, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-3. - Same—Use.     The corporate seal shall be, by the city clerk, affixed to all orders of the mayor and the board of city commissioners, deeds, contracts, ordinances, resolutions, bonds, notes, certificates of records, and to such other instruments as the mayor and the board may direct. (Code 1975, § 2-3; Code 1985, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-4. - Construction for private persons restricted.     The city shall be without power or authority to do or perform any type of construction work for private persons, firms or corporations, including the construction or extension of any public utility service, without first requiring the advance payment into the city treasury of the full amount of the estimated costs thereof. (Code 1975, § 2-4; Code 1985, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-5. - Joint city/county authority, responsibility respecting certain functions.     Under O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq., cities and counties must formulate agreements regarding the delivery of local government services. The department of community affairs has established standards and procedures. In 1999, the city and county began the process and have subsequently made timely changes so as to update the service delivery strategy. Copies of all such agreements available for inspection in the offices of city clerk and city attorney State Law reference— Intergovernmental contracts, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § III, ¶ I; municipal authority to contract with other political subdivisions for use of certain public facilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3. 
Sec. 2-6. - City records—Records retention schedules. (a)  The records retention schedules approved by the state records committee under the date of March 7, 1983, a copy of which is on file with the city clerk, are hereby approved and adopted as records retention schedules for the city. (b)  The city clerk is responsible for records management activities, and is charged with the responsibility for directing and coordinating all records management matters. (c)  No record shall be destroyed except in accordance with approved retention schedules. (d)  Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the city clerk which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered and the volume destroyed. (Code 1985, § 2-6; Ord. No. 83-196, §§ 1—4, 12-27-1983) State Law reference— The state Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq. 
Sec. 2-7. - Same—Fees for copies; exemption. (a)  There shall be a standard fee schedule for the reproduction of records in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., relating to the inspection of public records. The standard fee schedule shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (b)  The board of commissioners, by a majority vote either at a committee of the whole meeting or at a regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners may waive the costs imposed by this section. (c)  The agendas for committee meetings and regular meetings of the board of commissioners of the city will be furnished to the public, at no cost. (d)  The agenda packages for the committee meetings and the regular meetings of the board of commissioners of the city will be furnished to the news media, at no cost. (e)  Upon request, any individual appointed to a committee or a board by the board of commissioners shall be furnished the minutes of the committee meetings or other meetings of the board of commissioners, at no cost. (Code 1985, § 2-6.1; Ord. No. 88-161, §§ 1, 2, 9-17-1988; Ord. No. 96-299, § 1, 9-10-1996; Ord. No. 96-332, § 1, 11-12-1996; Ord. No. 97-107, § 1, 3-12-1997; Ord. No. 98-112, § 1, 2-24-1998; Ord. No. 00-134, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 2-8. - Same—Abstracts of real property.     The city clerk shall keep a record of all real estate belonging to the city, together with all original title papers relating thereto, and shall note any sale of city real estate on such record. It shall be the duty of the city attorney to abstract and pass upon the title to all real estate purchased by the city and no title shall be accepted without the city attorney's written approval of the title to same. (Code 1975, § 2-181; Code 1985, § 2-7) State Law reference— Acquisition, sale, lease, etc., of real and personal property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-9. - Processing and payment of certain claims for damages. (a)  Whenever in the performance of any work or the conducting of any activity the city shall cause damage to the property of other persons, liability for which is not covered by the city insurance, the city manager shall have the authority to determine the legitimacy and the amount of such property damage claims, based on such documentation as the city manager shall require satisfactory to him or her, and may pay the same, provided the amount does not exceed $100,000.00, without further authority from the board of commissioners. (b)  The water, gas and light commission is directed to provide and implement provisions granting its general manager the same authority. (c)  In all cases, payment shall be made by the entity causing the damage. (Code 1985, § 2-8; Ord. No. 86-143, §§ 1—3, 4-22-1986) State Law reference— Liability of municipal corporations for acts or omissions generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-10—2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND BOARD OF CITY COMMISSIONERS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Charter reference— Mayor, mayor pro tem, board of city commissioners generally, § 3; elections, § 20 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-41. - Meetings—Generally. (a)  Work sessions of the board of city commissioners shall be held at the Government Center, 222 Pine Ave. on the second Tuesday and on the fourth Tuesday of each month at 8:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. respectively. Regular meetings will immediately follow adjournment of each work session. (b)  Called meetings are provided for in § 3(h) of the city charter and in section 2-42 of the city code. (Code 1975, § 2-21; Code 1985, § 2-21; Ord. No. 00-144, § 1, 10-11-2000; Ord. No. 01-125, § 1, 5-30-2001; Ord. No. 01-127, § 1, 6-19-2001; Ord. No. 07-115, 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 09-131, § 1, 9-22-2009; Ord. No. 12-100, § 1, 1-9-2012; Ord. No. 12-117, § 1, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 16-107, § 1, 3-22-2016; Ord. No. 16-108, § 1, 3-22-2016; Ord. No. 16-115, § 1, 6-29-2016) 
Sec. 2-42. - Same—Special.     The mayor, any member of the board of city commissioners, or the city manager may call a special meeting of the board at any time upon 24 hours' written notice of the call to each member, such notice to be served in person or left at the commissioner's residence or place of business, or a special meeting may be had at any time, provided all the members attend or answer the roll call. (Code 1975, § 2-22; Code 1985, § 2-22) Charter reference— Special meetings, § 3(h). 
Sec. 2-43. - Same—Election day.     At any time a regularly scheduled meeting of the board of city commissioners or a committee of the whole takes place on an election day, special, primary or general, wherein a member is on the ballot facing one or more opponents, such meeting will be held on the next day after the election at the same hour. (Code 1985, § 2-22.1; Ord. No. 95-146, § 1, 10-10-1995) 
Sec. 2-44. - Contempt—Defined.     For any willful disobedience to valid rules, orders or process of the mayor and the board of city commissioners, whether by disorderly behavior or other disturbing conduct in the presence of the mayor and the board or by mere failure to obey the lawful orders, summons or subpoenas, the offender is guilty of contempt and shall be punished by the mayor and the board, on a majority vote therefor, as provided in the Charter, section 3(f). (Code 1975, § 2-25; Code 1985, § 2-23) 
Sec. 2-45. - Same—Procedure.     Where any person has been duly summoned, subpoenaed or ordered to appear before the board of city commissioners and disobeys such summons, subpoena or order and fails to appear at the time ordered, the mayor shall seek a warrant from the municipal court judge for the arrest of the offender to be brought before the mayor and the board instant or at such time as may be named, to show cause, if any, why such person should not be punished as for contempt. If such warrant is issued, it shall be unlawful for the offender to fail to appear to show such cause. After a hearing if such person be deemed guilty, such person shall be punished as provided in the Charter, section 3(f). For all contempt committed in the presence of the mayor and the board of city commissioners, the offender shall be taken into custody immediately upon the order of the presiding officer and punished as described in section 2-44. (Code 1975, § 2-26; Code 1985, § 2-24) 
Sec. 2-46. - Commissioners as sureties.     The board of city commissioners shall not accept any bond provided to be given to the city upon which a member of the board is surety. (Code 1975, § 2-27; Code 1985, § 2-25) State Law reference— Voting upon questions by interested council members prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6. 
Sec. 2-47. - Expense accounts for mayor and commissioners. (a)  The mayor of the city shall receive an expense account, and each commissioner of the city shall receive an expense account to enhance their ability to fulfill their duties and obligations as elected officials. The amount of the expense accounts shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. The mayor and commissioners shall receive one-half of the annual allocation, from the date of the organizational meeting in January until June 30 of that same year, in the event the elected official was not serving prior to the organizational meeting. All expenses incurred must meet the following criteria: (1)  The purpose for which the expense is incurred must be for the benefit of the city; and (2)  The amount of the expense must be reasonable. (b)  The city will pay travel expenses for attending such meetings, seminars, or other convocations as may be reasonably related to city business. Authorized expenses include registration fees, the costs of transportation, lodging, parking, and a per diem as set forth in subsection (e) of this section. All travel expenses will be subject to the following conditions: (1)  The mayor and commissioners will be responsible for taking the most cost-effective method of transportation available; (2)  The city will pay only for coach or tourist class accommodation; and (3)  Expenses of travel of spouses, children or other persons accompanying the mayor or commissioners will not be paid by the city. (c)  The city clerk or assistant city clerk shall provide travel assistance to the mayor and commissioners upon representation by that official that the meeting, seminar, or convocation she desires to attend is reasonably related to city business. This includes registration, reservations for transportation and lodging, and other assistance that may be applicable. (1)  The city clerk or assistant city clerk shall issue advances against expenses, including: a.  Prepayment of registration; b.  Transportation (to include airfare and the cost of transport to and from any airport to the place of lodging, whether it be by shuttle service, bus, van, taxicab, or rental vehicle); c.  Lodging; d.  Parking; and e.  The per diem; once attendance at the meeting, seminar or convocation is specifically authorized by a majority of the committee of the whole; though payment will be advanced only for those elected officials who are specifically authorized by a majority of the committee of the whole to attend. (2)  Attendance at all Georgia Municipal Association, Georgia Association of Black Elected Officials and National League of Cities meetings, including those committees to which the elected official may belong, and meetings of the board of directors, where they are members, shall be deemed to be reasonably related to city business. (d)  The mayor and city commissioners may utilize city vehicles not for travel within the county and for such travel as may be authorized herein when traveling outside of the county but within a 300 mile radius of the city. City vehicles will be turned in the next business day after the authorized travel is completed. The elected official's expense account will be debited for mileage, calculated at a rate of $0.20 per mile, when such official utilizes a city vehicle for travel. (e)  The city shall pay the mayor and city commissioners a per diem at the standard city rate where the payment of travel expenses is authorized. Per diem for less than a whole day shall be prorated at one-half of the daily rate. Claims for reimbursement of expenditures exceeding the per diem must be fully documented as provided in subsection (f) of this section. There need be no accounting for the per diem if no reimbursement above the amount of the per diem is requested. (f)  Any elected official asserting a claim for reimbursement of expense incurred in conjunction with travel outside the county shall file a report with the city clerk, not later than 14 days after completion of travel, itemizing all expenditures, with supporting receipts and other documents. The official who incurred the expense must verify the accuracy of the report and documentation submitted. No reimbursement of expenditures shall be made by the city without the approval of a majority of the committee of the whole, upon a determination that the subject expenses were warranted and reasonable under the circumstances. (g)  The mayor and commissioners shall receive reimbursement for mileage, calculated at the standard city rate, for use of personal vehicles within the county and for travel to meetings, seminars, or other convocations outside of the county but within a 300 mile radius of the city. Reimbursement for mileage shall be issued upon execution of a form verifying the distance traveled and that the trip was taken in conjunction with performance of official duties. (h)  The city will, through the city printing office, provide the mayor and commissioners with stationary, envelopes and business cards. The cost of printing will be debited against the elected official's expense account, consistent with the "indirect costs" allocated for such services when provided to other city departments. The costs of postage shall be reimbursed upon the presentation of a receipt and execution of a form verifying the expense was incurred in conjunction with performance of official duties. (i)  The city shall pay membership fees and dues to organizations to which the mayor and city commissioners belong, upon execution of a form verifying membership in the organization is held to assist the elected official in fulfilling his or her official duties; provided, however, that the city will pay the costs of membership fees and dues for the Georgia Municipal Association, the Georgia Association of Black Elected Officials and the National League of Cities for those elected officials who belong to these organizations. (j)  The city shall purchase equipment for the mayor and city commissioners upon execution of a form verifying the equipment is necessary to enhance the elected official's ability to perform his or her official duties. Equipment that may be purchased includes cellular telephones, beepers, facsimile machines, cameras, and computers. All equipment shall be delivered to the office of the city clerk during regular business hours, no later than 14 days after the elected official concludes such official's tenure on the board of commissioners. (k)  The city shall pay the costs for telephone service, whether a conventional exchange, cellular connection, or facsimile, for those elected officials who choose to avail themselves of such service. Monthly bills shall be paid upon presentation to the city clerk or assistant city clerk. The charges for any long-distance calls from a telephone provided by the city shall be paid by the elected official, unless such official executes a form verifying the expense was incurred in conjunction with performance of his or her official duties. Monthly bills for telephone service shall be retained by the city clerk, for public inspection, for a period of 24 months. (l)  The city shall reimburse costs of long-distance telephone calls, made by elected officials who do not avail themselves of separate telephone service, upon presentation of a copy of the bill for said charge and execution of a form verifying the expense was incurred in conjunction with performance of his or her official duties. (m)  Elected officials may purchase advertising in local media to notify their constituents and the community of meetings, issues pending before the board of commissioners for consideration and/or decision, and special events. No advertising espousing a particular position or candidate may be funded through the elected official's expense account. (n)  Elected officials may sponsor and/or purchase tickets to cultural and philanthropic events. The city will make such disbursements as the elected official may designate upon receipt of an opinion from the city attorney that the expenditure is not an endorsement of a particular religion, supportive of any political candidate or issue, or inappropriate for any other reason. (o)  The city clerk shall maintain records of all expenditures from the expense accounts provided to elected officials pursuant to this section. The city clerk shall present a report to the committee of the whole, not less than quarterly, itemizing all expenditures charged against the expense accounts for the mayor and each commissioner, and identifying the balance remaining in their respective expense accounts. (p)  Monies expended by the mayor and commissioners in excess of the annual expense accounts allocated herein shall be withheld from the salary of the elected official. The finance director is authorized and directed to withhold funds up to 50 percent of the elected official's monthly salary until all excessive account expenditures have been recouped by the city. The withholding from salary for excess expenditures from an elected official's expense account will commence after written notification to the board of commissioners from the city clerk. (q)  Any balance in an elected official's expense account at the end of the fiscal year shall not carry over into the next fiscal year, but shall be transferred to the city's unreserved fund balance. (r)  Nothing contained within subsections (b) through (n) of this section shall be interpreted as authorization to exceed the expense account limitation of $10,000.00 per annum for the mayor and $7,500.00 per annum for each commissioner or one-half of the annual allocation if the elected official was not serving prior to the organizational meeting. (Code 1985, § 2-26; Ord. No. 83-163, §§ 1—5, 9-13-1983; Ord. No. 85-252, § 1, 11-26-1985; Ord. No. 87-196, § 1, 11-10-1987; Ord. No. 88-129, § 1, 5-10-1988; Ord. No. 94-101, § 1, 1-10-1994; Ord. No. 99-111, § 1, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 02-122, § 1, 7-23-2002) 
Sec. 2-48. - Prohibition on communication by commissioners to attorneys representing parties having claims against the city of information concerning nonpublic meetings. (a)  Without authorization from the board of commissioners, no commissioner shall communicate to any attorney at law representing anyone making a claim against the city, whether or not suit has actually been filed, any information about what transpired at any nonpublic meeting held by the board of commissioners of the city or by any of its regular or special committees in compliance with the Open Meetings Law of the State of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.) pertaining to such claim. (b)  Any commissioner violating the foregoing provision of this section shall be subject to citation for contempt of the board of commissioners pursuant to section 3(f) of the Charter. (Code 1985, § 2-27; Ord. No. 90-121, §§ 1, 2, 4-24-1990) 
Sec. 2-49. - Travel expenses for City of Albany elected and appointed officials, employees, members of advisory boards, and all others who are authorized to travel on City of Albany business. (a)  The city will pay travel expenses for its elected and appointed officials, employees, members of advisory boards, and all others who are authorized to travel on City of Albany business for attendance at meetings, seminars and other events provided they are reasonably related to furtherance of city business. Expenses include travel expense, lodging expense, registration fees and parking. In addition, elected and appointed officials, employees, members of advisory boards, and all others who are authorized to travel on City of Albany business are entitled to a per diem of $46.00 per day. (b)  The city will pay its elected and appointed officials, employees, members of advisory boards, and all others who are authorized to travel on City of Albany business a per diem of $46.00 per day where the payment of travel expenses is authorized. The first and last day of travel is calculated at 75 percent. The per diem is recognized by the City as being an appropriate expense, and given the fact that it is a fixed amount, no formal proof other than completion of an appropriate expense form is required. (c)  Per diem in excess of $46.00 will be paid where travel has been approved to locales recognized by the United States General Services Administration. This is explained at page 7 and 8 of the attached policy* []. (d)  When an elected, appointed official, employee, member of advisory board, or all others who are authorized to travel on City of Albany business use their personal vehicle for travel, reimbursement shall be made at the then current reimbursement mileage rate set by the Internal Revenue Service. (e)  Elected and appointed officials, employees, members of advisory boards, and all others who are authorized to travel on City of Albany business are expected to use the most economical method of travel when use of automobile is not practicable. For example, if travel by airline is necessary, the elected and appointed official, employee, member of advisory board, and all others who are authorized to travel on City of Albany business are expected to use coach or tourist. It is not the city's intention to reimburse first class airfare. (f)  The city will not reimburse any expenses for travel involving a spouse or other family member of an elected or appointed official, employee, member of advisory board, or all others who are authorized to travel on City of Albany business. (g)  Elected and appointed officials, employees, members of advisory boards, and all others who are authorized to travel on City of Albany business may request an advance of registration fees, mileage expense, parking, lodging and per diem. (h)  All elected and appointed officials, employees, members of advisory boards, and all others who are authorized to travel on City of Albany business shall be required to use an appropriate travel expense form as approved by the city manager or finance director, such as Form No. 23 (A&M). (Code 1985, § 2-28; Ord. No. 02-124, § 1, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 04-134, §§ 1, 2, 10-26-2004; Ord. No. 13-121, § 3, 6-25-2013) Footnotes: --- () --- *Editor's note: Travel policy and procedures is attached to ordinance number 13-121 and incorporated herein by reference. A copy can be found in the city offices. 
Sec. 2-50. - Prior approval required for certain expenses of legislative account. (a)  Whenever the mayor or a commissioner requests an expenditure be made from the operating expense portion of the legislative budget,the expenditure must be approved in advance in a meeting of the committee of the whole of the board of commissioners prior to any such items being paid by the city. (b)  The city clerk (and assistant city clerk) shall have the authority to order such supplies and equipment as they deem necessary without being required to seek prior approval, provided such purchase are within the then current budget. (c)  The city clerk shall maintain the same type records and issue the same type report for these expenditures as is presently done under section 2-47(o). (Code 1985, § 2-29; Ord. No. 05-112, § 1, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 2-51—2-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 
Sec. 2-74. - Quorum.     A quorum of the board of city commissioners for the conducting of business shall consist of four commissioners. (Code 1975, § 2-38; Code 1985, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-75. - Rules of order.     The proceedings of the board of city commissioners, unless otherwise provided, shall be in accordance with 1970 Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised. The city attorney is designated parliamentarian and shall guide the meetings appropriately in accordance with 1970 Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised. (Code 1975, § 2-37; Code 1985, § 2-37; Ord. No. 97-118, § 1, 5-28-1997) 
Sec. 2-76. - Order of business.     The mayor or presiding officer shall be responsible for the order of business but shall make every effort to follow the agenda. (Code 1975, § 2-39; Code 1985, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-77. - Appointments.     It shall be necessary in all appointments by the board of city commissioners that a majority vote of the members present shall be obtained in favor of a candidate before such candidate is appointed. (Code 1975, § 2-41; Code 1985, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-78. - Official action on ordinances and resolutions.     The concurrence of at least four members of the board of commissioners shall be necessary to take official action on any ordinance or resolution. (Code 1985, § 2-41; Ord. No. 05-102, § 1, 2-22-2005) 
Secs. 2-79—2-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPEACHMENT 
Sec. 2-102. - When impeachment applies.     Any member of the board of city commissioners who shall be guilty of malfeasance in or neglect of office or any willful neglect or abuse of the powers and duties of the same, shall, upon trial and conviction thereof by a two-thirds vote of the whole body, be dismissed from office. Such trial shall be had and conducted as provided for in this division. (Code 1975, § 2-51; Code 1985, § 2-46) 
Sec. 2-103. - Filing of complaints. (a)  All complaints against any member of the board of city commissioners shall be in writing, setting forth distinctly the cause of such complaint and giving the names of witnesses thereto, if any, and shall be directed to the mayor and the board and shall be filed with the city clerk. (b)  Any person may file the complaint provided for in this section. (Code 1975, § 2-52; Code 1985, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-104. - Procedure after complaint is filed. (a)  Immediately upon receipt of a complaint as provided for in section 2-103, the city clerk shall notify the mayor and the person complained against, of such complaint, except in the case of the mayor's own impeachment, when the clerk shall then notify the mayor pro tem. (b)  The mayor shall call a meeting of the board of city commissioners. If, at such meeting, a majority of the board shall deem the complaint sufficient to authorize an investigation, they shall call, at the earliest date practicable, a meeting for the trial of the member complained of. (Code 1975, § 2-53; Code 1985, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-105. - Articles of impeachment; notice, etc. (a)  If a trial is ordered as provided in section 2-104, it shall be the duty of the city attorney to immediately draw articles of impeachment, based upon the complaint, which shall be filed with the city clerk at least five days prior to the date set for the trial. (b)  Upon receipt of the articles of impeachment it shall be the duty of the city clerk to attach to the same a notice directed to the party complained against, which notice shall specify the time and place of the trial and command the appearance of the accused. (c)  The notice and copy shall be served upon the accused by the chief of police or any police officer at least two days before the date of trial. (Code 1975, § 2-54; Code 1985, § 2-49) 
Sec. 2-106. - Trial—Conduct generally.     Impeachment trials shall be conducted in the manner employed by the courts, both the board of city commissioners and the accused having the right to introduce evidence and be represented by counsel, it being the duty of the city attorney to act as prosecuting officer in such trials. (Code 1975, § 2-55; Code 1985, § 2-50) 
Sec. 2-107. - Same—Verdict and judgment.     The board of city commissioners shall render a verdict upon each article of impeachment, to be followed by the judgment, which shall be entered by the city attorney upon the original articles and signed by the mayor or other presiding officer. Such verdict and judgment shall be spread upon the minutes of the board. (Code 1975, § 2-56; Code 1985, § 2-51) 
Sec. 2-108. - Subpoenas. (a)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk on application, to issue, under her seal and bearing test in the name of the mayor, subpoenas for witnesses, which subpoenas shall be directed to the party desired and shall state the time and place of trial. (b)  A verbal summons of any witness by the chief of police or any police officer shall be a valid summons and it shall be the duty of the witness so summoned to appear. (c)  The board of city commissioners may compel attendance of witnesses by attachment and fine as in cases of contempt. (Code 1975, § 2-57; Code 1985, § 2-52) 
Secs. 2-109—2-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-130. - Oath; form. (a)  All public officers, elected and appointed, and employees required to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before some officer authorized by law to administer oaths:     "I _______, do solemnly swear or affirm that I will properly perform the duties of the office of _______ in and for the city, to the best of my knowledge, skill and ability; that I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due to the State of Georgia or any political subdivision or authority thereto; that I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state, which I am by the laws of the State of Georgia prohibited from holding; that I am qualified to hold the office which I am about to enter according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia, that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the State of Georgia; that I have been a resident of the ward from which elected and City of Albany for the time required by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the Charter of the city; so help me God." (b)  All police officers are required to take an oath before entering upon the discharge of their duties, which shall be taken and subscribed before some officer authorized by law to administer oaths. The following oath is required:     "I _______, swear or affirm that I am not incumbent in any office of trust in this State, of the United States, or of any foreign state, and should I seek such office of trust, my separation from the city shall be instanter; that I am not the holder of any unaccounted public monies due this or any other State or political subdivision or authority thereto; that I am qualified to hold the office to which I am appointed for so long as I am employed with the city; that I will support or defend the Constitution of the United States of America and the Constitution of the State of Georgia and I will faithfully perform and discharge the duties of my position, conscientiously and without malice or partiality, to the best of my ability; I further swear or affirm to obey, to adhere to, to uphold and to enforce the laws of the United States of America and the State of Georgia at all times; and that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Governor of the State of Georgia, the Chief of Police of the city Police department and the officers appointed over me, according to law; so help me God." (c)  Each commissioner of the city board of commissioners shall before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties take and subscribe upon the minutes of the Board the oath as required by Charter section 3(f). (d)  All code enforcement personnel are required to take an oath before entering upon the discharge of their duties, which shall be taken and subscribed before some officer authorized by law to administer oaths. The following oath is required:     "I _______, swear or affirm that I am not incumbent in any office of trust in this State, of the United States, or of any foreign state, and should I seek such office of trust, my separation from the city shall be instanter; that I am not the holder of any unaccounted public monies due this or any other State or political subdivision or authority thereto; that I am qualified to hold the office to which I am appointed for so long as I am employed with the city; that I will support or defend the Constitution of the United States of America and the Constitution of the State of Georgia and I will faithfully perform and discharge the duties of my position, conscientiously and without malice or partiality, to the best of my ability; I further swear or affirm to obey, to adhere to, to uphold and to enforce the laws of the United States of America and the State of Georgia at all times; and that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Governor of the State of Georgia, and the officers appointed over me, according to law; so help me God." (Code 1975, § 2-71; Code 1985, § 2-66; Ord. No. 89-142, § 1, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 98-151, § 3, 12-8-1998) Charter reference— Oath for officers and employees, § 14. 
Sec. 2-131. - Bonds generally—Required; amount; period of coverage. (a)  All general employees of the city, with the exception of the city treasurer, shall be covered by an honesty blanket position bond in the amount of $25,000.00, unless otherwise provided by the city manager. (b)  The general manager of the board of water, gas and light commissioners shall be covered by a faithful performance position bond in the amount of $25,000.00, unless otherwise provided by the city manager. (c)  Such bond overages as provided in this section shall be obtained for three year periods. (d)  All other bonds required in this Code or by law or other ordinances of the city shall be in addition to the bonds required in this section. (Code 1975, § 2-72; Code 1985, § 2-67) 
Sec. 2-132. - Same—Premiums paid by city.     The premiums on all municipal officials' bonds shall be paid by the city. (Code 1975, § 2-73; Code 1985, § 2-68) 
Sec. 2-133. - Personnel policies, rules and regulations.     All city personnel shall be governed by the policies, rules and regulations promulgated and approved by the board of city commissioners from time to time and on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1975, § 2-75; Code 1985, § 2-69) 
Sec. 2-134. - Attendance of certain officers at meetings of board of city commissioners.     The officers of the city whose attendance shall be required at all regular meetings of the board of city commissioners shall be the city manager, city clerk, city attorney and any other department heads as directed by the city manager. (Code 1975, § 2-77; Code 1985, § 2-71) 
Sec. 2-135. - Books, etc., to be turned over to successors.     It shall be the duty of all officers and employees of the city, upon the expiration of their terms of office, to turn over to their successors all books and papers pertaining to their offices and any property of the city under their control. (Code 1975, § 2-78; Code 1985, § 2-72) 
Sec. 2-136. - Personal property; inventory; annual report; inspection.     Every city official or employee charged with the keeping of any personal property shall at all times keep an accurate inventory of same and make return thereof annually to the mayor and board of city commissioners on the first Monday in each year, showing the amount, disposition of and condition of such property. It shall be the duty of the mayor and board of city commissioners, from time to time, to cause inspections of such property. (Code 1975, § 2-183; Code 1985, § 2-73) 
Sec. 2-137. - Political activities. (a)  Prohibitions. Employees of the city may not: (1)  Use official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an election or nomination for office. (2)  Directly or indirectly coerce, attempt to coerce, command, or advise a state or local officer or employee to pay, lend, or contribute anything of value to a party, committee, organization, agency or person for political purposes. (b)  Permitted. Employees of the city are permitted to: (1)  Express opinions on political subjects and candidates. (2)  Take an active part in political management and political campaigns. (3)  Be a candidate for and hold political party office. (4)  Wear badges or buttons, and display stickers or posters on their cars or houses. (5)  Attend meetings, vote on candidates and issues, and take an active part in the management of any club, organization or party. (6)  Campaign in a primary or election by making speeches, writing on behalf of a candidate, and soliciting voters to support or oppose a candidate. (7)  Attend political meetings or rallies, including committee meetings of political organizations, and serve on committees which organize or direct activities at a partisan campaign meeting or rally. (8)  Sign nominating petitions for candidates in primaries or elections for public office, and originate or circulate such petitions. (9)  Drive voters to the polls as a convenience to them. (10)  Make financial contributions to political parties or organizations, and to election campaigns, and solicit and collect voluntary political contributions. (11)  Serve at the polls as election officials or clerks or as a checker, watcher or challenger for a political party candidate in a primary or election. (c)  Political activity prohibited while on duty. No city employee shall engage in any political activity defined or permitted hereunder or under any other city ordinance or policy while on duty, or while in uniform, or while wearing or displaying any badge, insignia, or other indicia identifying such employee as an employee of the city. (d)  Leave of absence for political office. An employee seeking elective public office within the city or the county shall, upon qualifying, submit a request in writing to the accountable manager for a leave of absence without pay from such employee's qualifying date through the duration of the campaign and announcement of the election results, not to exceed one year. If elected to office, the employee shall immediately, upon certification of election results, be separated from employment. City employees may seek nomination or election to public office outside the county and the city, but, if elected, the duties of such office shall not be permitted to interfere in any way with carrying out the duties of city employment. (Code 1975, § 2-79; Code 1985, § 2-74; Ord. No. 85-206, §§ 2, 3, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 85-211, §§ 2—4, 8-27-1985; Ord. No. 88-118, § 1, 3-22-1988; Ord. No. 04-110, § 1, 3-23-2004) 
Sec. 2-138. - Health officer designated.     The District Director of Public Health, Southwest Georgia Public Health District, shall be the health officer of the city. (Code 1975, § 13-2; Code 1985, § 2-75) 
Secs. 2-139—2-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY CLERK AND ASSISTANT CITY CLERK 
Sec. 2-162. - Duties—Generally.     The duties of the city clerk and assistant city clerk shall be: (1)  To keep on file the original ordinances and resolutions adopted by the board of city commissioners from time to time, and maintain an index to same; (2)  To issue all executions, as required by the ordinances or authorized by the board of city commissioners, bearing test in the name of the mayor, and keep an execution docket in which she shall enter all executions issued by her; (3)  To keep books and records available at all times for inspection by the city manager, mayor and the board of city commissioners and their committees or any member thereof. (Code 1975, § 2-101; Code 1985, § 2-86; Ord. No. 96-325, § 1, 10-22-1996) 
Sec. 2-163. - Same—To board of city commissioners.     It shall be the duty of the city clerk, as the city clerk, to attend all meetings of the board of city commissioners, to keep the minutes and records of the same, to keep an index to the record and enter alphabetically therein the acts and doings of the board and she shall have custody and charge of all records, books and papers belonging to the city. All deeds, leases and other instruments executed by the board shall be attested by the city clerk, who shall affix thereto the official seal of the city. (Code 1975, § 2-102; Code 1985, § 2-87) 
Secs. 2-164—2-194. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY TREASURER 
Sec. 2-195. - Bond and oath.     The city treasurer shall, before entering upon the discharge of her duties, give a bond with a solvent surety, to be approved of by the board of city commissioners, in such sum as the board shall require and shall take the oath of office as prescribed in section 2-130. The bond, if a personal one, shall have two or more good sureties and be subject to the approval of the board of city commissioners. Such bond may, at the discretion of the board of city commissioners, be given in any fidelity insurance company authorized by law to become surety on bonds of public officers and which has complied with all the laws of the state prerequisite to doing business in the state. (Code 1975, § 2-111; Code 1985, § 2-96) 
Sec. 2-196. - Deposit of funds.     The city treasurer shall deposit all money or cash assets of any kind belonging to the city and which shall come into her hands in such bank as the board of city commissioners by ordinance or resolution shall prescribe. (Code 1975, § 2-112; Code 1985, § 2-97) 
Secs. 2-197—2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY 
Sec. 2-216. - Qualifications.     No person shall be elected city attorney who has not been duly admitted to the bar of the state, and who has not been in the active practice of law for at least five years. (Code 1975, § 2-122; Code 1985, § 2-106) 
Sec. 2-217. - Duties and powers—Generally. (a)  The city attorney shall be the legal adviser of the city when called on for opinions from the proper heads of the different departments of the city. The city attorney may demand that the question proposed shall be fully made in writing. The city attorney shall be under no duty to act until the different matters properly referable to the legal department are referred to the city attorney for attention by the respective heads of the different departments of the city. The city attorney shall keep a record of all opinions rendered by the city attorney and of all cases brought by or against the city. (b)  On request of the mayor and board of city commissioners or any member thereof, it shall be the duty of the city attorney to draft any ordinance or resolution for introduction. In such cases the city attorney may demand that the request be in writing, setting forth in detail the subject matter of the proposed ordinance. (c)  When requested, the city attorney shall attend all committee or commission meetings of the city and in addition to the duties prescribed in this section, shall perform such other duties as are by ordinance imposed upon the city attorney's office. (Code 1975, § 2-123; Code 1985, § 2-107) 
Sec. 2-218. - Same—Legal representative of city.     The city attorney is hereby appointed as the legal representative of the city in all cases of litigation brought by or against the city. (Code 1975, § 2-121; Code 1985, § 2-108) 
Sec. 2-219. - Appointment alternatives.     The board of commissioners of the city may, at its option, appoint in-house counsel as city attorney. Such in-house city attorney shall function as an appointee of the board of commissioners, responsible directly to said board, and shall not be under the supervision of the city manager. If the board of commissioners appoints in-house counsel, the board will provide an office and such staff as it shall determine to be necessary, and shall fix the salary and remuneration of in-house counsel from time to time, which remuneration may include participation in such employee benefits as the board shall determine. A city attorney serving as in-house counsel shall not be permitted to engage in the private practice of law. (Code 1985, § 2-109; Ord. No. 98-101, § 1, 1-28-1992) 
Secs. 2-220—2-246. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-247. - Standing committees—Appointment. (a)  The following standing committees of the board of city commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor at the organizational meeting in January of each year: (1)  Public administration and finance; (2)  Public works; (3)  Public safety; (4)  Recreation; (5)  Public functions; (6)  Policy. (b)  Each elected member of the city board of commissioners shall be a member of the committee of the whole. (Code 1975, § 2-23; Code 1985, § 2-161) 
Sec. 2-248. - Same—Duties.     Each of the standing committees of the board of city commissioners shall promptly investigate, consider and report to the board on all matters which have been specifically or regularly referred to them for their attention and shall hold such meetings as may be necessary in order faithfully to perform the duties referred to them. (Code 1975, § 2-24; Code 1985, § 2-162) 
Sec. 2-249. - Meeting congeniality. (a)  No meeting of any agency, board, or committee receiving funding from the city will be scheduled to conflict with the committee meetings and regular meetings of the Honorable mayor and board of commissioners of the city. The schedule of the meetings promulgated by the city clerk for the city is hereby deemed to be appropriate and sufficient notice of said meetings to all agencies, boards and committees that receive funding from the city. (b)  Further, no meeting of any agency, board or committee receiving funding from the city will be scheduled less than four hours prior to the commencement of any committee meeting and regular meeting of the board of commissioners of the city. Normally, committee meetings of the board of commissioners commence at 8:30 a.m. on the first and third Tuesdays of each month, regular meetings of the board of commissioners commence at 8:00 p.m. on the fourth Tuesday of each month with a prebriefing commencing at 7:30 p.m. (c)  Failure to abide by the requirements of this section may result in an agency, board or committee losing its funding from the city. (Code 1985, § 2-164; Ord. No. 01-146, §§ 1—3, 8-28-2001) 
Sec. 2-250. - Terms and regulations for appointment to certain boards, commissions and committees. (a)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other ordinance or resolution of the city, from and after the adoption of this section, the terms of office of all members appointed to serve on any of the following boards, commissions or committees of the city shall be two years: (1)  Albany-Dougherty Inner City Authority; (2)  The Chehaw Park Authority; and (3)  The Water, Gas and Light Commission. (b)  No person serving on any of said boards, commissions or committees shall be eligible for reappointment for more than three consecutive terms, unless and until they have been out of office for one term. (Code 1985, § 2-163; Ord. No. 90-146, §§ 1—4, 9-11-1990; Ord. No. 03-126, § 1, 7-22-2003) 
Secs. 2-251—2-278. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT CIVILIAN REVIEW BOARD 
Sec. 2-279. - Purpose. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Abusive language means harsh, violent, profane, or derogatory language that would demean the dignity of an individual, including profanity, racial, ethnic, and sexist slurs.     Excessive force means the use of greater physical force than reasonably necessary to repel an attacker or terminate resistance. It does not include force that is reasonably necessary to effect a lawful purpose.     Harassment means repeated, unwarranted verbal or physical annoyances, or unwarranted threats or unwarranted demands. (b)  Established. There is hereby established a police department civilian review board ("civilian review board") to exercise the duties and responsibilities outlined herein so that there will be a procedure to review certain complaints against law enforcement officers of the city. No member of the civilian review board shall receive any remuneration for their service. (c)  Accountability. Accountability is perhaps the most important function of local government. This civilian review board is designed to induce confidence in the citizens of Albany concerning the operation of the police officers employed by the city. (d)  Review of policies and complaints. The civilian review board will address police department policies with a view toward recommendations to the chief of police and will review, when request is made, complaints of: (1)  Abusive language; (2)  Excessive force; and (3)  Harassment. (Code 1985, § 2-171; Ord. No. 05-108, § 1, 4-26-2005) 
Sec. 2-280. - Appointment and composition. (a)  The civilian review board shall consist of nine individuals appointed for the staggered terms listed hereafter. Once those initial terms are completed, future appointments shall be for three years. The mayor of the city shall make three appointments and each commissioner of the city shall make one appointment. In addition, the police chief shall appoint one advisory member. The length of term for appointments shall be three years. (b)  No one may be appointed more than twice. (Code 1985, § 2-172; Ord. No. 05-108, § 1, 4-26-2005) 
Sec. 2-281. - Duties and functions. (a)  The civilian review board will provide a process to review certain claims that have been made against members of the city police department. The present process can be summarized as follows: (b)  The police department presently responds to citizens' complaints by having the complaint investigated by the appropriate supervisor. Once the supervisor reaches a conclusion, the supervisor's determination makes it way through the appropriate chain of command/division head. The command staff of the police department then reviews the matter. At any point in the process, an investigation can be made beyond that conducted by the supervisor or the chief of police can refer a complaint to the internal affairs office of the police department. Upon completion of the investigation, the complaining party is notified by the city police department, via telephone, e-mail or letter of its findings. (c)  Given that the purpose of this board is to assure accountability to the citizens of the city, the city commission has made the decision to structure a process for further review of complaints arising out of alleged abusive language, excessive force, and harassment. If an individual feels like their complaint was not properly handled, then within 30 days of the police department's having made its decision, the complaining party must complete an Allegation of Employee Misconduct Form and mail it to: Police department Civilian Review Board c/o City Manager P.O. Box 447 Albany, Georgia 31702-0447 (d)  The form is available at the city's website www.albany.ga.us; at the information desk, city police department; and at each of the four police precincts. Upon receipt of such form, the city manager will promptly forward copies to each member of the civilian review board. The civilian review board shall look into the matter and make one of the following recommendations to the chief of police: (1)  Ask the chief of police to forward the matter to the internal affairs division for further investigation. (2)  Recommend to the police chief that the actions of the police officer were appropriate under the circumstances at issue. (3)  Recommend to the police chief that the actions of the police officer were not appropriate under the circumstances at issue. (e)  The civilian review board will mail a copy of its recommendation to the complaining party. (f)  As far as the civilian review board is concerned, the chief of police has the ultimate decision making authority concerning appropriate discipline for members of the police department. (Code 1985, § 2-173; Ord. No. 05-108, § 1, 4-26-2005) 
Sec. 2-282. - Powers and records. (a)  It is appropriate for the civilian review board itself to look into the matter or it may appoint three of its members to an inquiry panel (panel) to conduct an appropriate inquiry. The approach taken by the civilian review board (or panel) may be to address the complainant and/or the officer at issue. Additionally, the civilian review board (or panel) may want to request the attendance of witnesses. The officer who is the subject of a complaint shall be expected to appear even if such officer is off duty at the time of such appearance. Such officer shall be paid his or her normal rate of compensation. The civilian review board recognizes the right of anyone to bring counsel with them and the civilian review board may make use of the services of the city attorney. If the matter is handled through an inquiry panel, then that panel shall upon completion of its work, make a report to the civilian review board. (b)  Minutes shall be kept of any hearings/meetings whether conducted by the civilian review board or by an inquiry panel. The civilian review board is urged to appoint a new panel each time one is used. (Code 1985, § 2-174; Ord. No. 05-108, § 1, 4-26-2005) 
Secs. 2-283—2-312. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - KEEP ALBANY DOUGHERTY BEAUTIFUL 
Sec. 2-313. - Created; purpose.     A clean community commission is hereby created for the purpose of assisting the city and the county in establishing community-wide policies for the purpose of decreasing the amount of loose refuse in said city and county and for the purpose of promoting and establishing beautification programs for said city and county. (Code 1985, § 2-181; Ord. No. 87-173, § I, 9-8-1987) 
Sec. 2-314. - Name.     The name of the clean community commission shall be Albany-Dougherty Keep Albany Dougherty Beautiful (KADB). (Code 1985, § 2-182; Ord. No. 87-173, § II, 9-8-1987) 
Sec. 2-315. - Duties. (a)  The duties of said KADB shall be: (1)  To promote public interest in the general improvement of the environment of the city and the county; (2)  To initiate, plan, direct and coordinate programs for litter control for the community on a sustainable basis; (3)  To implement and maintain the KADB system, and to study, investigate and develop plans for improving the health, sanitation, safety and cleanliness of the city and the county by beautifying the streets, highways, alleys, river and stream banks, lots, yards and other similar places in the said city and county; (4)  To aid in the prevention of fires, diseases and other casualties by the removal and elimination of trash and other debris from the streets, highways, alleys, lots, yards, plots and other similar places; (5)  To encourage the placing, planting and/or preservation of trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects or ornamentation in said city and county; (6)  To protect song birds and other wild fowl; (7)  To advise and recommend plans to other agencies of the city and county for the beautification of said city and county and otherwise to promote public interest in the general improvement of the environment of the city and the county. (b)  Provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to abridge or change the powers and duties of other commissions, departments, boards and like agencies of the city and the county. (Code 1985, § 2-183; Ord. No. 87-173, § III, 9-8-1987) 
Sec. 2-316. - Authority.     In order to perform the foregoing duties, the commission shall have the following authority: (1)  To adopt by-laws to facilitate the attainment of its purpose and functions; (2)  To initiate, plan, direct and coordinate community-wide efforts to achieve its goal; (3)  To solicit and accept donations and appropriations of money, services, products, property and facilities for expenditure and use by the commission for the accomplishment of its objectives; (4)  To employ, to pay and to terminate the employment of such staff as may be required for the fulfillment of commission purposes; and (5)  To make recommendations to city and county governing bodies as well as to the private sector regarding measures which it deems necessary to accomplish its objectives. (Code 1985, § 2-184; Ord. No. 87-173, § IV, 9-8-1987) 
Sec. 2-317. - Composition; appointment. (a)  Composition. The commission shall consist of not more than 26 members who shall be residents of the city or the county and who shall serve without remuneration. Eleven of said members, one of whom may be a member of the city commission, shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of the city and 11 members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of the county. (b)  Appointment. In addition to the appointed members of the commission, the city manager and superintendent of solid waste of the city and the county administrator and director of public works of the county shall serve as nonvoting ex officio members of the commission and shall be counted a part of the 26 commission membership. (Code 1985, § 2-185; Ord. No. 87-173, § V, 9-8-1987; Ord. No. 13-108, § 1, 2-26-2013) 
Sec. 2-318. - Terms of commission members.     The terms of office of the members of the commission shall generally be for three years each, Members whose terms have expired shall continue as members until their successors shall have been appointed. The appropriate governing authority shall fill each vacancy from a list of two names submitted by the commission. (Code 1985, § 2-186; Ord. No. 87-173, § VI, 9-8-1987) 
Sec. 2-319. - Election of officers.     The commission shall elect from its membership, a chairman and such other officers as may be desired. Officers shall be elected on a calendar-year basis for a term of two years but may be reelected for succeeding terms. (Code 1985, § 2-187; Ord. No. 87-173, § VII, 9-8-1987) 
Sec. 2-320. - Powers; records; termination of projects. (a)  The commission shall have the power to receive and disburse funds within the limitations of appropriations, gifts and grants which have been previously approved jointly by said city and said county, and in connection with projects or undertakings previously approved under the terms of section 2-315. Within the same limitation, the commission shall be empowered to contract with any private or public agency to the extent required for its proper operation and to create and contract with not-for-profit corporations. The commission shall keep such records as will enable it to make such reports and accountings as from time to time are requested by the city and/or county and the same shall be subject to verification and examination by auditors of the city and/or county. (b)  Any project or undertaking begun by the commission shall be terminated at any time upon the decision of either the board of commissioners of the county or the board of commissioners of the city that the continuance thereof is not in the public interest. (Code 1985, § 2-188; Ord. No. 87-173, § VIII, 9-8-1987) 
Sec. 2-321. - Compensation.     All of the members of the commission shall serve without pay. (Code 1985, § 2-189; Ord. No. 87-173, § IX, 9-8-1987) 
Secs. 2-322—2-345. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BOARD FOR BARRIER FREE DESIGN 
Sec. 2-346. - Establishment.     There is hereby established a board for barrier free design for the City of Albany, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as "board." (Code 1985, § 2-191; Ord. No. 00-146, § 1, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 2-347. - Appointment of board; meetings. (a)  The board for barrier free design shall consist of seven voting members and six nonvoting members. The nonvoting members shall be the director of engineering, fire chief, director of community and economic development, transit director, director of planning and development services, and the police chief, or their designees or representatives. The seven voting members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of the city. Any resident of the city shall be eligible for appointment to the board. The board will be composed of not less than four members who are disabled and/or persons having an understanding of and a commitment to barrier free design and three members who shall represent the community at large of the city. (b)  All members shall serve for a term of three years and until their successors have been appointed and qualified. The six nonvoting members shall serve for the tenure of their office. (c)  The commissioners, on the recommendation of the board, shall have the right to remove any member of the board who is absent for three consecutive meetings unexcused by the board, or who is otherwise delinquent in the performance of such member's duties on the board. Vacancies occurring prior to termination of the term of a member shall be filled by the commissioners for the remainder of the term. (d)  The board shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, a secretary-treasurer, and such other officers as the board shall determine. Officers shall be elected for a term of one year and serve until their successors have been elected. (e)  Four voting members of the board shall constitute a quorum, and a vote of the majority of those present at a meeting at which there is a quorum shall be sufficient to take action. (f)  The board is authorized to adopt such rules of procedure as it shall deem appropriate. (g)  The board is authorized to determine the date upon which it will hold its regular meetings, and is authorized to hold meetings at any time when called by the chairperson or by written request of three members of the board. (h)  Members of the board shall not be entitled to compensation for service on the board except for actual expenses necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties. In no event shall any expense or liability be incurred without prior approval of the board of commissioners of the city. (Code 1985, § 2-192; Ord. No. 00-146, § 2, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 2-348. - General duties of the board.     The board shall be charged with the responsibility for advising the board of commissioners of the city on formulating plans for barrier free design and the accessibility to and use of all buildings and facilities by disabled individuals. For that purpose, the board shall be empowered to: (1)  Adopt by-laws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business. (2)  To conduct studies, review reports and recommend to the commission ways and means to implement the purposes of this division. (3)  To recommend to the board of commissioners rules and regulations in regard to enforcement of barrier free requirements. (4)  To recommend to the board of commissioners changes in the city building codes. (Code 1985, § 2-193; Ord. No. 00-146, § 3, 10-24-2000) 
Secs. 2-349—2-369. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION 
Sec. 2-370. - Establishment.     While the Albany Community Relations Commission is currently inactive, the city is authorized to reestablish such commission to consist of 11 members who shall be residents of the city, one of whom shall be appointed by each of the six ward commissioners, and five of whom shall be appointed by the mayor of the city. Emphasis in the selection of members shall be upon obtaining a group diverse with respect to race, religion, economic status, type of employment, age, national origin, sex, geographic location, and political party affiliation. The terms of office shall be two years each in duration, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. (Code 1985, § 2-194; Ord. No. 91-110, § 1, 1-22-1991) 
Sec. 2-371. - Appointment of chairman and officers.     The chairman of the city community relations commission shall be appointed by the mayor of the city from the members of the community relations commission, said chairman to serve until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. The Albany community relations commission shall appoint such additional officers as it shall deem appropriate and necessary. (Code 1985, § 2-195; Ord. No. 91-110, § 2, 1-22-1991) 
Sec. 2-372. - Duties, powers and functions.     The city community relations commission shall have the following duties, powers, and functions: (1)  To encourage, promote and develop fair and equal treatment and opportunity for all persons regardless of race, color, creed, sex or national origin; (2)  To coordinate and assist local governmental agencies on human relations in their efforts to promote better relations; (3)  To cooperate with community, professional, civic and religious organizations; and federal, state, county and municipal agencies in the development of public information programs, leadership and activities in the interest of equal opportunity and treatment of all racial, religious and ethnic groups; (4)  To conduct research projects and studies and to make reports on race relations in the city; (5)  To annually and periodically report to the mayor and board of commissioners of the city on the activities of the city community relations commission; (6)  To adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary to govern the proceedings of the city community relations commission and to conduct all meetings in accordance with said rules and regulations; (7)  To investigate, study and inform the public as to any complaints received concerning the above areas; (8)  To provide a forum for airing community problems and grievances. (Code 1985, § 2-196; Ord. No. 91-110, § 3, 1-22-1991) 
Sec. 2-373. - Compensation; budget; appropriation of funds.     No member of the city community relations commission shall receive any compensation for his or her activities as a member of said body. The city community relations commission shall submit an annual budgetary request to the governing authority of the city for approval. The governing authority of the city is hereby authorized to appropriate funds for use by the city community relations commission, as provided herein. (Code 1985, § 2-197; Ord. No. 91-110, § 4, 1-22-1991) 
Sec. 2-374. - Vacancies.     The absence of any member from three consecutive meetings of the city community relations commission shall automatically create a vacancy, which shall be filled by the mayor for the unexpired term of the member whose absences created the vacancy. (Code 1985, § 2-198; Ord. No. 91-110, § 5, 1-22-1991) 
Secs. 2-375—2-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - EMERGENCY 911 SYSTEM ADVISORY BOARD 
Sec. 2-411. - Established; composition. (a)  An advisory board consisting of individuals from the county and the city knowledgeable of the emergency "911" system and the emergency needs of the citizens of the county and the city is hereby established. (b)  The following individuals, or their designees, shall be members of the advisory board: county administrator; city manager; chairman, public safety committee or committee of the whole of the board of county commissioners; chairman, public safety committee or committee of the whole of the board of city commissioners; chief, Albany Police Department; Sheriff of Dougherty County, the state; Chief, Dougherty County Police Department; Director, Emergency Medical Services; Chief, Albany Fire Department; director, public safety and communications. (Code 1985, § 2-206; Ord. No. 92-109, § 1, 2-25-1992) 
Sec. 2-412. - Duties.     The advisory board shall prepare recommendations and assist the local governing authorities: (1)  Reviewing and analyzing the progress of public safety agencies in developing "911" system requirements; (2)  Recommending steps of action to effect the necessary coordination, regulation and development of a "911" system; (3)  Identifying mutual aid agreements necessary to effect the "911" system; (4)  Assisting in the promulgation of necessary rules, regulations, operating procedures, schedules and other such policy and administrative devices as shall be deemed necessary and appropriate; and (5)  Providing other services as may be deemed appropriate by the local government. (Code 1985, § 2-207; Ord. No. 92-109, § 2, 2-25-1992) 
Sec. 2-413. - Compensation.     The members of the advisory board shall not be entitled to any compensation by reason of their service on the advisory board. (Code 1985, § 2-208; Ord. No. 92-109, § 3, 2-25-1992) 
Secs. 2-414—2-439. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CITIZEN'S TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE 
Sec. 2-440. - Created.     There is hereby created for the City of Albany, Georgia, Lee County, and Dougherty County, Georgia, a citizen's transportation committee to be composed of nine members. Said citizen's transportation committee is referred to herein as "CTC." (Code 1985, § 2-211; Ord. No. 93-102, § 1, 1-11-1993) 
Sec. 2-441. - Membership; terms. (a)  The CTC shall be composed of nine citizens from the City of Albany, Lee County and Dougherty County, Georgia, appointed by the respective governing authorities, as follows: (1)  Three members: Albany City Commission. (2)  Three members: the Dougherty County Commission. (3)  One member of Albany/Dougherty Planning Commission: Albany/Dougherty Planning Commission. (4)  One member: Lee County Commission. (5)  One member of Lee County Planning Commission: Lee County Planning Commission. (b)  Said members may be removed by their respective governing authorities at any time. All appointments shall be for a period of three years. (Code 1985, § 2-212; Ord. No. 93-102, § 2, 1-11-1993) 
Sec. 2-442. - Rules and procedures.     The CTC shall meet as soon as practical after adoption of this section and resolution, and shall establish all rules and procedures necessary to conduct the business of said CTC. The CTC shall elect one member to serve as chairman. Staff assistance shall be provided by the Albany/Dougherty Planning Commission for all meetings. (Code 1985, § 2-213; Ord. No. 93-102, § 3, 1-11-1993) 
Sec. 2-443. - Compensation.     The members of the CTC shall serve without compensation. (Code 1985, § 2-214; Ord. No. 93-102, § 4, 1-11-1993) 
Secs. 2-444—2-469. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
Sec. 2-470. - Purpose.     In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City Albany and Dougherty County: (1)  Is among their most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; (2)  In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; (3)  In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and (4)  In order to provide for the designation protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; the Albany City Commission and the Dougherty County Commission hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this division to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, cemeteries, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the division. (Code 1985, § 2-215; Ord. No. 96-116, § I, 5-14-1996) 
Sec. 2-471. - Enforcement authorized.     The code enforcement director or the code enforcement director's designee is hereby authorized to enforce the design guidelines and criteria established by the historic preservation commission under the powers prescribed by the provisions of this division. 
Sec. 2-472. - Definitions. (a)  The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Secretary of the Interior means the person appointed by the U.S. President to manage and supervise the U.S. Department of the Interior. (b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-10-22 ("the Georgia Historic Preservation Act- Definitions"), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this division. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this division, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 44-10-22, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 44-10-22. (Code 1985, § 2-216; Ord. No. 96-116, § II, 5-14-1996) 
Sec. 2-473. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. (a)  Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Albany Dougherty Historic Preservation commission" (hereinafter "historic preservation commission"). (b)  Historic preservation commission position within the city and the county. This historic preservation commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city and the county. (c)  Historic preservation commission members; number, appointment, terms and compensation. The historic preservation commission shall consist of eight members. The building inspector for the city and county shall no longer be a voting member of the historic preservation commission. No member of this commission shall be entitled to compensation. The appointment process and terms shall remain as in the original ordinance from which this division is derived. All members shall be residents of the county and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. The city shall appoint four members residing within the corporate limits of the city and the county commission shall appoint four members from the county. Furthermore, the members of the historic preservation commission shall include the building inspector of the city and the county. All members of the historic preservation commission shall serve a term of two years. All members shall serve until their successors have been appointed. (d)  Statement of the historic preservation commission's powers. The historic preservation commission shall be authorized to: (1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the county having the potential for designation as an historic property; (2)  Recommend to the city commission or county commission specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, or works of art to be designated by the ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; (3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this division; (4)  Recommend to the city commission or county commission that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, objects, or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; (5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city or county; (6)  Promote the acquisition by the city and county of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the "state Uniform Conservation Easement Act" (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1 through 44-10-8); (7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the county and on general historic preservation activities; (8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, the city commission, county commission, or the historic preservation commission itself may from time to time, deem it necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; (9)  Seek out local, state, and federal funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations concerning the most appropriate use of any funds acquired to the city commission and/or county commission; (10)  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; (11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city and county historic preservation program; (12)  The Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission will serve as staff to the historic preservation commission; (13)  Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property with the consent of the city commission and/or county commission and acquire and sell historic properties with the consent of the city commission and/or county commission; (14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the national register of historic places; and (15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city commission and county commission, enter into agreements to do the same. (e)  Historic preservation commission's power to adopt rules and standards. The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business, and for consideration of applications for property designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The historic preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this division. The historic preservation commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The historic preservation commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. (f)  Conflict of interest. At any time the historic preservation commission reviews a project in which a member of the historic preservation commission has ownership or other vested interest, that member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. (g)  Records of historic preservation commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the historic preservation commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. (Code 1985, § 2-217; Ord. No. 96-116, § III, 5-14-1996; Ord. No. 08-111, § 1, 5-27-2008) 
Sec. 2-474. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. (a)  Preliminary research by historic preservation commission. The following shall be the preliminary research by the historic preservation commission: (1)  Historic preservation commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information, and conduct surveys of historic resources within the county. (2)  Historic preservation commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the city commission and county commission for designation. The historic preservation commission shall present to the city commission and county commission recommendations for historic districts and properties. (3)  Historic preservation commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the historic preservation commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city commission and county commission for designation, the historic preservation commission shall prepare a report consisting of: a.  A physical description; b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., historic, nonhistoric, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and e.  Representative photographs. (b)  Designation of a historic district. The following shall be the designation of a historic district: (1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art or a combination thereof, which: a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; b.  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and c.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. (2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in this division and in separate ordinances designating such districts, and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city and county. (3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: a.  Historic (contributes to the district); b.  Nonhistoric (does not contribute but does not detract from the district, as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section); and c.  Intrusive (detracts from the district as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section). (c)  Designation of a historic property. The following shall be the designation of a historic property: (1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, object, work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, county, or local region, for one of the following reasons: a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, county, state, or the region; or d.  It is a site of natural aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state, or region. (2)  Boundary description. Boundaries shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such properties and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city and county. (d)  Designation of historic districts and historic properties. The following shall be the designation of historic districts and historic properties: (1)  Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the city commission, the county commission, the historic preservation commission, or: a.  For historic districts. A historical society, neighborhood association, or group of property owners may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. b.  For historic properties. A historical society, neighborhood association, or property owner may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. (2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; b.  Set forth the name of the owner of the designated property or properties; c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the historic preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and county. (3)  Required public hearings. The historic preservation commission, and either the city commission or the county commission, shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property within the appropriate jurisdiction. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the historic preservation commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the county tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this division. (4)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the historic preservation commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city commission or county commission, as appropriate. (5)  City commission and county commission action on historic preservation commission recommendations. Following receipt of the historic preservation commission's recommendation, the city commission or county commission may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. (6)  Notification of historic preservation section. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the historic preservation commission must submit the report, required in subsection (a)(3) of this section, to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. (7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city commission or the county commission, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the city commission or county commission which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the county tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this division. (8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city and county of the ordinance for designation, including the local historical organization. (9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the historic preservation commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. (Code 1985, § 2-218; Ord. No. 96-116, § IV, 5-14-1996) 
Sec. 2-475. - Application to historic preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. (a)  Approval of alterations or new construction in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a structure, site, object or work of art within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to, and approved by, the historic preservation commission. (b)  Approval of new construction within designated districts. The historic preservation commission shall recommend to the appropriate governing authority that a certificate of appropriateness issue to new structures constructed within designated historic districts if these structures conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the design criteria developed by the historic preservation commission. (c)  Guidelines and criteria for certificates of appropriateness. When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness to existing buildings, the secretary of the interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation Projects" including the secretary's "Standards for Rehabilitation" shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the historic preservation commission. (d)  Submission of plans for historic preservation commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be required by the historic preservation commission. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans for the site. (e)  Acceptable historic preservation commission reaction to application for certificate of appropriateness. (1)  The historic preservation commission shall approve the application and recommend to the appropriate governing authority that a certificate of appropriateness issue if the historic preservation commission finds that the proposed material change in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the historic preservation commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. (2)  The historic preservation commission shall deny the application if the historic preservation commission finds that the proposed material change(s) in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. (f)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall take such action as may reasonably by required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the historic preservation commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. (g)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. (h)  Technical advice. The historic preservation commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the building inspector of the city and county, as well as the planning director and members of the planning director's staff shall be available to attend meetings as deemed necessary by the historic preservation commission. (i)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. The following shall be the deadlines for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: (1)  The historic preservation commission shall approve or reject an application or certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a structure, site, object, or work of art located within a historic district. Notice of the historic preservation commission's decision shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the historic preservation commission. (2)  Failure of the historic preservation commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. (j)  Necessary actions to be taken by historic preservation commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. The following shall be the necessary actions to be taken by the historic preservation commission upon the rejection of an application for certificate of appropriateness: (1)  In the event the historic preservation commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transfer a record of such actions and reasons, in writing to the applicant. The historic preservation commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. (2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the historic preservation commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. (k)  Under hardship. Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this division would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the historic preservation commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variance, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the historic preservation commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this division. Undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. (l)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. The following shall be the requirements of conformance with the certificate of appropriateness: (1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the historic preservation commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. (2)  The Albany City Commission, county commission, or the historic preservation commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provision of this division or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. (m)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. (n)  Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness. The historic preservation commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. (o)  Acquisition of property. The historic preservation commission may, where such action is authorized by the city commission or county commission, and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. (p)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the Albany City Commission or Dougherty County Commission, any such appeal must be filed with the Albany City Commission or Dougherty County Commission within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection 2-475(i)(1) of this section or, in the case of a failure of the historic preservation commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for historic preservation commission action, subsection 2-475(i)(1) of this section. The Albany City Commission or the Dougherty County Commission may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the historic preservation commission, if the governing body finds that the historic preservation commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decision of the Albany City Commission or Dougherty County Commission may be taken to the Superior Court of Dougherty County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for City of Albany and Dougherty County ordinance violations. (Code 1985, § 2-219; Ord. No. 96-116, § V, 5-14-1996; Ord. No. 08-111, §§ 2, 3, 5-27-2008; Ord. No. 12-103, §§ 1, 2, 2-28-2012) 
Sec. 2-476. - Demolition or relocation of a historic property within a historic district. (a)  Applications for certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to deny certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. (b)  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be scheduled for each application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. (c)  Consideration of post-demolition or post-relocation plans. The commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for the site. (d)  Demolition/relocation criteria. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the historic preservation commission shall use the criteria described in section 2-475(f) to determine whether to deny the application or issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. (Code 1985, § 2-220; Ord. No. 96-116, § VI, 5-14-1996) 
Sec. 2-477. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. (a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. (b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The historic preservation commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: (1)  The historic preservation commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of exterior architectural features, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. (2)  In the event the historic preservation commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. (3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 2-42 and, at the direction of the city commission or county commission, the historic preservation commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the historic preservation commission. (c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this division shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his or her property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. (Code 1985, § 2-221; Ord. No. 96-116, § VII, 5-14-1996) 
Secs. 2-478—2-504. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - FAIR HOUSING COMMISSION 
Sec. 2-505. - Commission established.     There is hereby established in and for the city the Albany Fair Housing Commission. Emphasis in the selection of members shall be upon obtaining a group diverse with respect to race, religion, economic status, type of employment, age, national origin, sex, geographic location, and political party affiliation. (Code 1985, § 2-222.1; Ord. No. 01-158, § 1, 11-27-2001) 
Sec. 2-506. - Membership. (a)  Composition. The city fair housing commission shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the honorable mayor and members of the board of commissioners (one appointment each) of the city. All of said members shall serve for terms of three years and until their successors have been appointed and have accepted. All members shall be eligible to succeed themselves. All members must reside within the county. (b)  Expense compensation. All members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. (Code 1985, § 2-222.2; Ord. No. 01-158, § 2, 11-27-2001) 
Sec. 2-507. - Organization rules and officers. (a)  The city fair housing commission shall elect from its members a chairman and a vice chairman, each to serve for a term of two years and until a successor is elected. The commission shall meet at least once every three months at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the chairman or a majority of the members of the commission shall determine. The commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its meetings and the transaction of its business and shall keep records of its resolutions, motions, transactions, findings, determinations, and recommendations, which records shall be public records. In performance of its duties, the commission may cooperate with, contract with, and accept funds from federal, state, local, public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations and may expend such funds and carry out cooperative undertakings and contracts with any of the same within its lawful powers. (b)  The commission may designate an executive committee to be composed of the chairman, the vice-chairman, the executive director and one member elected annually by the commission and may delegate to such committee such powers as the commission may see fit. Three members of the executive committee shall constitute a quorum of the executive committee. (Code 1985, § 2-222.3; Ord. No. 01-158, § 3, 11-27-2001) 
Sec. 2-508. - Powers, duties and responsibilities. (a)  It shall be the function and duty of the newly established city fair housing commission to provide within constitutional limits for fair housing throughout the city. In particular, the city fair housing commission shall have the power and duty to: (1)  Provide for execution in the city policies embodied in tit. VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (42 USC 3601 et seq.), as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (42 USC 3610(f)); (2)  Safeguard all individuals from discrimination in any aspect relating to the sale, rental, or financing of dwellings or in the provision of brokerage services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental of a dwelling because of that individual's race, color, religion, sex, disability or handicap, familial status, or national origin; (3)  Promote the elimination of discrimination in any aspect relating to the sale, rental, or financing of dwellings or in the provision of brokerage services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental of a dwelling because of a person's race, color, religion, sex, disability or handicap, familial status, or national origin; and (4)  Promote the protection of each individual's interest in personal dignity and freedom from humiliation and the individual's freedom to take up residence wherever such individual chooses; to secure the city against domestic strife and unrest which would menace its democratic institutions; to preserve the public safety, health, and general welfare; and to further the interests, rights, and privileges of individuals within the city. (b)  The city fair housing commission shall have such additional duties and responsibilities and shall perform such additional functions and services as may be called for from time to time by the city fair housing commission. (Code 1985, § 2-222.4; Ord. No. 01-158, § 3, 11-27-2001) 
Sec. 2-509. - Executive director.     There is hereby established a position of executive director of the city fair housing commission. The commission shall appoint the executive director from nominees submitted by the city manager. The executive director shall be responsible for the administration and execution of the policies of the commission and shall have such powers, duties, authority and responsibilities as shall be provided by the commission. These duties will include, but not be limited to the following: (1)  Provide administrative services to the city fair housing commission; (2)  Make studies with respect to the nature and extent of discriminatory housing; (3)  Publish and disseminate reports, recommendations and information derived from such studies; (4)  Cooperate with and render technical assistance to local, public or private agencies, organizations and institutions which are formulating or carrying out programs to prevent or eliminate discriminatory housing practices; (5)  Administer the programs and activities relating to housing in a manner affirmatively to further the policies of the Albany Fair Housing Ordinance; (6)  Adopt, promulgate, attend and rescind, subject to the approval of the Governor after giving proper notice and hearings to all interested parties pursuant to the Georgia Administrative Procedure Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-13-1 et seq.), such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the Albany Fair Housing Ordinance; (7)  Cooperate with the United States department of Housing Urban Development created by section 10(b) of the department of Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 (79 Stat. 667) and with other federal and local agencies for the purposes of tit. VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 81), as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (102 Stat. 1619), and to cooperate with other federal and local agencies in order to achieve the purposes of the fair housing ordinance; (8)  Accept gifts bequests, grants, or other public or private payments on behalf of the city fair housing commission and to pay such moneys into an escrow account of the city fair housing commission; (9)  Accept on behalf of the city fair housing commission reimbursement pursuant to section 810 of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (102 Stat. 1625), for services rendered to assist the United States department of Housing and Urban Development; and (10)  Secure from, and maintain with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, status as a "certified agency" under section 810 of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 85), as amended by the Fair Housing Act of 1988 (102 Stat. 1625), and as provided by the rules and regulations of said department. (Code 1985, § 2-222.5; Ord. No. 01-158, § 4, 11-27-2001) 
Secs. 2-510—2-526. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - TRANSITIONAL HOUSING ADVISORY BOARD 
Sec. 2-527. - Establishment.     There is hereby established a transitional housing advisory board ("transitional housing board") to exercise the duties and responsibilities outlined herein so that there will be a procedure to provide assistance to the administration of the transitional housing program. No member of the transitional housing board shall receive any remuneration for their service. (Ord. No. 08-130, § 1, 7-23-2008) 
Sec. 2-528. - Appointment and composition.     Members of the board shall be appointed by the board of city commissioners. (Ord. No. 08-130, § 1, 7-23-2008) 
Sec. 2-529. - Duties and functions.     The important interest which this board will serve is to make recommendation to the mayor and board of commissioners of the city concerning HUD's transitional housing program. (Ord. No. 08-130, § 1, 7-23-2008) 
Sec. 2-530. - Powers and records.     This board is authorized to meet as it deems appropriate and the director of community and economic development is requested to make space available for the meetings. The board should elect a chairperson and a scriber. The former will preside at meetings and the latter will keep minutes. (Ord. No. 08-130, § 1, 7-23-2008) 
Secs. 2-531—2-588. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— The City of Albany sponsors a contributory defined benefit pension plan covering substantially all employees. Copies of applicable ordinances are on file in the offices of the city clerk and city human resources department. State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish, maintain and modify merit systems, retirement systems and insurance plans for its employees, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14), O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(4); municipal authority to fix compensation and benefits for its employees and members of its governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; the state Municipal Employees Benefit System, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-589. - Records.     The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Code 1975, § 19-55; Code 1985, § 2-230) 
Sec. 2-590. - Certain agreements with employees not covered by article prohibited.     There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Code 1975, § 19-56; Code 1985, § 2-231) 
Secs. 2-591—2-647. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- State Law reference— Minimum budget, accounting, and auditing requirements for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; the state Local Government Public Works Construction Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-648. - Contracts.     No contract for public work, amounting to $40,000.00 or more, shall be let except to the lowest and best bidder, and then, only after the contractor shall give the city sufficient performance and payment bonds, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 13-10-1 et seq. If the contract for public works amounts to $40,000.00 or more, opportunity for competitive bidding shall be given after reasonable advertisement for at least five days prior to the date set for receiving such bids. (Code 1975, § 2-7; Code 1985, § 2-286; Ord. No. 14-124, § 1, 9-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-649. - City manager as purchasing and contracting agent; duties specified. (a)  (1)  The city manager shall be the purchasing and contracting agent of the city. All purchases and contracts made by the city manager requiring the expenditure of money in the amount of $40,000.00 or more shall be approved by the board of city commissioners. (2)  In the capacity of purchasing agent, the city manager shall conduct all sales of personal property which the board may authorize to be sold and which have become unnecessary or unfit for the city's use. Such sales involving personalty of $40,000.00 or less may be made without approval by the board of city commissioners. (3)  As contracting agent, the city manager is authorized, to the extent of $40,000.00, to execute in the name of and on behalf of the city all contracts for the purchase and sale of personal property and services of every kind and description, and contracts for construction. If sales or purchases or other contracts involve amounts in excess of $40,000.00, opportunity for competitive bids shall be given after reasonable advertisement thereof, and in the case of contracts for public work, the requirements of section 2-648 shall be complied with; provided, however, that the requirements contained herein and in section 2-648 respecting competitive bids after reasonable advertisement shall not apply in cases of contracts for professional services such as consultants, architects, engineers, accountants, attorneys, and other professional advisors, and no advertisement or solicitation for competitive bids or proposals shall be necessary in such cases. Prior to execution of any such contract, same shall be reviewed by the appropriate department head or such department head's designee. (4)  Contracts involving the purchase or sale of personal property or services or construction involving a maximum of $40,000.00 may be executed by the city manager without the prior approval of the board of city commissioners for emergency maintenance or repairs. (5)  The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to affix the seal of the city to any contract executed in the name of the city by the city manager. (b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, and the provisions of section 2-648, the city manager shall have the authority to make and execute all contracts, franchises and leases in connection with the operation of the Albany Civic Center. The city manager may delegate all or any portion of her authority in this connection, but shall remain responsible for the proper use of such authority. (c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, and the provisions of section 2-648, the city manager shall have authority to make emergency purchases of parts and materials and to contract for labor necessary for the repair and maintenance of all mechanical systems and equipment, up to an amount not to exceed $40,000.00, without first obtaining approval of the board of city commissioners and without advertising and obtaining competitive bids. (d)  The city manager may recommend to the city commission approval of a contract involving the procurement of goods, services or equipment/construction items where a procurement unit of a public entity has established such a contract through a process that substantially meets the requirements of Georgia law. Any such agreement is not binding on the city until the matter has been submitted to and formally approved by the mayor and board of commissioners. (Code 1975, § 2-8; Code 1985, § 2-287; Ord. No. 82-194, § 1, 11-9-1982; Ord. No. 86-184, § 1, 7-8-1986; Ord. No. 89-154, § 1, 8-8-1989; Ord. No. 14-124, § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 15-109, § 1, 3-24-2015) 
Sec. 2-650. - Requests for donations or special appropriations.     All requests for donations or special appropriations shall be in writing, addressed to the board of city commissioners, setting forth the amount and purposes to be used. No such donation or special appropriation shall be made unless such proposed donation or special appropriation be first referred to the finance and administration committee and reported back to the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 2-9; Code 1985, § 2-288) State Law reference— Limitation on contributions of municipalities, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII. 
Sec. 2-651. - City manager and indefinite quantity contracting.     Notwithstanding section 2-648, the city manager may enter into contracts utilizing indefinite quantity contracting with the following limitations: (a) each contract must not exceed $100,000.00; (b) the city manager's total contracting authority shall not exceed $2,500,000.00. (Ord. No. 15-124, § 1, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 2-652. - City manager and state of emergency.     Notwithstanding section 2-648, the city manager or whomever she designates in writing may, subject to the provisions of this section, enter into contracts as well as approve invoices for services rendered on behalf of city. This section is effective only during times when (i) the emergency operations center has been activated and (ii) a state of emergency has been declared and is still in effect and (iii) such contracts or invoices were essential to the city being able to deliver services or promote public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. No. 17-100, 1-10-2017) 
Secs. 2-653—2-673. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BONDS[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- State Law reference— Municipal authority to create sinking fund for proceeds from bond tax, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § V, ¶ VI; limitation on local debt, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § V; revenue bonds, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § VI; municipal bonds, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-82-1 et seq. and 36-38-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-674. - Preliminary proposal; adoption or rejection.     Preliminary to any issue of bonds by the city, the proposal for the issue shall be referred to the public administration and finance committee or committee of the whole which committee may give diligent consideration of the proposal, making a thorough investigation touching the same and as early as practicable shall report to the board of city commissioners with their approval or disapproval of the proposal, giving their reasons for their action. No ordinance providing for a bond issue shall be in order until the action of the finance committee on the preliminary proposal has been adopted or rejected by the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 2-131; Code 1985, § 2-301) 
Sec. 2-675. - Records information to be shown.     The director of administrative and financial services, shall procure and provide a suitable record to be kept on file in her office in which, upon written application and presentation of the bond by the holder thereof, she shall enter a description of each bond so presented, stating: (1)  The number; (2)  Of what issue; (3)  The amount; (4)  The date issued; (5)  The date of maturity; (6)  The rate and maturity of interest; (7)  The date and number of ordinance authorizing; (8)  How, and where payable, both as to principal and interest; (9)  By whom signed, and such other data as may be necessary for a ready identification of the bond registered; (10)  The name of the person registering the bond; (11)  The capacity in which such person holds the bond; (12)  For whose benefit the bond is registered; (13)  To what extent the bond is registered, or whether as to principal or principal and interest. (Code 1975, § 2-142; Code 1985, § 2-302) 
Sec. 2-676. - Written application required for registration; negotiability generally.     All bonds evidencing the indebtedness of the city may, upon written application or request of the holders of the bonds or any of them, be registered both as to principal and interest or as to principal only, as set out in section 2-677, and to the extent so registered, shall become non-negotiable. (Code 1975, § 2-141; Code 1985, § 2-303) 
Sec. 2-677. - Registration application; information required. (a)  In order that bonds may be registered as provided in section 2-676, the holder shall first make written application for such registration and shall present therewith the bond desired to be registered, which application shall be made to the city clerk, and shall state: (1)  The number of bonds presented; (2)  Of what issue; (3)  The date; (4)  The amount; (5)  When due; (6)  To what extent the bonds shall be registered. (b)  An application for registration of bonds shall be signed by the applicant who, if holding bonds in any capacity other than for himself, shall sign the application in the name of the party for whose benefit the applicant holds, by himself, stating the capacity in which the applicant signs and attaching proof of the capacity in which the applicant signs, the sufficiency of which proof to be determined by the city attorney. (Code 1975, § 2-143; Code 1985, § 2-304) 
Sec. 2-678. - Registration statement; form.     After any bonds shall have been registered as provided by this division, it shall be the duty of the chief finance officer to stamp, print or write upon each bond a statement of the registration in substantially the following form, inserting in the blanks the matter applicable to each transaction, to wit:     Registered by _______. Nonnegotiable. As to principal and interest only to ______ of ______ at ______ or his legal representative at ______. This ___ day of ________, 20___. CITY OF ALBANY, ___________ Chief Finance Officer (Code 1975, § 2-144; Code 1985, § 2-305) 
Sec. 2-679. - Disposition of coupons.     In the event any bond is registered both as to principal and interest, the chief finance officer shall tear off and destroy the coupons and stamp, write or print upon each bond a statement, properly dated, the amount and value of such coupons and that the interest, at the rate and on the date as provided by the coupons, will be paid only to the holder or the holder's legal representative or the chief finance officer shall make the entry as provided for in section 2-675 or a similar entry to the same effect upon each coupon and leave them attached or either, as may be desired by the holder. (Code 1975, § 2-145; Code 1985, § 2-306) 
Sec. 2-680. - Procedure for transfer after registration. (a)  In order to transfer any bond which may have been registered under the provisions of this division, the holder thereof shall present the same to the chief finance officer and shall authorize such transfer, in writing, giving the name of the transferee, the number of the bond, of what issue and the date of issue and maturity. Such authority shall be signed and acknowledged in the presence of a notary public or some other officer authorized by law to administer oaths and such notary public or other officer shall certify, in writing and under seal of her office, that such authority was signed and acknowledged in her presence. (b)  In addition to giving written authority, the holder of a bond shall enter a statement of the transfer on the face of each bond, properly dated and signed. Thereupon the chief finance officer shall enter the transfer of each bond opposite the original entry of registration in the book, under the provision of section 2-675, giving the name of the transferee and date of transfer and shall always enter the same on each bond over her official signature. The transferee may thereafter, in the manner prescribed in this section, also transfer such bond. (Code 1975, § 2-146; Code 1985, § 2-307) 
Sec. 2-681. - Negotiability after registration.     When any bond is registered as to principal only, the same may be made fully negotiable by transfer in the manner prescribed in section 2-680 in the general term "to bearer." When so done, the chief finance officer shall cancel all former entries on the face of the bond. (Code 1975, § 2-147; Code 1985, § 2-308) 
Sec. 2-682. - Annual tax for retirement.     For all bonds issued by the city there is hereby levied and assessed, in addition to all other taxes and for each year during the term for which such bonds run, an ad valorem tax upon all the taxable property in the city, in such amount as will be sufficient to pay such bonds, principal and interest at their respective dates of maturity. Such tax shall be promptly collected in each year in the same manner as other city taxes and when collected, such amounts shall be turned into the sinking fund and appropriated as provided in this Code. (Code 1975, § 2-133; Code 1985, § 2-309) 
Sec. 2-683. - Sinking fund—Established; withdrawals, etc.     All taxes collected for the payment of the principal and interest of city bonds shall be kept by the chief finance officer as a separate fund and shall be known as the sinking fund. Under no circumstances shall such fund be paid out by the chief finance officer for any other purpose than for the payment of the interest and principal on the bonds for which it was collected or for the purpose of investment as provided by law and city ordinance. If the chief finance officer or other officer honors or pays any warrant on such fund for any other purpose than those named in this section, they shall be guilty of malfeasance and liable to removal. (Code 1975, § 2-161; Code 1985, § 2-310) 
Sec. 2-684. - Same—Investment.     It shall be the duty of the chief finance officer to promptly make arrangements for the investment of and keeping invested the principal of the sinking fund. (Code 1975, § 2-164; Code 1985, § 2-311) 
Sec. 2-685. - Records to be kept.     The chief finance officer shall keep a suitable record with a complete and detailed statement and description of each bond issued and of force and the same shall at all times show the status of each bond. (Code 1975, § 2-132; Code 1985, § 2-312) 
Secs. 2-686—2-713. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STANDARDS OF CONDUCT[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-714. - Purpose and intent. (a)  It is the purpose of this article to prohibit the mayor, each individual commissioner and other officers and employees, elected or appointed, whether paid or unpaid, from engaging in any business, employment or transactions; rendering services; or having contractual, financial or other private interests, direct or indirect, which are in conflict with, or could reasonably appear to be in conflict with the proper discharge of their official duties or the best interest of the city, or which would tend to impair independency and objectivity of judgment or action in the performance of official duties. (b)  It is the express intention of this article, in the creation and formation of the board of ethics herein provided, that the board of ethics serve for the benefit of all persons who have a bona fide question regarding a possible conflict between governmental duties and private, personal or financial interests. It is not the intention of this article to establish a secret board for the purpose of undertaking investigations, or rendering opinions on any matters not specifically presented to the board in writing as herein provided; but on the contrary, it is the express intention of this article in the creation of the board of ethics to make government better so that the public may benefit therefrom, and at the same time to protect those people who have a bona fide question of conflict; and with the same it is the expressed and avowed intention in requiring the board of ethics to hold private hearings and to publish its advisory opinions with such deletions as to names of parties and other matters involved, so that those matters of private interest and concern shall remain private and personal unless and until such time as it is made to appear that such personal and private interest is in conflict with government duty to the detriment of the public. (Code 1985, § 2-351; Ord. No. 90-131, § 1, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-715. - Appearances on behalf of private interests. (a)  Neither the mayor, any commission member or other officer or employee, elected or appointed, whose salary is paid in whole or in part from the city treasury shall appear on behalf of private interests before any agency of the city, including any committee of city government, the Albany Housing Authority, any joint board if the city is a participant, or any other agency in which the city is involved, except in a matter of public record in a court of law as provided in section 2-716. (b)  With the exception of the planning commission, the mayor and city commissioners, however, may appear without compensation or remuneration of any kind on behalf of constituents, or in the performance of public and civic obligations. No persons serving the city without compensation shall appear, either directly or indirectly, on behalf of private interests in matters involving any committee, authority, board or other agency on which they serve or before any other committee, authority, board or agency of the city affecting matters involving any committee, authority, board or other agency on which they serve. (Code 1985, § 2-352; Ord. No. 90-131, § 2, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-716. - Representation of private interests.     Neither the mayor, any city commissioner or officer or employee, elected or appointed, whose salary is paid in whole or in part from the city treasury, shall represent any person or private interest in any action or proceeding against the interest of the city, in any litigation to which the city, including any committee of city government, any joint board, if the city is a participant, or other agency in which the city is involved, is a party, or in any action or proceedings in the municipal court or the superior courts of the county. (Code 1985, § 2-353; Ord. No. 90-131, § 3, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-717. - Private interest in proposed legislation or pending decisions.     The mayor, any individual commissioner, official or employee who has a private interest, direct or indirect, in any proposed legislation or any decision pending before such person or the body of which the person is a member or employee shall not vote for or against, discuss, decide or in any way participate in considering the matter, but shall publicly disclose, on the official records of the body, the nature and extent of such interest, prior to any determination of the matter. The failure of any person to comply with the requirements of this section and the failure of any person to refrain from participating in debate or voting on any matter will not affect the validity of any action taken by the board of city commissioners. (Code 1985, § 2-354; Ord. No. 90-131, § 4, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-718. - Disclosure of income statements by public officers. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. For the purpose of filing disclosure of income statements, the following definitions shall apply:     Business means an incorporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual and any other entity operated for economic gain, whether professional, industrial or commercial, and entities which for purposes of taxation are treated as a nonprofit organization.     Filing means delivered to the city clerk by the end of the business day on April 15 or depositing a properly addressed financial disclosure statement in the United States Mail with adequate postage affixed and postmarked by April 15.     Income means any money, item of value, or in-kind services in excess of $1,000.00 received or to be received as a claim for any future services, including, but not limited to, fees, salaries or commissions.     Public officer means the mayor, individual commissioners, and the members of the board of ethics established by this article.     Sources of income and income sources mean income from any business. However, where a business has multiple clients, customers or patrons, nothing herein shall be construed to require the reporting of individual clients, customers or patrons. Reporting income in excess of $1,000.00 from individual clients, customers or patrons is required where the client, customer or patron has, with the knowledge of the public officer, sought and obtained the assistance of a public officer in his or her official or legislative capacity on any matter requiring official or legislative action which is of interest to the client, customer or patron. Reporting income in excess of $1,000.00 from individual clients, customers or patrons is not required where assistance in obtaining routine city services is provided by a public officer to individuals who are clients, customers or patrons of the public officer. (b)  Disclosure of source of income. All public officers of the city shall annually file with the city clerk disclosure of any source of income, whatever its nature, in excess of $1,000.00 derived from any one source for the preceding calendar year on or before the close of business on April 15 of each year such officer holds such position and for the 12-month period after such officer leaves such position. The city clerk shall promptly forward financial disclosure statements to the board of ethics, together with the list of the persons required to file under the provisions of this section. The board shall inspect such statements as soon as practical after the disclosure statement has been filed, but no later than August 15 of each year. The disclosure statement shall be on the form which shall be signed under penalty of perjury by the person required to file such statement. The form, a copy of which shall be delivered with the signature of the recipient required, or sent by certified mail with a signed returned receipt, each year by the city clerk to all public officers who are required to file the same, shall contain the following information: (1)  Date, month and year. (2)  Name of person filing. (3)  Address of person filing. (4)  Position (currently holding or held). (5)  Last date of employment, if applicable. (6)  Sources of income: a.  Name of business, firm or consultant service. b.  Address of business, firm or consultant service. (7)  Type of business. (c)  Failure to disclose income source. Failure of an officer to file the disclosure of income source's statement by the close of business on April 15th of each year, without reasonable cause, shall render such person delinquent and result in a fine of $50.00 per day for each day past the filing deadline date. The board of ethics shall be responsible for reporting to the board of city commissioners the names of those public officials who have either filed late or incomplete statements or who have failed to file a disclosure statement as required herein without reasonable cause. (d)  Available for public inspection. All disclosure forms must be readily available for public inspection and shall be considered public documents immediately upon filing. (Code 1985, § 2-355; Ord. No. 90-131, § 5, 6-12-1990; Ord. No. 91-121, § 1, 3-14-1991) 
Sec. 2-719. - Receipts of gifts. (a)  Neither the mayor nor any commissioner or other officer or employee, elected or appointed, whether paid or unpaid, shall solicit or accept nor shall any person offer or give, anything of value, in any form whatsoever, calculated to influence a vote, decision or the exercise of official authority in any manner involving the city. (b)  Nothing shall prohibit any city official or employee from accepting a gift on behalf of the city, provided that the person accepting the gift shall promptly report the receipt of such gift to the board of ethics or its designee, which shall have the gift added to the inventory of property of the city. (c)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit the offer or acceptance of a gift of food, entertainment or anything of value, given with no intent to influence the recipient in the performance of the recipient's official duties. (Code 1985, § 2-356; Ord. No. 90-131, § 6, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-720. - Disclosure of confidential information.     Neither the mayor nor any commissioner or other officer or employee, elected or appointed, whether paid or unpaid, shall disclose confidential information concerning the property, governing operations, policies or affairs of the city; nor shall any such officer use such information or any acquired in his or her official capacity to advance the financial or other personal interests of himself or others in any interest wherein the same would conflict with, and be adverse to, the best interests of the city. (Code 1985, § 2-357; Ord. No. 90-131, § 7, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-721. - Investment conflicts; private employment. (a)  Neither the mayor nor any commissioner or other officer or employee, elected or appointed, whether paid or unpaid, shall invest, or hold any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial, business, commercial or other private transaction, which creates a conflict with and adversely affects his or her official duties to the detriment of the city. (b)  Neither the mayor nor any commissioner or other officer or employee, elected or appointed, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties. (Code 1985, § 2-358; Ord. No. 90-131, § 8, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-722. - Stock ownership or connection with businesses involved in bid solicitation or sealed competitive bidding.     Owning stock in or being employed by or having any connection with or ownership in any business, company or concern which does business with the city only through bid solicitation or sealed competitive bidding where said bids are opened and the awards are made at meetings open to the public, shall not be considered as doing business with the city so as to cause any conflict of interest. (Code 1985, § 2-359; Ord. No. 90-131, § 9, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-723. - Appearance of former officers and employees before city committees, authorities, boards or agencies.     No person who has served as officer or employee, elected or appointed, of the city shall within a period of six months after termination of such service or employment appear before any committee, authority, board or other agency of the city or receive any compensation for any services rendered on behalf of any person, firm, corporation or association in relation to any case, proceeding or application with respect to which such person was directly concerned, or in which he or she personally participated during the period of his or her service or employment, or which was under his or her active consideration or with respect to which knowledge or information was made available to him or her during the period of said service or employment. (Code 1985, § 2-360; Ord. No. 90-131, § 10, 6-12-1990; Ord. No. 96-329, § 1, 10-22-1996) 
Sec. 2-724. - Board of ethics. (1)  Purpose. The purpose of this code of ethics is to: a.  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; b.  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; c.  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and d.  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. (2)  Scope. The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials.     Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This section shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the charter. See for example, section 16 of the city Charter and O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6. (3)  Definitions. Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: a.  City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city commission, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, assistant city clerk, city attorney, assistant city attorney(s) and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city commission as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city commission. b.  Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city commission or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. c.  Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. d.  Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. e.  Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. f.  Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. g.  Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 1.  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed. i.  $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or ii.  Ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 2.  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city commission; or 3.  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. (4)  Prohibitions. a.  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. b.  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. c.  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city commission or other city body. d.  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. e.  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 1.  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 2.  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city commission and the city clerk. f.  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. g.  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. h.  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. i.  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city commission and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. j.  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. k.  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. l.  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. m.  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. n.  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. o.  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. p.  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Albany nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the City of Albany on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Albany. q.  No city official shall use any confidential information which came to him/her in the performance of municipal duties for personal economic gain. Confidential information is any communication (oral or written) that legally cannot be divulged to third parties. r.  No city official shall engage in any other conduct which is unbecoming to an elected or appointed official or which constitutes a breach of the public trust. (5)  Conflict of interest. a.  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. b.  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. c.  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. (6)  Board of ethics members. The board of ethics shall consist of five members, two members shall be appointed by the county circuit bar association, two members by city commission, and one member by the senior judge of the county superior court. Action and decision by the board of ethics shall be by majority vote. a.  All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. b.  All members of the board of ethics shall serve a two-year term or until their successors are appointed. c.  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. d.  Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. e.  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city commission shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. f.  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. g.  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the city. h.  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. i.  Members of the board of ethics may serve consecutive terms and be removed by majority vote of the city commission. (7)  Filing and service of complaints. a.  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the City Attorney's Office, 201 W. Oglethorpe Blvd., Suite 355, Albany, GA 31701. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the city attorney shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official who is the subject of the inquiry as well as members of the ethics board all within seven calendar days of the filing. Service upon the city official may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. b.  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this section. c.  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics board shall review it and made an initial determination as to whether the complaint is patently frivolous or unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city commission. The ethics board is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are patently frivolous or unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city commission; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. for complaints that are not dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, take evidence and information concerning any complaint, hold hearings and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. d.  The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for complaint and notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city commission has not prescribed such forms. e.  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, ethics complaints against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, which are filed between the date of qualifying for municipal office and the date of certification of the election results will be held and will not be processed until the election results for that office have been certified. (8)  Duties of board of ethics. The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be in writing and served upon the city official and the city commission. Service upon the city official may be via the same method(s) involving the complaint. Service upon the city clerk (via hand delivery) shall be considered service upon the city commission. Service of the decision is to be made within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation to submit evidence and call witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this [subsection] shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the city commission to act upon any complaint. (9)  Right to appeal. a.  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. b.  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the county superior court within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. (10)  Penalty. Any city official found to have violated any of the aforementioned prohibitions or engaged in an aforementioned conflict of interest is subject to public reprimand or censure by the city commission. (11)  Meetings. In addition to any meetings or hearings held in response to a complaint, the board of ethics shall meet at the city attorney's office at 9:00 a.m. on the 1st Monday in March and the second Monday in September of each year. At these meetings the board of ethics may take action appropriate to the management of the matters committed to its supervision and to adopt procedural rules not inconsistent with this section. (Ord. No. 10-138, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 12-115, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-2012) Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-138, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 23, 2010, deleted the former § 2-724, and enacted a new § 2-724 as set out herein. The former § 2-724 pertained to board of ethics and derived from Code 1985, § 2-361; Ord. No. 90-131, § 11, 6-12-1990. 
Sec. 2-725. - Penalty for violations.     Any intentional violation of this article or the furnishing of false or misleading information to the board of ethics with the intent to mislead shall subject one to punishment and to impeachment or removal from office or employment with the city, whether such person be elected or appointed, paid or unpaid; however, nothing herein shall be interpreted so as to conflict with the provisions of state law in O.C.G.A. § 45-5-6 should a commissioner be indicted by a felony, as provided for therein. (Code 1985, § 2-362; Ord. No. 90-131, § 12, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-726. - Borrowing and lending of money.     It shall be unlawful for the mayor, any individual commissioner or other officer or employee of the city to borrow from, lend money to, or maintain any existing loan with any officer or employee, elected or appointed, of any department within the city. (Code 1985, § 2-363; Ord. No. 90-131, § 13, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-727. - Involvement with bonds, notes or other obligations.     No officer or employee of the city who handles or controls any funds of the city shall, during such officer's or employee's term or continuance in office, become surety, guarantor or endorser of any bond, note or other obligation for any person. Any officer or employee violating this section shall be subject to removal or suspension, in the discretion of the board of city commissioners. (Code 1985, § 2-364; Ord. No. 90-131, § 14, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-728. - Negotiation of contracts involving city-owned facilities.     It shall be unlawful for any person holding a position or office in the city government, with the exception of the city manager, the director and assistant director of the Albany-James H. Gray, Sr., Civic Center, the director of the recreation department, and the athletic director, to whom a salary or compensation is paid by the city, to engage in negotiating contracts in connection with any show, exhibit or attraction at the civic center, Veteran's Park, Municipal Auditorium and any other city-owned facilities without the prior approval of the city manager. A violation of this section shall be cause for removal from the office or employment. (Code 1985, § 2-365; Ord. No. 90-131, § 15, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-729. - Disclosure of conflict of interest.     Any officer or employee, elected or appointed, of the city, who becomes aware of a conflict of interest has a duty to disclose such conflict in open session of the board of city commissioners and state such conflict of interest on the public record. (Code 1985, § 2-367; Ord. No. 90-131, § 17, 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 2-730. - Reporting fraud, waste and abuse in city programs and operations. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Public employee means the mayor, each individual commissioner and other officers and employees, elected or appointed, whether paid or unpaid, of the city.     Public employer means the city. (b)  Standards of conduct. This section provides for standards of conduct and for the receipt of complaints or information from city employees as to fraud, waste and abuse in city programs and operations. (c)  Complaints and information regarding fraud, waste and abuse. The public employer may receive and investigate complaints or information from any public employee concerning the possible existence of any activity constituting fraud, waste and abuse in or relating to any city programs and operations under the jurisdiction of such public employer. (d)  Nondisclosure of identity of informant. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, such public employer shall not after receipt of the complaint or information from a public employee disclose the identity of the public employee without the written consent of such public employee, unless the public employer determines such disclosure is necessary and unavoidable during the course of the investigation. In such event, the public employee shall be notified in writing at least seven days prior to such disclosure. (e)  No action. No action against any public employee shall be taken or threatened by the public employer who has authority to take, direct others to take, recommend, or approve any personnel action as a reprisal for making a complaint or disclosing information to the public employer unless the complaint was made or the information was disclosed with the knowledge that it was false or with willful disregard for its truth or falsity. (Code 1985, § 2-369; Ord. No. 02-127, §§ 1—5, 8-27-2002) 
Secs. 2-731—2-760. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS 
Sec. 2-761. - Introduction. (a)  This policy is only applicable to city employees, appointed city officials, agents and contractors of the city, but is not applicable to any elected officials. The code of business conduct and ethics helps ensure compliance with legal requirements and standards of business conduct for the city. All city employees are expected to read and understand this code of business conduct and ethics, uphold these standards in day to day activities, comply with all applicable policies and procedures, and ensure that all agents and contractors are aware of, understand and adhere to these standards. This policy recognizes that in determining ethical conduct, an employee or appointed official must bear in mind that he or she may have to also comply with additional standards. For example, an employee or official may be a member of a professional organization that places additional or higher constraints on individual conduct. (b)  Because the principles described in this code of business conduct and ethics are general in nature, employees should also review all applicable city policies and procedures for more specific instruction and contact the human resources department or city attorney's office if you have any questions. (c)  This code of business conduct and ethics, city policies and procedures, and/or other related communications (verbal or written) do not create or imply an employment contract or term of employment. (d)  The city is committed to continuously reviewing and updating city policies and procedures. Therefore, this code of business conduct and ethics is subject to modification. This code of business conduct and ethics supersedes all other such codes, policies, procedures, instructions, practices, rules or written or verbal representations to the extent they are inconsistent. (Ord. No. 08-134, § 1(1.1), 8-26-2008) 
Sec. 2-762. - Compliance is everyone's business. (a)  Ethical business conduct is critical to services the city provides to the citizens of the city. City employees are expected to closely examine this document and adhere to these practices. Many of these practices reflect legal or regulatory requirements. Violations of these laws and regulations can create significant liability for the employee, the city including department directors, other employees, and elected-officials. It is the job of employees and their ethical responsibility to help enforce this code of business conduct and ethics. Employees should be alert to and report possible violations in accordance with the whistleblower policy which sets forth: (b)  Any report may be made anonymously and must be made in one of the following ways: (1)  By contacting the supervisor; (2)  By contacting the city's human resources or city attorney; (3)  By calling the city's compliance officer or city hotline at or on-line at www.albany.ga.us; as established by the city's human resources office; (4)  By mail to: The City Compliance Officer Human Resources Department P.O. Box 447, Albany, GA, 31702-0447 (c)  Employees must cooperate in any internal or external investigations of possible violations. Reprisal, threats, retribution or retaliation against any person who has in good faith reported a violation or a suspected violation of law of this code of business conduct or other city policies, or against any person who is assisting in any investigation or process with respect to such a violation, is prohibited. The city has a more detailed set of guidelines with respect to reporting violations. Employees are expected to review, understand and follow such policies and procedures. (d)  Violations of law, this code of business conduct and ethics, or other city policies or procedures may lead to disciplinary action up to and including termination. (e)  In all cases, if you are unsure about the appropriateness of an event or action, please seek assistance in interpreting the requirements of these practices by contacting the city attorney's office. (Ord. No. 08-134, § 1(1.2), 8-26-2008) 
Sec. 2-763. - Employee's responsibilities to the city and its citizen. (a)  General standards of conduct. The City of Albany expects all employees, agents and contractors to exercise good judgment to ensure the safety and welfare of employees, agents and contractors and to maintain a cooperative, efficient, positive, harmonious and productive work environment and business organization. These standards apply while working on city premises, at offsite locations where city business is being conducted, at city sponsored business and social events, or at any other place where employees represent the City of Albany. Employees, agents or contractors who engage in misconduct or whose performance is unsatisfactory may be subject to corrective action, up to and including termination. (b)  Applicable laws. All city employees, agents and contractors must comply with all applicable laws, regulations, rules and regulatory orders. Each employee, agent and contractor must acquire appropriate knowledge of the requirements relating to his or her duties sufficient to enable him or her to recognize potential dangers and to know when to seek advice from the city's compliance officer or city attorney's office on specific city policies and procedures. Violations of laws, regulations, rules and orders may subject the employee, agent or contractor to individual criminal or civil liability, as well as to discipline by the city. Such individual violations may also subject the city to civil and/or criminal liability. (c)  Conflicts of interest. Each employee has a responsibility to the city, citizens and each other. Although this duty does not prevent employees from engaging in personal transactions and investments, it does demand avoidance of situations where a conflict of interest might occur or appear to occur. The city is subject to scrutiny from many different individuals and organizations; therefore, employees should always strive to avoid even the appearance of impropriety. (1)  Interest and benefit to one person, not the city. A conflict of interest exists where the interests or benefits of one person or entity conflict with the interests or benefits of the city. Examples include: a.  Employment/outside employment. In consideration of employment with the city, employees are expected to devote full attention to the business interests of the city and are prohibited from engaging in any activity that interferes with job performance or responsibilities to the city, its citizens or is otherwise in conflict with or prejudicial to the city. City policies prohibit any employee from accepting simultaneous employment with a city supplier, customer, or developer, or from taking part in any activity that adversely affects the city's competitive advantage. Additionally, employees must disclose to the city any interest that may conflict with the business of the city. Questions should be directed to the employee's immediate supervisor, the human resources department or city attorney's office. b.  Business interests. Employees considering investing in a city customer, supplier, developer or competitor, must first take great care to ensure that these investments do not compromise job responsibilities to the city. Many factors should be considered in determining whether a conflict exists, including the size and nature of the investment; ability to influence the city's decisions; access to confidential information of the city or of the other company; and the nature of the relationship between the city and the other company. Again, avoiding the appearance of impropriety or conflict. c.  Related parties. As a general rule, employees should avoid conducting city business with a relative or significant other, or with a business in which a relative or significant other is associated in any noteworthy role. Relatives include spouse, sister, brother, daughter, son, mother, father, grandparents, aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews, cousins, step relationships, and in-laws. Significant others include persons living in a spousal (including same sex) or familial fashion with an employee. (2)  Full disclosure of nature of transaction. If such a related party transaction is unavoidable, the employee must fully disclose the nature of the related party transaction to the city attorney. If determined to be material to the city by the financial director, the city attorney must review and approve in writing in advance such related party transactions. The most significant related party transactions, particularly those involving the city's directors or executive officers, must be reviewed and approved in writing in advance by the city manager and city attorney. The city must report all such material related party transactions under applicable accounting rules, federal securities laws, SEC rules and regulations, and securities market rules. Any dealings with a related party must be conducted in such a way that no preferential treatment is given to this business. (3)  Disclosure of relatives of employees. The city discourages the employment of relatives and significant others in positions or assignments within the same department and prohibits the employment of such individuals in positions that have a financial dependence or influence (e.g., an auditing or control relationship, or a supervisor/subordinate relationship). The purpose of this policy is to prevent the organizational impairment and conflicts that are a likely outcome of the employment of relatives or significant others, especially in a supervisor/subordinate relationship. If a question arises about whether a relationship is covered by this policy, the human resources department is responsible for determining whether an applicant's or transferee's acknowledged relationship is covered by this policy. The human resources department shall advise all affected applicants and transferees of this policy. Willful withholding of information regarding a prohibited relationship/reporting arrangement may be subject to corrective action, up to and including termination. If a prohibited relationship exists or develops between two employees, the employee in the senior position must bring this to the attention of such employee's supervisor. The city retains the prerogative to separate the individuals at the earliest possible time, either by reassignment or by termination, if necessary. (4)  Other situations. Because other conflicts of interest may arise, it would be impractical to attempt to list all possible situations. If a proposed transaction or situation raises, any questions or doubts should be directed to the city attorney's office. This policy prohibits real and apparent conflicts of interest that may arise among appointed officials, employees, or agents. (d)  City opportunities. Employees, officers and directors may not exploit for their own personal gain opportunities that are discovered through the use of corporate property, information or position unless the opportunity is disclosed fully in writing to the city manager, that they decline to pursue such opportunity. (1)  Requests by regulatory authorities. The city and its employees, agents and contractors must cooperate with appropriate government inquiries and investigations. In this context, however, it is important to protect the legal rights of the city with respect to its confidential information. All government and public requests for information (open records request), documents or investigative interviews must be referred to the city attorney's office. No financial information may be disclosed without the prior approval of the city manager and city attorney's office. (2)  City's spokespeople. The city manager is the official spokes person for the city and has herein delegated that authority to department directors or others officially appointed to perform in the absence of the director. (e)  Use of city's assets. (1)  Generally. Protecting the city's assets is a key fiduciary responsibility of every employee, agent and contractor. Care should be taken to ensure that assets are not misappropriated, loaned to others, sold or donated, without appropriate authorization. All city employees, agents and contractors are responsible for the proper use of city assets, and must safeguard such assets against loss, damage, misuse or theft. Employees, agents or contractors who violate any aspect of this policy or who demonstrate poor judgment in the manner in which they use any city asset may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment at the city's sole discretion. city equipment and property (buildings and land) are assets to be used for city business purposes only. Employees, agents and contractors may not use city assets for personal use, nor may they allow any other person to use city assets. Employees who have any questions regarding this policy should bring them to the attention of the city's human resources department or city attorney's office. (2)  City funds. Every city employee is personally responsible for all city funds over which he or she exercises control. City agents and contractors should not be allowed to exercise control over company funds. City funds must be used only for city business purposes. Every city employee, agent and contractor must take reasonable steps to ensure that the city receives good value for city funds spent, and must maintain accurate and timely records of each and every expenditure. Expense reports must be accurate and submitted in a timely manner. City employees, agents and contractors must not use city funds for any personal purpose. (3)  Computers and other equipment. The city strives to furnish employees with the equipment necessary to efficiently and effectively do their jobs. It is the responsibility of employees to care for that equipment and use it responsibility and only for city business purposes. If city equipment is used at home or off site, take precautions to protect it from theft or damage, just as if it were your own. Once a person is no longer an employee of the city, all city property is to be immediately returned While computers and other electronic devices are made accessible to employees to assist them to perform their jobs and to promote the city's interests, all such computers and electronic devices, whether used entirely or partially on the city's premises or with the aid of the city's equipment or resources, must remain fully accessible to the city and, to the maximum extent permitted by law, will remain the sole and exclusive property of the city. Employees, agents and contractors should not maintain any expectation of privacy with respect to information transmitted over, received by, or stored in any electronic communications device owned, leased, or operated in whole or in part by or on behalf of the city. To the extent permitted by applicable law, the city retains the right to gain access to any information received by, transmitted by, or stored in any such electronic communications device, by and through its employees, agents, contractors, or representatives, at any time, either with or without an employees or third party's knowledge, consent or approval. (4)  Software. All software used by employees to conduct city business must be appropriately licensed. Never make or use illegal or unauthorized copies of any software, whether in the office, at home, or on the road, since doing so may constitute copyright infringement and may expose employees and the city to potential civil and criminal liability. In addition, use of illegal or unauthorized copies of software may subject the employee to disciplinary action, up to and including termination. The city's information technology department ("IT department") will inspect city computers periodically to verify that only approved and licensed software has been installed. Any nonlicensed/supported software will be removed. (5)  Frequent flyer miles. Mileage earned on city related travel are assigned to the individual and will be use to reduce future city travel by the individual. When the employee retires the miles will remain the property of the individual. (6)  City credit card usage. These cards are to be used for authorized city business only and receipts are to be maintained, signed as verification of accuracy and authorized expenditure. Once signed they are to be turned-in to department finance officers/accounts clerk for retention. Should a card be use by mistake for personal business, the error will be immediately reported to the employee's reporting senior, and a formal report will be made to include a check for repayment of the unauthorized transaction. Repeated misuse of card may result in suspension, loss of card privileges and/or termination. Questions regarding this policy should be directed to the city attorney's office. (7)  Prohibition of inducements. Under no circumstances may employees, agents or contractors offer to pay, make payment, promise to pay, or issue authorization to pay any money, gift, or anything of value to customers, vendors, consultants, etc., that is perceived as intended, directly or indirectly, to improperly influence any business decision, any act or failure to act, any commitment of fraud, or opportunity for the commission of any fraud. Inexpensive gifts, infrequent business meals, celebratory events and entertainment, provided that they are not excessive or create an appearance of impropriety, do not violate this policy. Questions regarding whether a particular payment or gift violates this policy should be directed to human resources or the city attorney's office. (Ord. No. 08-134, § 1(1.3), 8-26-2008) 
Sec. 2-764. - Responsibilities to our customers and our suppliers. (a)  Customer relationships. If the job of an employee requires the employee to be in contact with any city citizen, customers or potential customers, it is critical to remember that the employee represents the city to the people with whom you are dealing. Act in a manner that creates value for our citizens and helps to build a relationship based upon trust and goodwill. Trust and goodwill are our most important assets, and the city employees, agents and contractors must act to preserve it for its customers (citizens). (b)  Payments or gifts. Under no circumstances may employees, agents or contractors accept any offer, payment, promise to pay, or authorization to pay any money, gift, or anything of value from customers, vendors, consultants, etc. Inexpensive gifts ($25.00 or less), infrequent business meals, celebratory events and entertainment, provided that they are not excessive or create an appearance of impropriety, do not violate this policy. Questions regarding whether a particular payment or gift violates this policy are to be directed to human resources or the city attorney's office. (c)  Publications of others. The city subscribes to many publications that help employees do their jobs better. These include newspapers, newsletters, reference works, online reference services, magazines, books, and other digital and printed works. Copyright law generally protects these works, and their unauthorized copying and distribution constitute copyright infringement. Employees are to first obtain the consent of the publisher of a publication before copying publications or significant parts of them. When in doubt about whether a publication can be copied, consult the city attorney's office. (Ord. No. 08-134, § 3(1.4), 8-26-2008) 
Sec. 2-765. - Waivers.     Any waiver of any provision of this code of business conduct and ethics for an appointed official, employee must be approved in writing by the city attorney's office and promptly disclosed. (Ord. No. 08-134, § 1(1.5), 8-26-2008) 
Sec. 2-766. - Disciplinary actions. (a)  The matters covered in this code of business conduct and ethics are of the utmost importance to the city, its citizens and are essential to the city's ability to conduct its business in accordance with its stated values. It is expected that all of employees, agents, contractors and consultants adhere to these rules in carrying out their duties for the city. (b)  The city will take appropriate action against any employee, agent, contractor or consultant whose actions are found to violate these policies or any other policies of the city. Disciplinary actions may include immediate termination of employment or business relationship at the city's sole discretion. Where the city has suffered a loss, it may pursue its remedies against the individuals or entities responsible. Where laws have been violated, the city will cooperate fully with the appropriate authorities. For detailed punitive or disciplinary actions associated with violations of this policy, review the city's personnel management system policies and procedures. (Ord. No. 08-134, § 1(1.6), 8-26-2008) 
Chapter 4 - ADVERTISING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 4-1—4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS 
Sec. 4-19. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature.     Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statutes or regulations and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law. The term "newspaper" shall also mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public, and shall mean and include any other copyrighted material.     Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Code 1975, § 16-81; Code 1985, § 3-16) 
Sec. 4-20. - Exemption for mail and newspapers.     The provisions of this article shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. (Code 1975, § 16-82; Code 1985, § 3-17) 
Sec. 4-21. - Inhabited private premises.     It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises. Such person may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure and prevent it from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulation. (Code 1975, § 16-83; Code 1985, § 3-19; Ord. No. 99-113, § 1, 4-27-1999) 
Sec. 4-22. - Drug samples.     It shall be unlawful for any person to give, distribute, throw or leave in or near any house, yard, sidewalk, street or other place in the city, any samples of patent medicines, drugs, chemicals, pills, powders, tablets, etc., with the object of making a free distribution of the same or for advertising purposes. Nothing in this section shall prevent any person properly licensed from advertising goods by giving samples to adult persons. (Code 1975, § 16-84; Code 1985, § 3-20) 
Sec. 4-23. - Depositing on uninhabited, vacant premises.     It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which is uninhabited or vacant. (Code 1975, § 16-86; Code 1985, § 3-21) 
Sec. 4-24. - Placing on vehicles.     It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle, without the owner's consent. (Code 1975, § 16-87; Code 1985, § 3-22) 
Secs. 4-25—4-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COORDINATED SIGNAGE PROGRAM 
Sec. 4-52. - Requirements.     Notwithstanding any other provision of City Ordinance 08-121, the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission shall be authorized to approve a coordinated signage program for unified commercial developments which contain the following: (1)  More than ten acres in size; (2)  More than one building; and at least one building onsite shall have a minimum of 45,000 square feet of gross building space; (3)  More than one parcel or private street. (Ord. No. 09-129, § 1(E-1(a)), 9-22-2009) Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 09-142 replaced Ord. No. 08-121 in its entirety. Ord. No. 09-142, § 2, adopted adopted Dec. 15, 2009, has been designated as Art. IV, §§ 4-71—4-81 of this Chapter. 
Sec. 4-53. - Administration.     Applications for the coordinated signage program shall be submitted to the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission for approval. (Ord. No. 09-129, § 1(E-1(b)), 9-22-2009) 
Sec. 4-54. - Procedures. (a)  An application shall be submitted to the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission which shall include the following: (1)  Statement of justification for approval of the coordinated signage program; (2)  Description/depiction of the sign program including all of the following: a.  Number; b.  Location; c.  Size; d.  Height; e.  Color; f.  Material; g.  Illumination; h.  Site plan; and i.  Compliance with design requirements. (b)  The Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission shall approve, disapprove, or approve with modifications any proposed coordinated signage program application. (Ord. No. 09-129, § 1(E-1(c)), 9-22-2009) 
Sec. 4-55. - Design requirements for wall signs.     The following requirements shall be followed and specifically referenced in the application: (1)  The size of the sign shall be in proportion to the size, location, and background of the supporting structure. (2)  The wall sign shall not exceed the maximum height, maximum size, setback requirement and number of signs permitted under the current city sign ordinance. (3)  Wall signage shall be mounted on a raceway flush with the wall of the building to which such sign is affixed. (4)  Tenants over 20,000 square feet may have individual illuminated letters mounted flush to the building. (5)  The size of wall signs including corporate crests, shields, insignia which may be permitted shall not exceed two square feet per linear foot of frontage and shall in all cases be a minimum of two feet from the centerline of the wall dividing the premises from the premises adjacent thereto. (6)  The wall sign shall be either individual illuminated plastic-faced letters, or individual illuminated back-lighted letters, sign band type. (7)  All sign transformers and ballast boxes shall be concealed. (8)  Raceway color must be the same as the building elevation. (9)  Manufacturer's names, stamps and decals shall not be exposed. (10)  The forward projection of the wall sign shall not be more than 12 inches from the front elevation of the building, provided that the use of corporate crests, shields or insignia will be permitted. (11)  No exposed neon or incandescent bulbs or flashing, blinking box, rooftop, rotating or moving signs or markers shall be permitted and also subject to city sign regulations. (12)  For any building side not facing a public right-of-way, no wall signs will be permitted at or on the rear of the premises except that a small identification sign showing only the name of the business shall be lettered on the exterior of the delivery door by the business. (13)  No signs, banners, or other signage shall be painted or allowed on the exterior of the masonry, doors, windows or any other surfaces of the premises, nor erected on the roof or parapet of the premises, unless approved by the city. (Ord. No. 09-129, § 1(E-1(d)), 9-22-2009) 
Sec. 4-56. - Multi-tenant sign requirements. (a)  All multi-tenant signs shall be monument style signs. (b)  In no event shall any monument sign exceed the maximum height allowed per City Ordinance No. 08-121. (c)  Multi-tenant signs and their supporting structures shall be architecturally in harmony with the surrounding structures. (d)  Each commercial development shall be allowed one off premises monument sign, in the event that: (1)  Including all other monument signs on the project, the addition of an off premises sign shall not exceed the square footage allowance governing multi-tenant lots in City Ordinance No. 08-121. (2)  The location of the sign is within 1,000 feet of the subject property. (3)  The sign is located within a permanent sign easement. (4)  The sign is located at an access point to the subject property. (Ord. No. 09-129, § 1(E-1(e)), 9-22-2009) 
Sec. 4-57. - General requirements. (a)  No sign shall be erected by the business owner, property owner, agent, contractor, or other interested party without first obtaining the necessary approval from the city. The business tenant, property owner, agent, or other interested party is responsible to maintain said sign in a good state of repair. (b)  If the above cannot be accomplished by the issuance of a valid sign permit, city staff may be authorized to increase allowable square footage by ten percent based on unique circumstances. (c)  Upon vacating the premises, the business owner shall remove all wall signs and repair all damage caused by such removal, this includes but not limited to the repainting of the surface to match the existing store front color. (d)  All signs shall comply with the current International Building Code with Georgia amendments. (Ord. No. 09-129, § 1(E-1(f)), 9-22-2009) 
Sec. 4-58. - Appeal procedures.     The provisions of section 3-60 of City Ordinance No. 08-121 are incorporated by reference. (Ord. No. 09-129, § 1(E-1(g)), 9-22-2009) 
Secs. 4-59—4-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIGN REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-111, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), adopted April 28, 2015, repealed the former article IV, §§ 4-71—4-81, and enacted a new article IV as set out herein. The former article IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 09-142, § 2(3-51—3-61), adopted December 15, 2009. 
Sec. 4-71. - Statement of purpose.     In adopting these sign regulations, it is the intent and purpose of the mayor and board of commissioners of the City of Albany not to impose an outright ban on signs, but instead to: (a)  Balance the right of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; and (b)  Further the objectives of the city's comprehensive land use planning; (c)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare; (d)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; (e)  Maintain the historical and cultural heritage and image of the city; (f)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; (g)  Avoid the harmful aspects of the unrestricted proliferation of signs; (h)  Promote economic development and tourism; (i)  Protect private property values; and (j)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations.     In accessing how to go about the above described task, the mayor and board of commissioners have given considerable weight and find the following to be relevant and useful to the mayor and board of commissioners of the city concerning the size, location and quantity of sign structures within the city must be regulated in order to achieve the above-stated intents and purposes: University of Georgia Land Use Clinic (2003, June 26). Sign Control on Rural Corridors: Model Provisions and Guidance; Wisconsin Department of Transportation (1994, December). Milwaukee County Stadium Variable Message Sign Study: Impacts of an Advertising Variable Message Sign on Freeway Traffic; Scenic America (2007). Billboards in the Digital Age: Unsafe (and Unsightly) at Any Speed. Scenic America Issue Alert.; Nasar, Jack L. and Hong, Xiaodong (1999, September). Visual Preferences in Urban Signscapes. Journal of Environment and Behavior, 31(5), 671-691.; Office of Safety Research and Development, Federal Highway Administration (2001, September 11). Research Review of Potential Safety Effects of Electronic Billboards on Driver Attention and Distraction. U.S. Department of Transportation.; New York State Department of State, Division of Local Government Services (2006, January). Municipal Control of Signs. James A. Coon Local Government Technical Series.; Weinstein, Alan C. A Study of Local Regulation of Outdoor Advertising in 268 U.S. Jurisdictions. Outdoor Advertising Association of America, Inc.; City Club of Portland (1996, September 6). Billboard Regulation in Portland. City Club of Portland Bulletin, 78(13), 1-40.; Smily, Alison and Persaud, Bhagwant, et al (2005). Traffic Safety Evaluations of Video Advertising Signs. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 1937, 105-112.     In adopting these sign regulations, the mayor and board of commissioners of the city have carefully considered and especially recognize the case law coming from Georgia courts, the federal courts, and courts throughout the United States, which recognize that the regulation of the size, location and quantity of sign structures is a valid and lawful means of achieving the above-stated intents and purposes, and that such intents and purposes are valid and lawful governmental interests, which include the following: Granite State Outdoor Advertising, Inc. v. Cobb County, Ga., 193 Fed. Appx. 900 (C.A.11th 2006) (finding that the stated goals within a sign ordinance of protecting against traffic hazards and the adverse impact on the county's aesthetic qualities are substantial government interests); Gregory v. Clive, 2007 WL 2914515 (Ga. S.Ct. 2007) (recognizing as within a local government's police power to enact legislation governing billboards and signs, as such legislation clearly addresses the public health, safety, or general welfare of the community); H & H Operations, Inc. v. City of Peachtree City, Ga., 248 Ga. 500 (1981) (holding that, under its police power, a municipality can enact and enforce reasonable regulations governing the erection and maintenance of signs within its jurisdiction); Harnish v. Manatee County, Florida, 783 F.2d 1535 (C.A. 11th 1986) (finding that aesthetics is a substantial governmental goal which is entitled to and should be according weighty respect, and that the governmental entity charged with the responsibility of protecting the environment must be given discretion in determining how much protection is necessary and the best method of achieving that protection); Lamar Advertising Company v. City of Douglasville, Ga., 254 F.Supp.2d 1321 (N.D.Ga. 2003) (finding that where a sign ordinance asserts the goals of public safety, traffic safety, health, welfare and aesthetics, a municipality has shown an important or substantial governmental interest unrelated to the suppression of free speech); Metromedia, Inc. v. City of San Diego, 453 U.S. 490 (1981) (holding that the goals of traffic safety and aesthetics advanced by a municipality as justification for regulating signs is a substantial governmental interest); St. Louis Poster Advertising Co. v. City of St. Louis, 249 U.S. 269 (1919) (finding that billboards may be prohibited in the residential districts of a city in the interest of the safety, morality, health and decency of the community); Members of the City Council of the City of Los Angeles v. Taxpayers for Vincent, 466 U.S. 789 (1984) (finding that a government entity can regulate signs and billboards when necessary to advance a significant and legitimate state interest, such as the protection of the aesthetics and quality of life within its jurisdiction); City of Doraville v. Turner Communications, Corp., 236 Ga. 385 (1976) (finding that under its police power authority, a municipality can regulate the location and maintenance of outdoor advertising signs within their territorial jurisdiction); Spratlin Outdoor Media, Inc. v. City of Douglasville, 2006 WL 826077 (N.D.Ga. 2006) (upholding sign ordinance where the ordinance's height and setback restrictions were rationally related to its stated goals of promoting the health, safety, morality and general welfare of the community, promoting the orderly and beneficial development of the city, promoting adequate access to natural light and air, improving the aesthetic appearance of the city, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and buildings in accordance with the city's comprehensive plan). (Ord. No. 15-111, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-2015) 
Sec. 4-72. - General provisions and definitions. (1)  No sign structure shall be placed or maintained within the city except in conformity with this sign ordinance. Violations of this article may be punished in the same manner as other violations of the zoning ordinance. The city reserves the right to take legal action to remove signs erected in violation of this article, to summarily remove signs illegally placed in the right-of-way or to otherwise enforce the provisions of this article. (2)  Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this sign ordinance, any sign, display or device allowed under this article may contain any commercial or non-commercial message, or any political or non-political message; except that such messages cannot depict obscenity, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, nor can they depict sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3, nor advertise any activity illegal under the laws of Georgia or the United States. (3)  Definitions. As used in this article, the following words have the following meanings. The general definitions and interpretative rules of the zoning ordinance shall also be used. To the extent those general rules or definitions conflict with these specific definitions, these definitions shall control.     Balloons. Any lighter than air or gas-filled object tethered in place or otherwise anchored to the ground.     Banner. A temporary sign, requiring a permit, consisting of durable and flexible material such as but not limited to coated, corrugated or non-corrugated paper, cardboard, vinyl, plastic, canvas, or fabric of any kind, intended to be hung rigidly, either with or without a frame, attached to one or more poles, or mounted as a temporary sign device, with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations.     Billboard. A type of ground sign which is permitted in certain zoning districts as provided by this article, and which shall be a maximum of 35 feet in height and 382 square feet in sign face area, and which is greater than 100 square feet in sign face area. Billboards may be double-faced, and may include embellishments not exceeding an additional 100 square feet.     Custom flag. A sign consisting of loose or semi-rigid material supported by a small to large, sometimes bowed, horizontal or vertical pole, including but not limited to signs commonly referred to as bowflag, flutter, stick, teardrop, drop, blade, small flags, beachwing, shark, U-shaped and feather signs.     Directional sign. An unofficial or non-standard traffic control sign, freestanding or mounted on a building, and dedicated to providing traffic direction such as enter, exit, drive through, etc., which may contain logos. These are limited to three feet in height and no larger than four square feet in area.     Flag. Any outdoor display or device made of fabric that is larger than two square feet in area and used to convey a message. A flag differs from a banner because a flag is typically attached along only one side to a pole or hung from only one side beneath a beam or other overhead structure.     Flag Code. United States Code Title 4 Chapter 1, The Flag. The laws relating to the flag of the United States of America.     Ground sign. A sign that is anchored to the ground and is wholly independent of a building for support. Freestanding signs are included in this definition, as are signs on poles, frames, or other mounting structures other than buildings.     Hanging sign. Any non-fabric sign hanging or suspended from the exterior walls of a building structure, or an awning attached to the building structure, which is directed so as to be plainly visible from a public right-of-way. Includes projecting signs.     Historic sign. Any sign, other than a billboard, which existed and was displayed in the city a minimum of 50 years prior to the present day, and is deemed to have historic merit based on its uniqueness, age, character or association. Signs of less than 50 years old may be deemed historic if they possess exceptional characteristics. The National Register of Historic Places Criteria for Evaluation will be applied to determine if the sign qualifies as an historic object.     Incidental or informational sign. A small sign that has a purpose secondary to the use of the parcel on which it is located. This includes but is not limited to credit cards accepted, official notice of services as required by law, trade affiliations, business hours, "telephone," "self-service," "private drive", "no trespassing", etc. These signs are typically located on doors, windows or building walls. Unless noted elsewhere in this article, these signs shall not require a permit. Signs shall be one square foot or less in size.     Mobile sign. A sign display area attached to a wheeled vehicle (whether motorized or not) which may be legally operated upon any public road or street. A mobile sign is distinct from a vehicle with a sign in that a mobile sign is typically used for the purpose of advertising for hire as opposed to a message that directly relates to the vehicle such as could be found on a delivery truck. Mobile signs include multiple-message type signs.     Multiple-message signs. Signs which change the message or copy on the sign face mechanically or electronically by movement or rotation of panels or slats, or by changing electronic display on the sign face.     Nonconforming sign. A sign that at the time it was erected or affixed to a building received all permits required at that time. Subsequent to the sign being installed the zoning of the property was changed, the parcel lines were altered, or regulations applied to signs were amended so as to make the sign no longer in accordance with the current requirements.     Order board. A sign for a drive-through window that includes an intercom allowing customers to place an order.     Out-of-store marketing device. An object located outside of a primary building on a site zoned for non-residential uses on which may contain messages or logos. Examples of out-of-store marketing devices include, but are not limited to: fuel pumps, bank ATM units, newspaper racks, drink machines, ice boxes, and phone booths.     Portable signs. A movable sign not permanently affixed to a building, permanent structure or the ground including sign structures which are attached to vehicles, trailers, movable structures, or any sign which may be transported. Such signs include, but are not limited to, printed banners or billboards attached to vehicles and trailers and signs designed to be transported with or without wheels attached. Except as provided herein, the definition of portable structures does not include messages painted directly upon or attached by sticker or magnetic backing to a motor vehicle or placed within a motor vehicle such that it may be viewed from outside the vehicle through windows. Portable signs with the wheels, hitch or other apparatus which makes them portable removed and attached to the ground, or other permanent structure will be considered as ground or wall signs.     Preview board. A sign for a drive-through window that does not include an intercom allowing customers to place an order.     Projecting sign. A sign which is attached perpendicularly to a building and extends one foot or more from the plane of the building wall but not more than five feet. Includes hanging signs. Count as wall signs.     Roof line. The top edge of a structure which is visible from the ground level.     Roof sign. Any sign erected, attached or mounted wholly upon or over the roof of any building, or which is dependent upon a building for support and projects above the roof line.     Sidewalk, sandwich or A-frame sign. A non-illuminated sign which is normally in the shape of an "A" or some variation thereof and which is usually two-sided. This includes a sign mounted on an easel. For the purposes of this article, these signs are not considered portable signs.     Sign. Any display of words, shapes or images designed to convey a message to the viewer, located on the exterior of any dwelling, building or structure, or located anywhere on a lot upon a dedicated supporting structure or device, including poles, banners, windows and similar devices.     Sign face. The actual message-carrying portion of the sign that can be used to display content, including any area that can display or does display words, pictures or other communicative elements of the sign, including the background color.     Sign structure. This includes all the elements of the sign, including its supporting structure, sign face, base, lights and every portion of the sign.     Small signs. Signs which have less than one square foot in sign face area, and which are either wall or window signs, or which are ground signs less than three feet in height.     Streamer. Narrow strips of material used for decoration, intended to be hung and visibly affected by the movement of the wind.     Subdivision sign. A permanent sign placed at the entrance to a land subdivision development.     Temporary sign. Any sign that by its design and construction is intended to be used for a limited period of time and is not permanently mounted or anchored. Such signs are constructed of materials and to a standard meant to last for less than one year. Includes signs put up during periods of rent, lease, sale or construction.     Wall sign. A sign that is fastened directly to, or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior of a building, with the sign face parallel to the wall, and extending from the surface of the exterior no more than 24 inches.     Window sign. Any sign, excluding incidental signs, placed inside or on the outside of a window, intended to be seen from the exterior. (4)  Except as provided herein, the provisions of this article shall be administered by the planning and development services director and enforced by the code enforcement director. Whenever this article places a duty, obligation, power or authority in the planning and development services director or code enforcement director, it shall be construed to include that respective official's authorized designee. (Ord. No. 09-142, § 2(3-52), 12-15-2009) (Ord. No. 15-111, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-2015) 
Sec. 4-73. - Permits, inspections, etc. (1)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or convert any sign in the city or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a sign permit from the planning and development services director. These directives shall not be construed to require any permit for change of copy on any sign, replacement of the sign face, nor for the repainting, cleaning, or other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure for which a permit has previously been issued, so long as the sign or sign structure is not modified or enlarged in any way. (2)  Application. Sign permits may be applied for by the owner of the property upon which the sign will be located, or by that person or entity's authorized agent. In order to obtain a permit to erect, alter or relocate any sign under the provisions of this article, an applicant therefor shall submit to the planning and development services director a sign permit application which shall set forth in writing a complete description of the proposed sign including: a.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner or persons entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor or erector. b.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of the lot on which the sign is located if different from those designated above. c.  The location by street address of the proposed sign structure. d.  A drawing of the proposed sign showing design, dimensions, construction specifications and sign location(s). There may be circumstances such that in order to protect public health, safety and welfare the drawing must be prepared and signed by an architect or engineer licensed by the State of Georgia. e.  Where the sign construction requires an electrical connection, the electrical contractor shall obtain an electrical permit. f.  Each applicant shall present to the planning and development services director on request a certificate of liability insurance or current occupation tax certificate prior to the issuance of a sign permit. g.  Where the application is for a multiple-message sign using electronic lighting as part of the display on the sign face, a copy of the sign manufacturer's specifications for luminosity shall be attached to the application. (3)  Issuance of permit if application in order. It shall be the duty of the planning and development services director, upon receipt of a completed application for a sign permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and, if the proposed structure is in compliance with the requirements of this section and all other applicable provisions of this article to issue, within five working days from date of filing, to the applicant a written permit evidencing the applicant's compliance therewith. Sign permits shall be issued in the name of the property owner upon which the sign is to be located. Issuance of the permit shall in no way prevent the planning and development services director from later declaring said sign to be nonconforming if the permit is obtained based on false information submitted by the applicant. (4)  Permit duration. A sign permit shall become null and void if the construction of the sign for which the permit was issued has not begun within a period of six months after the date of issuance and completed within 12 months after date of issuance. (5)  Work on illegal signs. No person shall erect or assist in the erection, construction, maintenance, alteration, relocation, repair or painting of, or do any work upon any sign for which a permit has not been obtained. Any such sign shall be illegal and the planning and development services director shall order the owner to remove the same immediately. If the owner fails to remove the same within 30 days, the planning and development services director shall proceed in accordance with this article. (6)  Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required by this article are subject to inspection by the planning and development services or code enforcement director. (7)  Revocation. The planning and development services director is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by him upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with the provisions of this section within 30 days after notification in writing. (8)  Permit fees. Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this section, the applicant shall pay a fee as follows: a.  For each permit for ground signs, illuminated or not, $0.50 per square foot on each face, to a maximum fee of $80.00. b.  For each permit for a wall sign and mobile sign as permitted by this article, $0.50 per square foot on each face, to a maximum fee of $80.00. c.  For each permit for a banner, custom flag, sidewalk, sandwich or A-frame sign, $30.00. d.  A double permit fee shall be paid in addition to any other penalties levied for violation of this section. (9)  Exemptions. Except as otherwise provided, the following signs may be erected without a permit. Provided that each is in accordance with the prescribed conditions and all other applicable codes and regulations. a.  Signs having no electrical connection and a sign face with 32 square feet in area or less excluding banners, custom flags, sidewalk, sandwich, or A-frame signs. b.  Small signs having no electrical connection, provided that when two or more such signs are used together to form a single message, then such group of signs shall be treated as one sign for purposes of this article, and will be regulated accordingly. c.  Menu and preview boards. In addition to any other signs authorized by this chapter, one menu and one preview board are allowed if such property contains a commercial or industrial building or structure where materials are delivered at a drive-through window located other than on the front side of the building. These signs cannot have electrical connections to be considered exempt. d.  Directional signs, without electrical connections. e.  Custom flags, banners, streamers and balloons for citywide celebrations, conventions, and commemorations when specifically authorized by the city commission or their designee, for a prescribed period of time. f.  Governmental signs and legal notices. Any sign or notice posted, erected by, or at the direction of the city, county, state, or federal government. g.  Holiday lights and decorations. h.  Incidental or informational signs. i.  Any sign not visible from the public right-of-way. j.  Temporary signs erected during the time that a property is actively being constructed, marketed for sale, lease, or rent. Such signs may be freestanding or attached to a building (wall sign). k.  Flags displayed in accord with the U.S. Flag Code. (Ord. No. 15-111, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-2015) 
Sec. 4-74. - Permitted signs by zoning district. (1)  If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically permitted in a zoning district as provided under this section shall be prohibited. These regulations apply to signs located on any lot or development, except that any sign not visible from the outside of a structure or to passing members of the public is not restricted or regulated by this article. a.  Sign height. Sign height is measured from centerline of street grade upon which the sign fronts to the highest portion of the sign structure. b.  Sign face area. The area of a sign is calculated by determining the area of the smallest square or rectangle which encloses the sign face and the structure surrounding the sign face. For example, the pole or base would not be included, but any frame holding the sign face in place would be counted. See examples below. However, this example is not a substantive regulation as to permissible types of signs: (2)  Signs permitted in R-1, R-2, R-3, C-8 R-MHS, R-MHP, and C-R zoning districts: a.  Ground signs. Three double-faced signs per lot. No single sign face may exceed six square feet. Height is limited to four feet. b.  Window signs. Permitted, but total window signage shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of windows facing road frontage. c.  Wall signs. Not permitted. d.  One additional ground sign is permitted during periods of rent, sale, lease or construction, not to exceed six square feet or four feet in height. (3)  Signs permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-5, C-6, C-7, M-1, M-2, FH and AG zoning districts: a.  Ground signs. One double-faced sign per street frontage. Maximum square footage for each sign face shall be two square feet for each linear foot of building frontage facing the public right-of-way, or one square foot for each linear foot of street frontage on the public right-of-way, whichever is larger, provided that no sign face may exceed 100 square feet. Maximum height for each sign structure shall be 25 feet. b.  Window signs. Permitted, but total signage shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of windows facing road frontage. c.  Wall signs. 1.  Maximum square footage for wall signs shall be two square feet for each linear foot of building frontage on the public right-of-way, or one square foot for each linear foot of street frontage on the public right-of-way, whichever is larger, provided that no sign face may exceed 100 square feet, except as provided in subsection 2., below. 2.  Where the structure upon which a wall sign is located is greater than 50 feet from the right-of-way of the nearest public street, the maximum square footage shall be as follows: Distance from wall sign to the right-of-way of the abutting street frontage: Maximum surface area, as determined in subsection 1. above, may be multiplied by a factor of: 50—100 feet 1.5 (but no larger than 150 square feet) 100—175 feet 2 (but no larger than 200 square feet) 175—250 feet 2.5 (but no larger than 250 square feet) 250 + feet 3 (but no larger than 300 square feet)  3.  Wall signs may be located on multiple walls provided each sign faces a street or parking lot and the total square footage of the signs does not exceed what is set forth above. d.  Signs on multi-tenant lots. 1.  On all multi-tenant lots having less than 25,000 square feet of gross leasable area, each individual establishment shall be permitted wall signage as though each individual establishment was an individual building with individual street frontage. Where such multi-tenant premises has a frontage of 200 lineal feet or more on either an arterial or collector street, an additional double-faced ground sign shall be permitted, not to exceed 32 square feet per sign face, and no greater than 25 feet in height. Such additional ground sign shall be no closer than 120 feet from the primary ground sign on the lot. 2.  On multi-tenant lots having 25,000 or more square feet of gross leasable area, one ground sign for the first 500 lineal feet of frontage adjacent to a street and one additional ground sign for each additional 500 lineal feet of street frontage shall be permitted, provided that such ground signs on the lot shall be no closer than 250 feet. Maximum surface area for each such ground sign shall be as follows: for multi-tenant lots having between 25,000 and 100,000 square feet of gross leasable area, the maximum area of sign faces shall be 175 feet; for multi-tenant lots having between 100,000 and 300,000 square feet of gross leasable area, the maximum area of ground sign faces shall be 200 square feet; for multi-tenant lots having greater than 300,000 square feet of gross leasable area, the maximum square footage for ground sign faces shall be 300 square feet. e.  Directional signs. Directional signs are limited to three feet in height and no larger than four square feet in area. Directional signs may be permitted within the rights-of-way with approval from the city commission. f.  One additional, non-illuminated ground sign per street frontage is permitted during periods of rent, sale, lease or construction. This sign shall not exceed 32 square feet or eight feet in height. Such signs shall be removed within ten days after the subject lot or building is rented, leased, sold, or construction is completed. g.  Projecting and hanging signs. For the purposes of this article, such hanging signs shall be regulated as wall signs, and shall be included in and count towards the amount of wall signage allowed under this article. h.  Menu and preview boards. One of each permitted where a building exists, not to exceed 32 square feet, and seven feet in height. Cannot be located in the required front yard. Speakers shall not be located closer than 200 feet from a residential zone without implementation of mitigation measures suggested by a professionally prepared noise study. j.  Additional signage allowed during business openings for a period of 30 days and during business closing for 60 days with one 30-day extension. k.  Mobile signs. As defined in this article, require a permit and an occupational tax certificate. These signs are only permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8, M-1 & M-2 zoning classifications. Mobile signs shall not exceed 64 square feet in size per sign face. l.  Historic signs. Historic signs within the city may be utilized if they do not comply with provisions of this article including height, size, illumination and motion. The erection, re-erection, or re-location of such non-conforming historic sign shall require a permit and shall count toward the number of signs permitted on a lot or per street frontage as the case may be. To qualify as a historic sign, the applicant must demonstrate in writing that the sign is historic through application of the National Register of Historic Places Criteria for Evaluation. Application for use of a non-conforming historic sign must be made to the Historic Preservation Commission. (4)  Billboards. Billboards are permitted only in the C-2, C-3, C-7, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. In those districts billboards may be constructed subject to the following conditions: a.  No billboard shall be constructed or permitted, except as a replacement for an existing billboard. No billboard which is also a multiple-message sign shall be constructed or permitted, except as a replacement for two and one-half times as much existing billboard sign face area as the multiple-message sign face area of the proposed billboard. The city shall maintain a list of all billboards in the city, including the location and total sign face of each sign. Any application for a billboard building permit shall identify the billboard or billboards that are being replaced by the new billboard. Replacement shall be performed within six months after it has been determined that an existing sign or signs will be replaced by a new sign. b.  Billboards shall be located at least 750 feet from any residential district, measured from the location of the base of the sign along the street frontage to the property line at the street of the nearest residentially zoned lot. c.  New billboards shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any existing billboard, measured from the base of the billboard along the street frontage to the base of the nearest existing billboard on the same side of the street. d.  The restriction of 50 percent of sign area generally applicable to multiple-message signs under this article shall not apply to billboards which are also multiple-message signs. e.  The owner of each billboard shall file on or before January 31 of 2009 and each succeeding year a statement from a registered engineer licensed by the State of Georgia, or some other person possessing qualifications acceptable to the planning and development services director, certifying that the billboard has been inspected, and that it remains structurally sound and capable of safely carrying the loads placed upon it. If, upon inspection, it is determined that the billboard is not structurally sound, the engineer shall list the structural deficiencies and the actions which must be taken to correct the structural deficiencies. Prior to March 1 of the same year, the sign owner shall be required to take such actions and file a statement with the city certifying that each required repair has been completed. f.  No billboards shall be permitted in any historic district of the city. (Ord. No. 15-111, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-2015) 
Sec. 4-75. - Regulations for signs. (1)  Location and setback. a.  The property owner must give permission for all sign structures erected on the owner's property. Sign structures are not permitted in the public right-of-way except as provided in this article. b.  No portion of a sign or sign structure erected on private property shall encroach on or overhang the public right-of-way or any other person's property except as otherwise permitted by these regulations. c.  Distances are measured from the closest portion of the sign (whether that is the base, sign face, or the sign structure) to the right-of-way, curb or pavement. (2)  Illumination. a.  Signs cannot be illuminated in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-MHS, R-MHP, C-R, C-5, C-6, C-8, FH and AG zoning districts. Signs may be illuminated in all other districts, subject to the following provisions. b.  Flashing or blinking illumination is not permitted. Except as expressly provided in this article, no sign may use images changing more frequently than once every 20 seconds. No external or internal illumination that causes confusion with or distraction from any traffic signal or safety device shall be permitted. c.  All externally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries, mounted in fixtures designed to direct the light and eliminate light trespass, such as light shining into residences or other neighboring structures. d.  All internally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries designed to reduce light glow. e.  All illuminated signs over ten feet in height shall be internally illuminated or illuminated by external lighting fixtures located above the sign area, firing downward, and not visible to passing motorists. Billboards may be illuminated by fixtures that fire upwards providing that they are aimed in such a way to direct the light and eliminate light trespass. f.  No sign shall give off light, which glares, blinds, or has any other adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. This shall be determined by measuring the footcandles (lumens per square foot) that fall on adjacent properties. No sign shall exceed one-half footcandles at any adjacent property line in a residential district and two footcandles at any public right-of-way. (3)  Multiple-message signs. a.  Except as expressly provided in this article for multiple-message billboards, such signs are not permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-MHS, R-MHP, C-R, C-5, C-6, C-8, FH and AG zoning districts, but are permitted in all other zoning districts. b.  No multiple-message sign may change its message or copy, or any pictures or images that are part of the message, more frequently than once every 20 seconds, provided that multiple-message billboards shall be allowed to change the copy or images that are part of the message not more frequently than once every ten seconds. c.  When the message of a multiple-message sign is changed mechanically, it shall be accomplished in three seconds or less. When the message of a multiple-message sign is changed in an electronic manner, through the use of light emitting diodes, back lighting or other light source, the transition shall occur instantaneously. Multiple messages signs shall not depict motion of any type through scrolling, flashing, etc. d.  Except as expressly provided in this article in regards to billboards, the portion of the sign face of a multiple-message sign which accommodates multiple-messages shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign face area and may not change its message or copy, or any pictures or images that are part of the message, more frequently than once every 20 seconds; the remaining portion shall be static. e.  When any multiple-message sign is located within 150 feet of any residential district, the display of multiple-messages shall discontinue between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., and the sign shall be static and not display more than one message during that period. f.  Multiple-message signs which are illuminated or which use electronic to display message shall be subject to the restrictions and limitation applicable to illumination in this article. g.  There shall be located no more than one multiple-message sign per lot, and such sign shall be permitted only on a ground sign or freestanding structure, and not on any wall sign or window sign. h.  The total number of multiple-message billboards within the city shall be limited to eight sign faces. After the adoption of this article, new multiple message billboards shall only be permitted when both of the following location requirements are met: 1.  The proposed multiple-message billboard is to be erected on an existing billboard sign structure as of the date of the adoption of this article or at the location of and as a replacement for such an existing billboard sign structures. A list of such existing billboard sign structures known to the city is attached [by reference] as exhibit A to the ordinance adopting this article, and identified as "Billboards existing in the City of Albany, Georgia, as of May, 2008;" and 2.  The proposed multiple-message billboard will be located facing one of the following designated public right-of-way, which are deemed by the city commission to be the only right-of-ways within the city where multiple-message billboards are appropriate: Cordele Road, Oakridge Drive, Old Dawson Road (between Dawson Road and Westover Boulevard only), Newton Road (south of Oakridge only), Oglethorpe Boulevard, Westover Boulevard, Dawson Road, Slappey Boulevard, Jefferson Street, Gillionville Road, Ledo Road, US-82, and US-19. i.  Multiple-message billboards constructed after the adoption of this article shall be located at least 5,000 feet from existing billboards using a multiple-message sign face, measured from the base of the billboard along the street frontage to the base of the nearest existing billboard using a multiple-message sign face on the same side of the street, and 3,000 feet from any existing billboard using a multiple-message sign face, measured along the shortest straight-line from sign structure to sign structure. j.  No multiple-message sign shall be permitted in any historic district of the city. k.  The total number of multiple-message signs permitted (as defined in this article) within the city shall be limited to 100. l.  The total number of multiple-message mobile signs (as defined within this article) shall be limited to five. m.  Prior to the issuance of an multiple-message sign permit, the applicant shall provide a written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed the levels specified within this article, and the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by password-protected software or other method as deemed appropriate by the Department Director. (4)  Flags. Flags are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following size limitations: a.  Only one flagpole is permitted per lot; b.  Such flagpole shall not exceed the height of the tallest structure on the lot by ten feet; and shall in no case be greater than 60 feet in height; c.  The longest side of the flag shall not be greater than ¼ (25%) the height of the flagpole to which the flag is mounted; d.  No flag shall exceed 150 square feet in area (a 10′ × 15′ flag at regulation size). e.  On officially designated city, state, or federal holidays, or as a sign of mourning if ordered by the president or governor, there shall be no maximum flag size or number or other limitations on display, with a three day prior to and three day after grace period for setup and removal of additional flags. f.  Flagpoles may be mounted on buildings and exceed the maximum heights if they are included and approved in the building plans. (5)  Banners and custom flags. Banners and custom flags are limited to 48 square feet; only one banner per property or road frontage; only one custom flag per 120 feet of road frontage up to a maximum of six per property; and only permitted in C-1, C-2, C-3, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8, M-1, and M-2 zoning classifications, and it must be mounted or attached to a building or attached to a pole, mast, arm or other structure. Banners and custom flags may only be exhibited six times each calendar year for a period of not more than 21 consecutive days during each period. Banners shall be attached to a rigid frame or displayed in such a manner that they do not sag or flutter. Banners and custom flags shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be maintained free of defects such as holes, tears, fading, cracks, breaks or missing portions. Upon written notice of any such defects the banner or custom flag must be repaired or removed. Violation of any of these requirements will result in a six month suspension of new banner or custom flag permits. Violation for one type will not limit application for the other.     Flags properly mounted to a pole, streamers and balloons may also be exhibited and are not subject to the six times per calendar year/21 consecutive days set forth above. Flags, streamers and balloons shall be maintained free of defects such as holes, tears, fading, cracks, breaks or missing portions. Upon written notice of any such defects the flags, streamers or balloons must be repaired or removed.     Permits are required for banners, flags, custom flags, streamers and balloons and written application shall be made to the planning and development services director ("director"). The director shall establish an application form and the permit fees. (6)  Vehicles with signs. For purposes of this article, motor vehicles which are used in connection with a business at the site and which have more than six square feet of painted or permanently affixed sign face may be parked onsite provided the vehicle is parked within the lateral lines of a parking space. Vehicles with signs are only permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-5, C-6, C-7, M-1 and M-2 zoning classifications. (7)  Sidewalk, sandwich or A-frame sign are an A-frame, sandwich type, sidewalk or curb sign within a commercial zoning district. Signs may be two-sided and shall be limited to six square feet per side. Maximum height shall be six feet above the sidewalk or ground and shall be located within ten feet of the entrance of the building. A-frame signs shall be located so as to not obscure safe vision of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. One A-frame sign may be allowed for each entrance to the building or business. Shall not obstruct vehicle safety or pedestrian traffic. (8)  Mansards and parapets. Signs on mansards and parapets are allowed, provided that the sign must not extend above the top of the mansard or parapet roof line. (Ord. No. 15-111, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-2015) 
Sec. 4-76. - Safety and construction standards. (1)  Official confusion. Signs which contain or are an imitation of an official traffic sign or signal, or can be confused with an official traffic sign, are prohibited. (2)  Fire safety. No sign or sign structure may be erected or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, ventilation, or door; nor shall any sign or sign structure be attached to a fire escape. (3)  Corner visibility. No sign or sign structure above a height of three feet shall be maintained within 25 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. (4)  Traffic visibility and safety. No sign or sign structure shall obstruct the traffic sight line, or the view of vehicles entering the roadway (i.e., the view of oncoming traffic by vehicles attempting to enter the road, or vice versa). No sign shall be erected on any traffic island. (5)  Location in general. (a)  All signs shall be located on and over private property only, except those specifically permitted by this article. (b)  No sign shall be attached to any utility pole or other structure in the public right-of-way. (c)  No sign requiring a permit shall be attached to an existing sign, fence, rock, tree or other form of vegetation. (d)  All signs shall be erected in such a manner as to not interfere with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. (e)  No sign shall be attached to or placed against a building in such a way as to prevent egress through any door or window required or designed for access to any building; nor shall any sign be attached to or obstruct a fire escape, or interfere with openings required for proper light or ventilation. (f)  All signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance from all overhead utilities in accordance with electrical code specifications. In no case shall any sign be installed within three feet horizontally or vertically from an overhead utility line or utility guide wire. (Ord. No. 15-111, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-2015) 
Sec. 4-77. - Prohibited signs.     The following types of signs are prohibited in every zoning district: (1)  Roof signs. See subsection 4-78(3)(d) for regulation of roof signs in existence prior to the adoption of this article. (2)  Rotating signs. (3)  Moving signs, or signs with moving parts. This includes, but is not limited to, animated signs involving motion or sound; signs with moving words; signs with waving elements, whether motorized or wind-powered; or similar moving signs. (4)  Signs on public rights-of-way other than publicly owned or maintained signs, signs pertaining to railroad crossings, or signs otherwise permitted by this article. (5)  Signs, including but not limited to banners, custom flags, streamers and balloons, erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, fence, rock, utility pole, out-of-store marketing device, or other structure except as set forth herein; (6)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing. (7)  Portable signs. (8)  Temporary signs not otherwise allowed by this article, examples of temporary signs allowed by this article include banners, streamers, balloons, A-frame signs and custom flags. (Ord. No. 15-111, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-2015) 
Sec. 4-78. - Existing signs. (1)  It is the intent of this article to bring into conformity permanent sign structures which existed at the adoption of this article or an amendment thereto, but which are non-conforming to the provisions of this article or the provisions of an amendment to this article. It is the intent of the mayor and city commission to protect the investment-backed expectations of property and sign structure owners, and to accomplish conformity while allowing property and sign structure owners a reasonable return on their investment. (2)  The provisions of this section shall have no application to any sign which is subject to a valid and current permit issued by the state department of transportation under O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. Nor shall this provision have any effect on any billboard which is existing legally at the time of the adoption of this article. A list of such billboards known to the city is identified as "Billboards existing in the City of Albany, Georgia, as of May, 2008" and attached [by reference] to the ordinance adopting this article as exhibit A, and in the future shall be maintained by the planning and development services director. In the event that any billboard sign is legally existing at the time of the adoption of this article, but not included on such list, the owner of such sign shall have a period of 90-days running from the adoption of this article to register such sign with the planning and development services director, who, upon confirming that such sign is a billboard lawfully existing as of the date of the adoption of this article, shall place such sign on the list. The planning and development services director shall place a notice in the legal organ of the city once each month during such 90-day period advising owners of billboard signs that they should register the sign with the planning and development services director within such 90-day period. For the purposes of this amortization section, any billboard which has not been registered shall be presumed to not be a lawfully-existing billboard existing as of the time of the adoption of this article unless the owner thereof can show that the billboard structure was existing in its current location, design, height and sign face size on the date of the adoption of this article. During such 90-day period, there shall be a moratorium on the issuance of any permits for the erection of billboard sign structures to allow for the registration of existing signs. After the running of the 90-day period and the automatic expiration of such moratorium, whenever a permit is issued for any billboard, such billboard will be added to the list, along with date upon which the permit was issued. (3)  Except as otherwise provided and subject to the restrictions of this sub-paragraph, a nonconforming sign may be used, but not expanded nor improved unless the sign is made conforming. Nonconforming signs are subject to the maintenance requirements of this chapter and may be subject to removal for violations of maintenance standards. No structural repairs or change in shape or size of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with all standards of this chapter, provided that a nonconforming sign damaged up to 50 percent of its value by act of God or by other circumstances beyond the control of the owner of the sign may be repaired without regard to the restrictions of this paragraph. (a)  Maintenance. A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. All nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good repair. (b)  Repairs; material change. Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted. Provided, however, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the standards of this article; this includes the replacement of channel letters on raceway wall signs, and poles and/or frames for ground signs. To the extent that any sign allowable hereunder is damaged up to 50 percent of its value by act of God or by other circumstances beyond control of owner of the sign then such sign may be repaired without regard to the restrictions of this section. (c)  Location. A nonconforming sign shall not be in a location that restricts the visibility of traffic traveling on the road or entering and exiting to and from the roadway. (d)  The owner of each non-conforming roof sign shall file on or before January 31 an annual statement from a registered engineer licensed by the State of Georgia, or some other person possessing qualifications acceptable to the planning and development services director, certifying that the sign has been inspected, and that it remains structurally sound and capable of safely carrying the loads placed upon it. If, upon inspection, it is determined that the roof sign is not structurally sound, the engineer shall list the structural deficiencies and the actions which must be taken to correct the structural deficiencies. Prior to March 1 of the same year, the sign owner shall be required to take such actions and file a statement with the city certifying that each required repair has been completed. (Ord. No. 15-111, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-2015) 
Sec. 4-79. - Sign and sign structure maintenance. (1)  The sign and sign structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, with proper anchorage capable of supporting the imposed loads, so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. (2)  All exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. Sign faces shall be maintained in good repair, and shall have neatly painted, posted or otherwise maintained display surfaces, free of defects such as holes, tears, cracks, breaks or missing portions, which are plainly visible from the public right-of-way. (3)  When a sign or sign structure is found to be in need of maintenance, the code enforcement officer shall issue a notice of violation to the property owner, which shall describe the maintenance issue, and provide a reasonable amount of time to repair the violation. (4)  If, after receiving the notice of violation, the property owner fails to remedy the maintenance issue within the time provided, it shall be a violation of this article, subject to citation. The code enforcement director or designee may also institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal of the sign or sign structure. The reasonable cost of any action taken by the city or its agents to remedy the maintenance issue shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall constitute a lien upon such real estate. (5)  The issuance of a notice of violation may be appealed to the planning and development services director ("director") by written appeal received at the director's office within ten calendar days of the notice. The appeal shall set forth in detail why the appealing party feels its sign or sign structure is in good repair, etc. as required by sections 4-71 and 4-72.     The director shall consider the appeal by holding a hearing, open to the public, within 30 days of receipt of the appeal. The appealing party and code enforcement may present testimony and documentary evidence at the hearing.     The director has the authority to review what is presented by the appealing party and code enforcement and decide whether to affirm, reverse, or modify the notice of violation. This includes the authority to extend the length of time in which the maintenance issue must be completed. (Ord. No. 15-111, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-2015) 
Sec. 4-80. - Appeals.     Appeals of the decisions of the planning and development services director under this article shall be to the planning commission. The aggrieved party shall file such appeal in writing within 30 days of the date of the appealed decision. The planning commission shall consider the appeal at a public meeting conducted within 35 days of the filing of the appeal. The aggrieved party or its agent and the planning and development services director shall be allowed to present testimony and evidence as to whether the decision should be affirmed, reversed or modified. Such testimony and evidence shall constitute the record. The planning commission shall consider this record in light of the requirements and intent of this article, and shall vote to affirm, reverse or modify the decision at such public meeting. In the event that the planning commission fails to render a decision on the appeal within 35 days of the filing of the notice of appeal, the decision of the planning and development services director shall stand affirmed. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal to the county superior court, within 30 days of the planning commission's decision. (Ord. No. 15-111, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-2015) 
Sec. 4-81. - Legal provisions. (1)  Any person or entity violating or refusing to comply with any provision of this article shall be subject to citation to the municipal court, and upon conviction, may be sentenced to imprisonment for up to 60 days, to pay a fine of up to $1,000.00, or both. Each day a violation exists shall be considered a separation violation for purposes of citation and sentencing. The city may also seek civil remedies including injunctive, declaratory or equitable relief for violations of this article. The city may summarily remove signs in the rights-of-way. (2)  Should any section or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (3)  This article replaces the city's prior sign ordinance existing and in effect immediately prior to the adoption of this article. In the event all of this article is struck down as void, unconstitutional or invalid, including therefore this provision, that prior ordinance shall be considered to not have been repealed, and shall therefore still be in effect. (4)  This article shall take effect and be in force as of the date of its adoption, the public welfare of the city demanding. (Ord. No. 15-111, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-2015) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— The Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine.     Brown bagging. (1)  The term "brown bagging" means the bringing, taking or carrying of any distilled spirits into any business licensed to operate within the city, with the exception of: a.  A bona fide private club as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1 et seq.; b.  An offices for business uses such as insurance sales, accounting, medical, dental and legal; and c.  A banquet type facility located within a motel, hotel or food service establishment as the latter is defined at O.C.G.A. § 26-2-370. (2)  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, brown bagging includes, but is not limited to: a.  Any person who brown bags; b.  Any person who participates in the consumption of an alcoholic beverage being brown bagged; c.  Any person who consumes an alcoholic beverage on any premises holding a business license, except for those premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or otherwise exempted from the definition of brown bagging by virtue of the private residential character of the occupancy; d.  Any employee of the business establishment in whose presence brown bagging knowingly or within reckless indifference occurs.     Church means a permanent stand alone building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and shall be publicly designated as a church, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes.     Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines.     Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy.     Growler means glass or plastic bottle or jug, not less than 12 ounces or more than 64 ounces, used to hold specialty malt beverages such as beer and hard cider, which are dispensed from a tap and sealed airtight before being sold to the customer for off-premises consumption.     Growler retailer means an establishment that holds a current brewer's license or an establishment that holds a current retail license from the City of Albany for the sale of malt beverages which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food.     Legal age means the age established by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended from time to time, as the age below which alcoholic beverages may not lawfully be sold to, furnished to, purchased by or possessed by a person.     Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.     Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container.     Premises means the space or area owned, leased, or controlled by the licensee and used by the licensee for the purpose of operating under the license; except that in the case of hotels and motels, the term "premises" includes only that portion of the property where alcoholic beverages are sold, delivered or served.     Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. (Code 1975, § 4-3; Code 1985, § 4-1; Ord. No. 81-161, § I(a), 6-9-1981; Ord. No. 85-223, § 1, 10-8-1985; Ord. No. 04-102, § 1, 1-27-2004; Ord. No. 04-111, § 1, 3-23-2003; Ord. No. 07-135, § 1, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 18-113, § 1, 9-11-2018) 
Sec. 6-2. - Activities declared privilege.     The business of manufacturing, distributing, selling, handling and otherwise dealing in or possessing alcoholic beverages are declared to be privileges in this city and not rights. (Code 1975, § 4-2; Code 1985, § 4-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Proximity regulations. (a)  Churches. No wines or distilled spirits shall be offered for sale, sold or dispensed in any form within 100 yards of any church, such distance under this subsection shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground from the nearest principal entrance of any church building to the nearest principal entrance of the premises on which such wines or distilled spirits are sold or dispensed. For purposes of measuring "direct route of travel" measure along a paved or otherwise improved surface appropriate for public vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic as follows: (1)  From the main public entrance of the structure from which the alcoholic beverage is sold or offered for sale go in a straight line to the nearest public route of travel; (2)  Thence go in a straight line along said public route of travel by the nearest route; (3)  Thence go to the nearest principal entrance of the church building; (4)  No minor or principal arterial street, as identified by the Functional Classification Map in the 2030 DARTS (Dougherty Area Regional Transportation Study), a copy of which is on file in the office of planning and development services, shall be crossed except at the nearest city-, county- or state-approved pedestrian cross-walk or at the nearest intersection. (b)  Schools and colleges. No distilled spirits shall be offered for sale or sold in any form within 200 yards of any school or college, and no malt beverages or wines shall be offered for sale or sold in any form within 100 yards of a school or college, such distance under this subsection shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground from the nearest point on the property line of such school or college to the nearest principal entrance of the premises on which such wines or distilled spirits or malt beverages are offered for sale or sold. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such immediately preceding such application. For purposes of measuring "direct route of travel" measure along a paved or otherwise improved surface appropriate for public vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic as follows: (1)  From the main public entrance of the structure from which the alcoholic beverage is sold or offered for sale go in a straight line to the nearest public route of travel; (2)  Thence go in a straight line along said public route of travel by the nearest route; (3)  Thence go to the nearest point on the property line of the school or college campus; (4)  No minor or principal arterial street, as identified by the Functional Classification Map in the 2030 DARTS (Dougherty Area Regional Transportation Study), a copy of which is on file in the office of planning and development services, shall be crossed except at the nearest city-, county- or state-approved pedestrian cross-walk or at the nearest intersection. (c)  [Locations licensed in the future.] As to any location licensed in the future, if the proximity requirements set forth above are met at the time of application for license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibitions set forth above shall not operate to prevent the (i) continuance of an existing license or (ii) the renewal thereof or (iii) the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent tenant of the owner or subsequent owner of such property. (d)  Adult entertainment premises. (1)  No adult entertainment premises shall be licensed to sell alcoholic beverages if it shall be located within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any residential, apartment or townhouse zoning district or within 1,000 feet of: a.  Any public park which exceeds three acres in size; b.  The property line of any church, shrine or other place used exclusively for religious services, except the chapel of a mortuary or cemetery; c.  Any school ground or college campus; d.  A branch of any public library; or e.  A regular stop as designated by the county board of education where a school bus for the transportation of school children in the public schools of the county shall board or discharge school children. (2)  As used herein, the term "adult entertainment premises" shall be defined as premises which sell alcoholic beverages and are used for commercial entertainment wherein live performers display any portion of the areola of the female breast or any portion of pubic hair, cleft to the buttocks, anus, vulva or genitals. (3)  Distance under this subsection shall be measured by the same direct route of travel described in this subsection: a.  From the main public entrance of the structure from which the alcoholic beverage is sold or offered for sale go in a straight line to the nearest public route of travel. b.  Thence go in a straight line along said public route of travel by the nearest route. c.  Thence to the nearest point on the property line of the church, school, college campus, residence, public park, public library or school bus stop. d.  No minor or principal arterial street, as identified by the Functional Classification Map in the 2030 DARTS (Dougherty Area Regional Transportation Study), a copy of which is on file in the office of planning and development services, shall be crossed except at the nearest city-, county- or state-approved pedestrian cross-walk or at the nearest intersection. (Code 1975, § 4-4; Code 1985, § 4-3; Ord. No. 84-108, § 1, 2-14-1984; Ord. No. 91-188, § 1, 12-31-1991; Ord. No. 07-133, § 2, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 15-116, §§ 1, 2, 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 6-4. - Sales to intoxicated persons prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, exchange, give, provide or furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication. (Code 1985, § 4-4; Ord. No. 81-152, § 1(4-5.1), 5-12-1981) State Law reference— Furnishing alcoholic beverages to intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22. 
Sec. 6-5. - Hours, days of sales—Generally. (a)  Sales by the package. All persons licensed to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package for off-premises consumption only, and the employees of such licensees, shall cease all sales no later than 2:30 a.m. Tuesday through Sunday and shall not resume such sales any earlier than 8:00 a.m. the following Monday. Sales of alcoholic beverages by the package shall be prohibited Tuesday through Friday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. the same morning for those stores licensed to sell beer and wine and not subject to an earlier closing time by state law. (b)  Sales by the drink. All persons licensed to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises, and the employees of such licensees, shall cease all such sales no later than 2:55 a.m. Tuesday through Sunday and shall not resume such sales any earlier than 8:00 a.m. the following Monday. Sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be prohibited Monday through Friday between the hours of 2:55 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. All premises licensed to engage in such sales by the drink may remain open until 4:00 a.m. Tuesday through Sunday, at which time such premises shall be closed and be cleared of all persons, provided up to four employees of the licensed location may remain on said premises until 5:00 a.m. (c)  Sunday sales. All establishments licensed to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises which derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retailed outlets of the individual establishment where food is served or derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross income from the rental of rooms from overnight lodging, may sell alcohol beverages for consumption on the premises on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight, provided in any year where December 31 falls on a Sunday, such sales may take place between the hours of 12:01 a.m. Monday January 1 until 2:55 a.m. Monday, January 1. (d)  Game rooms. Game rooms as defined in section 8-19 who are licensed to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises and derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross receipts from sales other than alcoholic beverage sales may be open from 12:00 p.m. Sunday until 10:00 p.m. Sunday provided sales of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited. (e)  Civic Center. Alcoholic beverages may be sold at the James H. Gray Civic Center on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and midnight. (Code 1975, § 4-11; Code 1985, § 4-5; Ord. No. 89-104, §§ 1, 2, 2-14-1989; Ord. No. 02-139, § 1, 11-26-2002; Ord. No. 03-118, § 1, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 04-139, § 1, 12-14-2004; Ord. No. 05-100, § 1, 1-25-2005; Ord. No. 05-113, § 1, 6-29-2005; Ord. No. 06-134, § 2, 12-19-2006; Ord. No. 10-117, § 1, 3-23-2010; Ord. No. 09-138, § 2, 10-27-2009) Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-138, § 1, adopted Oct. 27, 2008, states that there is added to the last sentence of section [6-5(b)] the following language: "Provided up to four employees of the licensed location may remain [on] the licensed premises until 5:00 a.m." 
Sec. 6-6. - Same—On election days, holidays. (a)  Election days. Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to this governing authority by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b)(2)(A), the sale by wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages, to-wit, distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages, shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are opened. (b)  Holidays. All persons licensed to engage in the sale of distilled spirits and other alcoholic beverages by the package for off-premises consumption only, and the employees of such licensees, shall cease all such sales no later than 11:55 p.m. the night before Thanksgiving Day and the night before Christmas Day, and shall close the premises and be clear of all persons at such time. Such premises shall remain closed and no such sales may resume earlier than 8:00 a.m. on the morning following Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. The sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink and the sale of malt beverages, fortified wine and wine on Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day shall be lawful and shall be governed by the provisions of section 6-5. (Code 1975, § 4-11; Code 1985, § 4-6; Ord. No. 81-218, § 1, 11-10-1981; Ord. No. 82-177, § 1, 9-14-1982; Ord. No. 85-239, § 1, 11-12-1985) 
Sec. 6-7. - Same—By restaurants, bowling alleys. (a)  Restaurants. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article to the contrary, bona fide full-service restaurants may remain open on any and all of the days and during any and all of the hours prescribed in sections 6-5 and 6-6 for the purpose of serving meals, but no sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made during any of such proscribed hours or any of such proscribed days. For purposes of this subsection, the term "bona fide full-service restaurant" means an established place of business: (1)  Which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, malt beverages or wines for consumption on the premises; (2)  Where meals with substantial entrees selected by the patron from a menu are served; (3)  Which has adequate facilities and sufficient employees for cooking or preparing and serving such meals for consumption at tables in dining rooms on the premises; (4)  Which derives at least 50 percent of its gross income from the sale of such meals prepared, served and consumed on the premises. (b)  Bowling alleys. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article to the contrary, bowling alley premises being served by waitresses from a licensed premise pursuant to the provisions of section 6-95, shall not be required to close during the hours and days proscribed in sections 6-5 and 6-6, but such sections shall apply to the licensed premise from which such service is rendered. No waitress service shall be afforded, or alcoholic beverages sold or delivered, in the bowling alley premises during any of such proscribed hours or proscribed days; provided that a bowling alley which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues either from the rental of bowling lanes and bowling equipment or from the combination of the rental of bowling lanes and bowling equipment and the sale of prepared meals and other food products, may sell alcoholic beverages on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until midnight. (Code 1985, § 4-7; Ord. No. 81-137, § 7, 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 7, 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 81-224, § 1, 11-24-1981; Ord. No. 09-119, §§ 1, 2, 5-26-2009) 
Sec. 6-8. - Same—Private clubs. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Bona fide private club means any nonprofit association organized under section 501 of the U.S. IRS Code and the laws of this state which: (1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for an alcoholic beverage license to be issued pursuant to this chapter. (2)  Has at least 75 regular dues paying members. (3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members. (4)  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment. (5)  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests. (6)  Has no member officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. (7)  Has the occupational license required of private clubs.     Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for him or her by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purposes of this definition, tips, or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. (b)  Hours open but not serving. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 6-5 and 6-6, a bona fide private club as defined in this section may remain open on Sunday, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day for use by its members and guests; provided, however, that no alcoholic beverages shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises during the hours and days proscribed by sections 6-5 and 6-6. (Code 1985, § 4-8; Ord. No. 81-225, § 1(4-11.1), 11-24-1981) State Law reference— Sale of distilled spirits by private clubs generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-9. - Misrepresentation of beverages.     It shall be unlawful for licensees under this chapter to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. (Code 1975, § 4-32; Code 1985, § 4-9) 
Sec. 6-10. - Telephone required.     Holders of licenses under the provisions of this chapter are required to have a telephone on all premises where alcoholic beverages are sold or served. Failure to have a telephone in compliance with the requirements of this section shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of all alcoholic beverages licenses under which the premises are being operated. (Code 1975, § 4-13; Code 1985, § 4-10) 
Sec. 6-11. - Regulation for the giving away or selling of alcoholic beverages at reduced prices.     Alcoholic beverage licensees are prohibited from selling or giving away alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises under the following circumstances: (1)  Serving multiple drinks for a single price or offering all you can drink for a set price during a set time. (2)  Making a single price the basis for a required purchase of two or more servings. (3)  Selling or furnishing alcoholic beverages prior to 4:00 p.m. or after 8:00 p.m. at a price less than the normal retail price of the establishment for that drink. For purposes of this subsection, the term "normal retail price" shall be the highest price charged for that drink at any time during the preceding seven days. Between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. beverages may not be sold for less than one-half normal retail price as herein defined. (4)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the dispensing of drinks in pitchers or in jumbo sizes provided that such pitchers or jumbo sizes shall be available at all times that the licensee is open for business and the usual, customary or established retail price shall not be reduced; for the purposes of this subsection, a jumbo drink is defined as any drink containing more than 1¼ ounces of alcohol. (5)  No licensee shall give away or sell coupons, receipts, or other devices authorizing the serving of alcoholic beverage drinks on a subsequent day. (6)  Licensees may give discounts to employees, who for purposes of this section are defined as employees who work not less than five days a week or 20 hours per week. (Code 1985, § 4-11; Ord. No. 85-140, § 1, 3-28-1985; Ord. No. 88-110, § 1, 2-9-1988) 
Sec. 6-12. - Security camera systems. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Audio-video interleave (AVI) means a multimedia format that can contain both audio and video data that allows for synchronous playback.     Bayonet Neill-Concelman (BNC) means a type of RF (radio frequency) connector used for terminating coaxial cable.     Bitmap (BMP) means an image file format used to store digital images.     Coder-decoder, compressor-decompressor, compression-decompression algorithm, or Codec means a device or program capable of performing encoding and decoding on a digital data stream or signal.     Compact disc (CD) means an optical disc storage media used for storing digital data.     Digital versatile disc (DVD) is an optical disc storage media format primarily used for video and data storage.     Digital video (DV) means a compressed video format with a 5:1 compression ratio.     Field means a series of lines consisting of odd- and even-numbered lines which are interlaced to display a single frame.     FireWire (IEEE 1394 interface) means is a serial bus interface standard for high-speed communications and data transfer.     Frame means a single image of video, usually consisting of two interlaced fields in analog video.     Joint photographic experts group (JPEG) means a commonly used method of compression for photographic images.     Motion picture experts group MPEG means a set of standardized compression formats for video and audio primarily consisting of MPEG-1, MPEG-2, MPEG-3, and MPEG-4.     Multi-image display means an image consisting of split screens that allow for the viewing of multiple cameras on a screen simultaneously.     Multiplexer means a device that alternates between multiple cameras and adds an encoded signal that allows a picture from each camera to be viewed in succession (as with switchers) or simultaneously.     Radio Corporation of America connector or RCA connector means a type of electrical connector that is commonly used in the audio/video market.     Separate video connector or S-video connector means an analog video connector that carries the video data as two separate signals (brightness and color). The four-pin Mini-DIN (Deutsches Institut für Normung) connector is the most common type connector and, for purposes of this section, is the required standard.     Switcher means a device that alternates between multiple cameras so that the output at any one time is from a single camera. The output of the switcher usually serves as the input to the recording device.     Tagged information file format (TIFF) means a container format for storing images, including photographs and line art.     Universal serial bus (USB) means a serial bus standard to connect devices to a host computer.     Video cassette recorder (VCR) means a device used to record and play back analog video to and from a removable tape medium (usually VHS).     Video home system (VHS) means a recording and playing standard developed by Victor Company of Japan, Limited (JVC). (b)  Required. Any establishment licensed by the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package for off-premises consumption is required to install security camera systems of a type and number enumerated in this section. (c)  Capability requirements. Camera systems meeting the requirements of this section must be capable of producing retrievable images on video cassette tape, or downloading to a compact disc, digital versatile disc, or other digital memory device that can be made a permanent record. Camera systems meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the chief of police or the chief of police's designee or the code enforcement director or the code enforcement director's designee. (1)  All camera systems shall consist of, at a minimum, the following: a.  Video cameras with a minimum resolution of 640 x 480 lines will be located at each exit door of the establishment with additional cameras located at each point of customer transaction (e.g., cash registers, teller machines, drive-throughs, etc.), and pointed at the customer. All video cameras must have a signal-to-noise ratio of at least 48dB. b.  A recorder with retrieval capability. 1.  The recorder must record at a minimum resolution of 640 x 480 lines per frame. 2.  The recorder shall record at no less than five frames per second per camera. c.  A monitor for playback review connected to the output of the recording device. d.  If a switcher or multiplexer is used (either internal or external), video images shall not be recorded in multi-image display mode. e.  All components must be compatible to produce sharp, detailed, video images. The line loss between the camera and the switcher, multiplexer or recorder shall not cause the signal to fall below 45dB. (2)  Analog video cassette recorders must be capable of the following: a.  The recorder must record onto a cassette tape. b.  The recorder must have a BNC, RCA, or S-video type output connector (monitor output). (3)  Any digital video recorder must be capable of the following: a.  The recorder must have a BNC, RCA, S-video (monitor output), FireWire or USB type output connector. b.  The recorder must be able to produce retrievable video on a CD, DVD or other removable memory storage device in its native file format with the proprietary player. c.  The recorder must also be able to produce retrievable video in an open file format such as AVI, DV, or MPEG format on a CD, DVD or other removable memory storage device. Any codec file that is required to play the open file format must be included on the CD, DVD or memory device. d.  If alarm activation is incorporated into the recorder, the recorder shall record at the highest number of frames per second, the highest resolution, and the least compression available when the alarm is activated. The recorder should have a buffer capable of retaining five minutes of video prior to alarm activation. (d)  Responsibilities of owner. The business owner or the business owner's designee will be responsible for the maintenance and periodic checks of camera systems. In the event of an actual crime, the business will be responsible for producing a recording of the incident within 24 hours. The tape, CD, or DVD will become the property of the city police department to be used as evidence. (e)  Violation and penalties. Violation of any provisions of this section shall constitute an offense hereunder and be punished as follows: (1)  First offense. A fine of $200.00, and the judge of the municipal court may impose a suspension of all alcoholic beverage licenses from the city for a period not to exceed 30 days. (2)  Second offense. An offense will be considered a second offense if it occurs within 365 calendar days from the date of the occurrence of the first offense. A second offense will incur a fine of $350.00, and all alcoholic beverage licenses at the establishment issued by the city will be suspended for a minimum period of 60 days. 
Sec. 6-13. - Open containers. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meaning, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Open container means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from, or the seal of which has been broken.     Semi-public parking facility means any privately owned area wherein motor vehicles may be parked by the public in conjunction with any business, enterprise, commercial establishment, office building, church, school, or multifamily residential building. (b)  Policy. The following shall be the policies for open containers: (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in such person's possession any alcoholic beverages in an open container while on the public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way, or in any public or semi-public parking facility within the City of Albany, Georgia. (2)  It is unlawful and punishable, as provided in this section, for any person to possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage while operating a vehicle on the public streets, rights-of-way or other public property in the city or while a passenger in or on a vehicle being operated on the public streets, rights-of-way or other public property in the city. (c)  Exceptions. The prohibition announced in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to: (1)  Any events to which permission for outdoor consumption of an alcoholic beverage license has been granted by the board of city commissioners. (2)  Any property owned by the board of regents of the state. (3)  Patrons of a sidewalk cafe as defined in the applicable zoning ordinance, if such establishment is otherwise licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. (d)  Notice requirements. All licensed alcoholic beverage establishments are hereby requested to post, in a conspicuous location inside such establishment, a notice informing patrons that open containers are prohibited on the public streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, or in any public or semi-public parking facility within the City of Albany, Georgia. (e)  Violation. Violation of the provisions of this section by any person shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1985, § 4-13; Ord. No. 90-174, § 1, 12-27-1990; Ord. No. 95-160, §§ 1—5, 12-12-1995) 
Sec. 6-14. - Types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited upon premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.     The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on such premises within the City of Albany, Georgia: (1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. (2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) of this section, or where such persons perform acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. b.  The caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. (3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section; provided, however; that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theater which derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. (Code 1985, § 4-14; Ord. No. 93-146, § 1, 7-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-15. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited in certain areas.     Alcoholic beverages, beer, and controlled substances are prohibited in or upon any park or other public property, building, or facility owned or operated by the city displaying such signs announcing the prohibition against alcoholic beverages, beer, and controlled substances. (Code 1985, § 4-15; Ord. No. 93-150, § 1, 7-27-1993) 
Secs. 6-16—6-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE 
Sec. 6-37. - Consumption, possession by persons not of legal age.     Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 1-17 for any person who has not attained legal age to purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage except for medical purposes pursuant to the prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state, or in connection with a religious ceremony, or in the home with parental consent. (Code 1975, § 4-6; Code 1985, § 4-21; Ord. No. 81-137, § 2, 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 2, 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 85-223, § 2, 10-8-1985) 
Sec. 6-38. - Misrepresentation of age prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner whatsoever to falsely misrepresent that such person has attained legal age for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverages. (Code 1975, § 4-9; Code 1985, § 4-22; Ord. No. 81-137, § 5, 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 5, 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 85-223, § 2, 10-8-1985) 
Sec. 6-39. - Furnishing to persons not of legal age.     It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 1-18 for any person holding an alcoholic beverage license, or any other person, or such person's agent or employee, to sell, or give away, or permit the sale or gift of, any alcoholic beverage to any person who has not attained legal age, except for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state, or in connection with a religious ceremony, or in the home with parental consent. No person shall be convicted under this section if such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person who is being furnished alcoholic beverages has attained legal age. For purposes of this section, the term "proper identification" means any document is issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such as the person's photograph or other written description, and giving the person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, or driver's license. (Code 1975, § 4-5; Code 1985, § 4-24; Ord. No. 81-137, § 1, 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 1(4-5), 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 85-223, § 2, 10-8-1985) 
Sec. 6-40. - Acquiring for persons not of legal age.     It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally act as agent or otherwise to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverages for or on behalf of any person who has not attained legal age, or otherwise procure for or furnish to any person who has not attained legal age, any alcoholic beverage, except for medical purposes upon the prescription of a physician duly licensed under the laws of the state, or in connection with a religious ceremony, or in the home with parental consent. (Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1985, § 4-25; Ord. No. 81-137, § 3, 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 3, 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 85-223, § 2, 10-8-1985) 
Sec. 6-41. - Persons not of legal age on licensed premises. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who holds an alcoholic beverage license, or such person's agent or employee, to allow any person who has not attained legal age to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises unless such person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, or unless such person is an employee of the license holder; provided, however, that such person shall be permitted in restaurants or other places serving food without being accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a bowling alley premises being served by waitresses from a licensed premises pursuant to the provisions of section 6-95, but shall apply to the licensed premises from which such service is rendered. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who holds an alcoholic beverage license in conjunction with a license for game rooms, pool halls, or billiards to allow any person inside such establishment under the age of 18 unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. (Code 1975, § 4-8; Code 1985, § 4-26; Ord. No. 81-137, § 4, 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 4, 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 85-223, § 2, 10-8-1985; Ord. No. 86-240, § 2, 10-28-1986) 
Sec. 6-42. - Employment of persons at least 18 years of age.     Only persons at least 18 years of age may be employed where spirituous liquors, wines or malt beverages are consumed on premises. Such employees may dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages as part of their employment. (Ord. No. 09-139, §§ 1, 2, 11-24-2009) Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-139, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 24, 2009, repealed the former § 6-42, and enacted a new § 6-42 as set out herein. The former § 6-42 pertained to employment of persons not of legal age and derived from Code 1975, §§ 4-10, 4-10.1; Code 1985, § 4-27; Ord. No. 81-117, § 1, 2-24-1981; Ord. No. 81-137, § 6, 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 6, 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 85-223, § 2, 10-8-1985. 
Secs. 6-43—6-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES 
Sec. 6-73. - Required. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distribute, or to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail in the city any alcoholic beverage without having the required alcohol beverage license. (b)  All existing holders of alcoholic beverage licenses for consumption on premises or the retail sale of alcoholic beverages at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article amendment is derived shall be required to pay for and complete city certified license holder training within three months immediately following the passage of this article amendment. (c)  All new applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses for consumption on premises or the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be required to pay for and complete city certified license holder training before such alcoholic beverage license shall be issued. (d)  The license holder certification shall be valid for three years for the license holder. Any change in the ownership or license holder will require the license holder to again pay for and complete certified license holder training. (e)  All holders of alcohol beverage licenses for consumption on premises and for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages establishments shall be responsible for training all employees engaged by the holder in the sale of alcohol beverages. If the license holder allows any employee to sell or serve alcoholic beverages in violation of section 6-137, such license holder shall be subject to an administrative penalty of $1,000.00. (Code 1975, § 4-21; Code 1985, § 4-41; Ord. No. 03-132, § 1, 9-23-2003) 
Sec. 6-74. - Qualifications.     No alcoholic beverage license required by the provisions of this article shall be issued to: (1)  Any person, unless the person or such person's manager or the person actually in charge of the operation of the business is a resident of this county; (2)  A person found by the board of city commissioners to have been guilty of the violation of any felony under federal or state law; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the renewal of licenses existing on April 23, 1971, or to subsequent renewals thereof, except as to violations occurring after the passage of such date; (3)  A partnership, if any member of the partnership is disqualified under this section; (4)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof would not be eligible to receive a license under this section for reason other than nonresidence in this county; (5)  A person whose business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless the manager or agent possess the same qualifications required of the license holder; (6)  A person who has been convicted of the violation of any federal or state law or regulation respecting the manufacture, possession or sale of any alcoholic beverage or who shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation; (7)  A person who is the previous holder of an alcoholic beverage license and is, in the judgment and discretion of the board of city commissioners, an unfit person to have a license because of the manner in which such person conducted business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law or regulation relating to such business; (8)  Where any alcohol license has been revoked or suspended, no further alcohol license shall be issued to the holder of such revoked or suspended license for a period of 12 months from the date of the revocation or suspension; (9)  For a location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the board of city commissioners because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties, or on the neighborhood; (10)  For a location at which the operation of the proposed business would be in violation of the zoning ordinance of the city; (11)  For a location at which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been revoked or suspended, no further alcohol license shall be issued at such location for a period of 12 months from the date of the suspension or revocation; (12)  Where the granting of such license would constitute a violation of state law or regulations. (Code 1975, §§ 4-29, 4-30; Code 1985, § 4-42; Ord. No. 98-153, § 1, 12-8-1998; Ord. No. 06-114, §§ 1, 2, 5-23-2006) 
Sec. 6-75. - Limitations for on-premises consumption licenses.     Notwithstanding anything else in this Code or elsewhere to the contrary, the issuance of on-premises consumption licenses in the city shall be subject to the following limitations, and no on-premises consumption licenses shall be issued except in conformity with said limitations: (1)  The total number of alcoholic beverage on-premises consumption licenses outstanding and in operation at any time in the various wards of the city shall not exceed in any ward a number equal to one such license for each 800 persons residing in said ward as of and according to the latest decennial census of the United States. The calculation shall be as follows: the number of persons residing in the ward as of and according to the latest decennial census of the United States shall be the numerator; 800 shall be the denominator; the result rounded down to the whole number. However, "the total number of alcoholic beverage on-premises consumption licenses outstanding and in operation" shall not include bona fide full service restaurants as determined by Code Enforcement Department utilizing the following standards. The term "bona fide full-service restaurant" means an established place of business: (a)  Which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, malt beverages or wines for consumption on the premises; and (b)  Where meals with substantial entrees selected by the patron from a menu are served; and (c)  Which has adequate facilities and sufficient employees for cooking or preparing and serving such meals for consumption at tables in dining rooms on the premises; and (d)  Which derives at least 50 percent of its gross income from the sale of such meals prepared, served and consumed on the premises, as well as establishments licensed to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises by the drink which are located within the Riverfront Overlay District, as the Riverfront Overlay District now exists or later amended. (1.1)  No such license shall be issued in any ward in excess of such number, nor shall any license be transferred to such ward from another ward where such transfer will have the effect of increasing the outstanding number of licenses in said ward above such limit. (2)  No new alcoholic beverage on-premises consumption license, as distinguished from a renewal of an existing license, shall be issued or transferred in the city except to or for a location which is on an arterial street or a collector street as those terms are defined in the subdivision regulations. (3)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the renewal and continued operation of an existing license at an existing location. Nothing herein shall prohibit the transfer of an existing on-premises consumption license to a new owner; or to a new location within the same ward, provided that the new location must be on an arterial or collector street as those terms are defined in the subdivision regulations. (4)  No new alcoholic beverage on-premises consumption license, as distinguished from a renewal of an existing license, shall be issued for any location within 1,000 feet of an existing establishment holding an alcoholic beverage license for on-premises consumption this distance to be measured from the front entrance of the existing licensed establishment to the front entrance of the proposed location; provided this prohibition shall not apply if the existing establishment holding an alcoholic beverage license for on-premises consumption is a restaurant, hotel, motel or private club as defined in sections 6-7 and 6-8. The method of measurement shall be the direct route of travel on the ground as set forth in section 6-3(a). (5)  Existing establishments holding alcoholic beverage on-premises consumption licenses which do not meet the distance requirements specified in subsection (4) of this section, but which were operating under valid licenses prior to the enactment of this section, are eligible for reissuance of an identical license. If any such establishment is without a valid alcoholic beverage on-premises consumption license for a period of 12 months or longer, or if such establishment makes application for a change in the type of alcoholic beverage license, such establishment must conform to the provisions of this section. (Code 1985, § 4-43; Ord. No. 91-155, § 1, 8-13-1991; Ord. No. 00-121, § 1, 6-13-2000; Ord. No. 03-107, § 1, 4-22-2003; Ord. No. 06-114, § 3, 5-23-2006; Ord. No. 08-135, § 1, 8-26-2008; Ord. No. 13-134, § 1, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 6-76. - Interest in conflicting licenses prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to hold a distilled spirits retail dealer's license who also has any direct financial interest in any wholesale liquor business. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any distilled spirits retail dealer's license to accept or receive financial aid or assistance from the holder of any distilled spirits manufacturer's or wholesale dealer's license. (Code 1975, § 4-31; Code 1985, § 4-43.1) 
Sec. 6-77. - Applications—Required. (a)  Applications for licenses to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be made to the license investigator in writing on forms furnished by the license investigator, signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by a duly authorized agent if a corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information: (1)  The name, age and address of the applicant in case of an individual, in case of a partnership, the general partners or persons entitled to share in the profits thereof, their ages and addresses, in case of a corporation, the names, ages, and addresses of all the officers and stockholders; (2)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license; (3)  A statement of whether the applicant, or any member of the partnership, or any officer or stockholder of the corporation, has made application at any previous time for any alcoholic beverage license in the city, and the disposition of such application; (4)  Whether any of the persons signing the application, or if a corporation any of the officers or stockholders, have ever been convicted of a crime, other than for violation of traffic laws; (5)  Whether a previous license issued to applicants or any of them by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor; (6)  Whether any other person is to be interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses or both of the proposed business; (7)  The length of residence of the applicant, or members of the firm, or officers, directors, and stockholders of the corporation in the city, and if such residence is less than one year prior to the date of application, the last prior place of residence of the parties. (b)  No application for an alcoholic beverage license will be considered for any location with respect to which a prior application has been submitted and denied, withdrawn or otherwise disposed of within the past 30 days. (Code 1975, § 4-22; Code 1985, § 4-44; Ord. No. 81-137, § 8, 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 8, 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 6-78. - Same—Designation of corporate agent.     All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses required by the provisions of this article by a corporation shall name in the application one or more persons resident in the city, as the agent and representative of the corporation to receive all communications, notices, service of process or other papers or documents, on behalf of the corporation in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any such license. The application shall give the mailing address of such person, and the mailing to any such person at such address of any notice required to be given under this article shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. If any such person shall cease to be a resident of the city, another person shall immediately be appointed in writing in such person's place, and written notice shall be given the city stating the name and address of the new agent. (Code 1975, § 4-24; Code 1985, § 4-45) 
Sec. 6-79. - Same—When due.     All alcoholic beverage licenses that are active for the current year will be submitted to the chief license investigator prior to the first regular meeting of the board of city commissioners in the month of December. All active licenses will be submitted in a blanket renewal report package bearing information as requested from the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 4-25; Code 1985, § 4-46) 
Sec. 6-80. - Same—Commission action restricted.     No application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be acted upon by the board of city commissioners except at a regular meeting of the board. (Code 1975, § 4-26; Code 1985, § 4-47) 
Sec. 6-81. - False statements on applications prohibited.     The making of any untrue or misleading statement in the application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be sufficient cause for the refusal, suspension, revocation or cancellation of such license by the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 4-27; Code 1985, § 4-48) 
Sec. 6-82. - Publication of notice of application. (a)  No application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be acted upon by the board of city commissioners until after the applicant shall have run a notice of the application in a newspaper published in the county at least ten days prior to the committee of the whole or public safety committee meeting at which the application is to be presented and considered. (b)  The notice of application shall contain the names of all persons named in the application and the location of the proposed business. This notice shall not be required from an existing license holder making application for the renewal of an existing alcoholic beverage license at the same location. (Code 1975, § 4-28; Code 1985, § 4-49; Ord. No. 81-137, § 9, 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 9, 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 6-83. - Fees—Imposed.     The fees for licenses issued under the terms of this article shall be established by ordinance by the board of city commissioners in accordance with state law and appear in the appendix attached to this Code. Copies of such ordinances shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1975, § 4-33; Code 1985, § 4-50; Ord. No. 09-132, § 1, 9-22-2009; Ord. No. 13-R116, §§ 1-2, 5-28-2013) Editor's note— Fee amounts have most recently been updated by Ordinance No. 13-R116, adopted 5-28-2013. State Law reference— Payment of license fees for manufacture, sales, etc., of alcoholic beverages required, amount, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-50, 3-5-42, 3-5-43. 
Sec. 6-84. - Same—When due.     The license fees for which provision is made in this article are due and payable immediately. Any person who is doing business or begins to do business at any time after January 1 and before July 1 shall pay the full annual license fee. Any person who begins to do business on or after July 1 shall pay one-half of the annual license fee unless otherwise provided. (Code 1975, § 4-34; Code 1985, § 4-51) 
Sec. 6-85. - Same—Manner of payment.     All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be accompanied either by lawful money of the United States, certified check or cashier's check, payable to the city for the proper amount of the license fee. If the license if refused, same shall be returned to the applicant. (Code 1975, § 4-35; Code 1985, § 4-52) 
Sec. 6-86. - Investigation.     Upon receipt by the license investigator of any application for an alcoholic beverage license, or for the transfer of any license, the license investigator shall forward the same to the chief of police for investigation, who, following such investigation, shall indicate his or her approval or disapproval thereof on the face of such application, and shall attach thereto the entire police record of every person named in the application. (Code 1975, § 4-36; Code 1985, § 4-53) 
Sec. 6-87. - Inspection of premises.     The license investigator shall also forward any application for a new alcoholic beverage on-premises consumption license, or for the renewal of or for the transfer of an existing such license, to the inspection department and to the fire marshal. The fire marshal and the building inspector shall make inspections of the proposed premise to determine whether or not the same is in compliance with all of the codes and ordinances of the city and statutes and regulations of the state, and shall report their findings to the board of commissioners. (Code 1985, § 4-54; Ord. No. 91-156, § 1, 8-13-1991) 
Sec. 6-88. - Recommendations of public safety committee or committee of the whole.     The license investigator shall, upon return of an application under this article from the chief of police, submit the application with the chief's report attached and with the approval or disapproval of the chief indicated thereon, to the public safety committee or committee of the whole. The public safety committee or committee of the whole shall give to the application such study and consideration as it shall deem necessary, and shall return the same to the board of city commissioners for action at a regular meeting with its recommendation as to what action should be taken on the license. (Code 1975, § 4-37; Code 1985, § 4-54.1) 
Sec. 6-89. - Location restricted; license for each place of business.     A license in any category issued under the provisions of this article will entitle the licensee to conduct the licensed business only at the location licensed. The licensee is required to obtain a license for each separate place of business the licensee wishes to operate. (Code 1975, §§ 4-38, 4-40—4-43; Code 1985, § 4-55) 
Sec. 6-90. - Activities restricted—Manufacturers.     A manufacturer's license in any category issued under the provisions of this article will entitle the licensee to manufacture only the alcoholic beverage for which the license is issued. (Code 1975, § 4-38; Code 1985, § 4-56) 
Sec. 6-91. - Same—Wholesalers.     A wholesale dealer's license in any category issued under the provisions of this article will entitle the licensee to sell only the alcoholic beverage for which the license is issued, and only in the original unbroken container, to persons holding a retail license for the sale of that alcoholic beverage, for the purpose of resale only. (Code 1975, § 4-39; Code 1985, § 4-57) 
Sec. 6-92. - Same—Package dealers. (a)  A retail dealer, who sells by the package only, licensed in any category issued under the provisions of this article is entitled the licensee to sell only the alcoholic beverage for which the license is issued, and only in the original and unopened container. It shall be unlawful for any such retail dealer to knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking of any package containing alcoholic beverages on the premises where sold or allow or permit the drinking of the contents of such package on the premises where sold. This restriction shall not apply with respect to sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises. All distilled spirits possessed by such licensee shall be kept in the package store. (b)  No retailer's place of business shall have more entrances than are allowed under state law or regulation. Such entrances must open on a public street, and such place of business shall have no other entrance except as approved by state law, and shall contain no vestibule, closet, booth, room or other place where persons may consume alcoholic beverages. (c)  The place of business operated under this license shall not be operated in conjunction with or open into or have access to or from any lunchroom, dining room, dance hall or store. The windows in such retail place of business shall not be obstructed or obscured, but shall be so arranged that a passerby on the street can view the premises of such retailer by looking through windows opening onto such street. (Code 1975, § 4-40; Code 1985, § 4-58) 
Sec. 6-93. - Same—Regular malt beverage dealers.     A regular malt beverage retail dealer license issued under the provisions of this article will entitle the licensee to sell malt beverages to consumers to take out or to consume on the premises. (Code 1975, § 4-41; Code 1985, § 4-59) 
Sec. 6-94. - Same—Limited malt beverage dealers.     A limited malt beverage retail dealer license issued under the provisions of this article will entitle the licensee to sell malt beverages only in the unopened container, and will not authorize or permit the drinking of the contents on the premises where sold. (Code 1975, § 4-42; Code 1985, § 4-60) 
Sec. 6-95. - Same—Consumption license. (a)  It shall be lawful for all persons first paying the license fee for and procuring the consumption license under the provisions of this article to sell distilled spirits, wines and alcoholic and malt beverages for beverage purposes by the drink for consumption on the premises. The holder of a consumption license shall be entitled to sell, over one dispensing facility, distilled spirits, alcoholic beverages, wines and malt beverages for beverage purposes by the drink for consumption on the premises. There shall be no additional license fee required for a temporary dispensing facility set up by the license holder to meet a special occasion. In no event shall a consumption license permit the sale of distilled spirits, alcoholic beverages, wines or malt beverages in unopened containers. The sale of such beverages in unopened containers shall require the additional licenses otherwise provided by law, and the license holder must otherwise comply with the laws pertaining thereto. The holder of a consumption license operating a bowling alley under the same ownership adjacent to the premises on which the consumption license is operated may offer waitress service on the bowling alley premises to patrons of the bowling alley for the purpose of taking orders and delivering drinks. (b)  The holder of a consumption license may purchase from wholesalers licensed by the city or county alcoholic beverages in sizes of 750 milliliters or larger containers unless a particular brand is not packaged in such sizes, in which event the license holder may purchase the brand in the next nearest size. It shall be unlawful for a consumption license holder to purchase alcoholic beverages in containers less than the sizes specified in this subsection, or from sources other than as specified in this article. (c)  The holders of consumption licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises may sell the alcoholic beverages permitted by such license as a catering service to conventions, conferences, sales meetings, seminars, banquet groups and private parties held in the Albany Civic Center, subject to and in accordance with regulations promulgated by the city manager, and only at such events and in such locations within the civic center as may be approved for that purpose by the city manager. All such sales, and all events at which the sales take place, shall be in compliance with civic center rules and regulations, city ordinances and state laws and regulations. Any license holder failing to comply with this provision, may, in the discretion of the city manager, and in addition to all other penalties provided by law, be denied future use of the civic center for alcoholic beverage sales. (Code 1975, § 4-43; Code 1985, § 4-61; Ord. No. 83-103, § 1, 1-25-1983) 
Sec. 6-96. - One-day license. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Charitable organization means an organization must: (1)  Either be incorporated as a nonprofit corporation, or must be formally organized, with a constitution and bylaws, and with a central governing body such as a board of trustees or directors to be directly responsible for the one-day license; and (2)  Said organization must also have been granted approved tax-exempt status by United States Internal Revenue Service.     Charitable purposes includes the following: (1)  Relief of the indigent, medical research, education, including youth education; (2)  Historical preservation, preservation and encouragement of the fine arts; crime prevention and rehabilitation; (3)  Libraries; (4)  Zoos; (5)  Scientific research and development; (6)  Community development; (7)  Industrial and commercial recruitment; and (8)  Recreation.     Proceeds is the gross proceeds from the sale of licensed beverages after payment of all of the expenses of the particular activity in connection with which the license is issued. (b)  Authority of city manager to issue one day license(s); fee; maximum number. The city manager is authorized to issue a consumption license valid for one day only to any charitable organization, authorizing the holder to sell, at one location only, over one dispensing facility, spirituous liquors, alcoholic beverages, wines and malt beverages, by the drink for consumption on the premises; provided that the proceeds from the sale of such beverages shall be used only for charitable purposes. The application for such one day license shall be on such form as approved by the city manager or his/her designee and must be submitted no later than 20 calendar days in advance of the event. The permit issued in accordance with this section shall be valid only for the physical location specified in the permit. No permit shall be issued unless the sale of distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages is lawful in the place and during the time of day for which the permit is issued. The fee for such license shall be $25.00 and the fee shall not be waived under any circumstances. The organization shall designate one resident in the city who shall be responsible for the lawful and proper conduct of the alcoholic beverage license, giving the name, address and other information sufficient to identify such person. No more than four permits shall be issued to any single charitable organization during any calendar year. There shall be no appeal from any denial of an application. (c)  Excise tax, telephone and identification card provisions not applicable. The excise tax imposed by section 6-180 shall not be applicable to sales under the one-day license. The provisions of section 6-42 requiring a telephone, section 6-101 as to duration of license, section 6-102 as to expiration of license, and section 6-137 et seq., requiring an identification card, shall not be applicable. (d)  Final report. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the activity, the license holder shall file a final report and accounting with the board of commissioners, said report and accounting to include a statement of the gross receipts, the amount of expenses paid, the net proceeds remaining, and how and to whom and for what purpose said net proceeds were distributed. (e)  Suspension or revocation. The chief of police or the code enforcement director shall have the right at any time to suspend or revoke the one-day license on any ground which constitutes a ground for suspension or revocation of licenses generally under sections 6-181 and 6-182. Any aggrieved organization shall have the right of appeal to the city manager. (f)  Applicability of article. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the remaining provisions of this article shall be applicable to the one-day license. (Code 1985, § 4-62; Ord. No. 83-129, § 1(4-57), 5-24-1983; Ord. No. 85-200, § 1, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 14-123, §§ 1—3, 9-23-2014) 
Sec. 6-97. - Transfers.     All alcoholic beverage licenses shall be personal to the licensee to whom issued. Upon proper application, the board of city commissioners may permit the license to be transferred upon payment of a transfer fee equal to one-half the original license fee, provided the transferee meets all of the qualifications which would have been required had the transferee been an applicant for alcoholic beverage license. Upon the death of any license holder, the license holder's personal representatives or heirs may continue to operate under the license for the balance of the year without the payment of any fee, if otherwise qualified as license holders, or the license may be transferred to a qualified transferee within 30 days after the date of the death of the license holder upon payment of the transfer fee. (Code 1975, § 4-44; Code 1985, § 4-63) 
Sec. 6-98. - Sale of interest by licensee.     Where the license holder is a partnership or a corporation, one or more partners, or one or more stockholders, as the case may be, may withdraw from the partnership or the corporation in favor of one or more of the partners or stockholders who were partners or stockholders at the time of the issuance of the license. The sale by a partner or a stockholder of his or her interest in the partnership or the corporation to a person who is not at the time of the sale already a partner or a stockholder shall constitute a ground for revocation of the license unless the new partner or stockholder is a person qualified to hold a license, and unless the transaction is approved by the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 4-45; Code 1985, § 4-64) 
Sec. 6-99. - Change of location.     The location named in the licensee's application shall not be changed without permission and approval of the board of city commissioners upon written application made. Approvals as to change of location shall be at the discretion of the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 4-46; Code 1985, § 4-65) 
Sec. 6-100. - Display, knowledge of article     Every license holder under this article shall display a copy of this article on the premises where the license is operated, and shall advise each and every employee of the terms thereof. (Code 1975, § 4-47; Code 1985, § 4-66) 
Sec. 6-101. - Duration. (a)  Except as hereinafter provided, no license shall issue under this article for less than a calendar year, or the remainder thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, a restricted alcoholic beverage license, limited to a designated location and to a designated period of time, which may be less than a year, may be issued for the sale of malt beverages at professional baseball games, professional basketball games, and/or professional football games; provided, that at all such games where malt beverages are sold, there shall be set apart and established a seating area to be designated as the "family area" within which no alcoholic beverages of any kind may be sold, possessed, or consumed; provided further that no more than two normal retail size containers shall be sold to a customer at any one time. (b)  Sales of malt beverages under such restricted licenses shall be permitted only during the designated periods, only at the designated locations, and only during those hours of the day when the game takes place. (c)  An application for such restricted alcoholic beverage license, and the applicant, shall meet with and comply with all of the other provisions of this article governing the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses. (d)  In case of the revocation or surrender of any license, general or restricted, before the expiration of the time for which the license was issued, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund. (Code 1975, § 4-48; Code 1985, § 4-67; Ord. No. 91-182, § 1, 11-19-1991) 
Sec. 6-102. - Expiration.     All alcoholic beverage licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued. All applications for a renewal of the license for the ensuing year shall be treated as applications for new licenses, except that they need not be advertised as required by this article. (Code 1975, § 4-49; Code 1985, § 4-68; Ord. No. 07-134, § 2, 11-27-2007) 
Sec. 6-103. - Advertising restricted.     It shall be unlawful for the holder of any alcoholic beverage license to advertise in any news media or by any other means the fact that alcoholic beverages may be purchased at such establishment except as permitted by state law and by regulations duly promulgated thereunder. (Code 1975, § 4-50; Code 1985, § 4-69; Ord. No. 81-137, § 10, 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 10, 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 6-104. - Unlawful conduct.     It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued under the provisions of this article to permit any disturbance of the peace or other unlawful conduct in the licensed premises. (Code 1975, § 4-51; Code 1985, § 4-70) 
Sec. 6-105. - Closing for emergencies. (a)  The chief of police, any police department shift commander on duty at the time, the code enforcement director or a designee shall have the authority to close any location holding an alcoholic beverage license for a period not in excess of 24 hours in the event there shall occur on the premises any violation of law, this Code or any other ordinance of the city, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, or other occurrence which is contrary to the public health, welfare or safety, when in the judgment of the chief of police and code enforcement director or shift commander such action is necessary to protect the public health, welfare or safety. (b)  The chief of police or the code enforcement director or a designee, with the concurrence of the city manager, may close any location holding an alcoholic beverage license in the event of disorders which threaten the public health, welfare or safety for the duration of the emergency. (Code 1975, § 4-52; Code 1985, § 4-71) 
Sec. 6-106. - Suspension authorized.     The city manager shall have the right, upon recommendation from the code enforcement director, to temporarily suspend any alcoholic beverage license pending the hearing provided for in this article, where, in the judgment of the city manager, such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. All decisions under the provisions of this section shall be in writing. (Code 1975, § 4-55; Code 1985, § 4-72) 
Sec. 6-107. - Suspension, revocation— Grounds generally.     The following shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license; provided, however, that whether or not the grounds exist shall be determined by the board of city commissioners in its sole discretion: (1)  The violation by the license holder or the license holder's employee of any state or federal law or regulation involving moral turpitude or any provision of this Code or ordinance of the city, other than traffic violations. The determination of whether any such violations has occurred shall be made by the board of city commissioners, and an actual conviction in a court for such offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license; (2)  The failure of the license holder or the license holder's employee to report with reasonable promptness to the police department any violation of law, this Code or any other ordinance of the city, breach of peace, disturbance or altercation, occurring inside the premises, or the removal by the license holder or the license holder's employees of any customer from inside the premises; (3)  Any conduct on the part of the license holder or the license holder's employee contrary to the public welfare, safety or health, such as, but not by way of limitation operating or conducting the business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, or health or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance; (4)  The violation of any state or federal law or regulation pertaining to alcoholic beverages; (5)  If subsequent investigation by state or local officials reveals information of past criminal activity on the part of the licensee of a nature that would render the licensee ineligible to hold such license; (6)  Upon the business or the operation or location thereof, or the owner or any person connected therewith, ceasing to meet any of the qualifications for the issuance of a license as stated in section 6-74; (7)  Where, in the judgment of the board of commissioners, the operation of the business by the alcoholic beverage licensee constitutes a nuisance, or poses problems of law enforcement and the maintenance of public order because of the unusual number of fights and/or being frequented by known or reputed drug dealers and/or illegal sales or use of controlled substances and/or breaches of peace and/or violations of the law by patrons of the licensee occurring either on the premises or in parking lots available for use by patrons of the licensee, whether under the licensee's sole control or not. For purposes of this subsection, the word "premises" shall include the curtilage. The determination as to whether to suspend or to revoke a license on the foregoing grounds shall be made by the board of commissioners, and actual conviction in a court for any offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license; (8)  Where the board of commissioners finds and determines after notice and an opportunity to be heard pursuant to section 6-109 hereof that: a.  Illegal sales of controlled substances take place on the premises with such frequency that, in the judgment of the board of commissioners, the owner or operator or manager in charge of the business knew, or in the exercise of ordinary care should have known, that such sales were taking place and such owner or operator or manager in charge has failed to take effective action to stop such sales; or b.  Persons have been permitted to loiter on the premises without legitimate business reasons who are known to the owner or operator or manager in charge of such business, or in the exercise of ordinary care should be known to them, or who are reputed to be, illegal sellers or purveyors of controlled substances. (Code 1975, § 4-53; Code 1985, § 4-73; Ord. No. 81-137, § 12, 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 12, 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 85-141, § 1, 3-28-1985; Ord. No. 87-205, § 1, 11-24-1987) 
Sec. 6-108. - Same—Upon sale to minors; on Sundays. (a)  In the case of alcohol beverage violations involving selling to persons not of lawful age to purchase or selling on Sunday, all alcoholic beverage license holders who hold a valid and current certificate of certified license holder training from the City of Albany will be referred to the Georgia Department of Revenue, Alcohol and Tobacco Division (GDRATD) for prosecution. To qualify for renewal, a licensee must provide competent evidence of adjudication or other disposition of any violation previously referred to the GDRATD for prosecution. (b)  In the case of alcohol beverage violations involving selling to persons not of lawful age to purchase or selling on Sunday, all alcoholic beverage license holders who do not hold a valid and current certificate of certified license holder training from the city shall be fined and penalized as follows: (1)  Selling to persons not of lawful age to purchase: a.  First offense. Suspension of license for seven days and a $200.00 reinstatement fee. b.  Second offense. Suspension of license for 30 days and a $400.00 reinstatement fee. c.  Third offense. Revocation of license. (2)  Selling on Sunday: a.  First offense. Suspension of license for 30 days and a $400.00 reinstatement fee. b.  Second offense. Revocation of license. (c)  Each violation will continue as a counting offense for 24 months from the date of action by the board of city commissioners on that offense. Violations of subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section will be counted independently of each other. (d)  Regardless of the kind of alcoholic beverage license held, and regardless of whether or not the owner was present on the premises at the time the violations occurred, whenever there occur four violations of either or both kinds described in subsection (a) of this section at the same location within a 24-month period, revocation of the alcoholic beverage license shall be mandatory. (e)  For purposes of this section, each location of a business having more than one location shall be considered independently of the other locations, and only that location at which the offense occurred shall be affected or held accountable. (Code 1985, § 4-74; Ord. No. 81-137, § 13(4-56(12), (13)), 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 13(4-56(12), (13)), 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 83-133, § 1, 5-24-1983; Ord. No. 00-115, § 1(1), 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 00-128, § 1(1), 6-28-2000; Ord. No. 00-128, § 1(1), 6-28-2000; Ord. No. 03-132, § 2, 9-23-2003) 
Sec. 6-109. - Same—Procedure for denial of application of license or for transfer of any license. (a)  Before the board of city commissioners shall deny any application for a license or for the transfer of any license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing to show cause before the board of city commissioners at a time and place specified herein, not less than seven days nor more than 14 days from the date of service of the notice, why the application for license or for transfer of license should not be denied, stating the grounds therefor. (b)  At the appointed time and place the applicant shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exists, why the application should not be denied, after which the board of commissioners shall take such action as it, in its judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. (c)  The hearing provided for in this section need not be a regular or official meeting of the board of city commissioners, but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice, provided that four members of the board of city commissioners shall constitute a quorum for conducting the hearing. (Code 1975, § 4-54; Code 1985, § 4-75; Ord. No. 00-115, § 1(2), 4-11-2000; Ord. 00-128, § 1(2), 6-28-2000; Ord. No. 00-128, § 1(2), 6-28-2000) 
Sec. 6-110. - Same—Existing license procedure. (a)  Before the board of city commissioners shall revoke or suspend any existing license, the license holder shall be given notice in writing to show cause before the board of city commissioners at a time and place specified therein, not less than seven days nor more than 14 days from the date of service of the notice, why the license should not be revoked or suspended, stating the grounds therefor. (b)  At the appointed time and place the license holder shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exists, why the license should not be revoked or suspended, after which the board of commissioners shall take such action as it, in its judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. (c)  A conviction, plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere to a charge for selling to persons not of lawful age to purchase or selling on Sunday will conclusively establish a violation, without regard to whether the holder of the license was on the premises at the time the violation occurred. (d)  The hearing provided for in this section need not be at a regular or official meeting of the board of city commissioners, but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice, provided that four members of the board of city commissioners shall constitute a quorum for conducting the hearing. (Code 1985, § 4-76; Ord. No. 00-128, § 1(3), 6-28-2000; Ord. No. 00-128, § 1(3), 6-28-2000) 
Sec. 6-111. - Off-premises license. (a)  Persons who are actively engaged in the preparation of food for consumption off-premises holding a city alcoholic beverage license for the retail sale of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises are authorized to make application for an off-premises license as provided herein. The application shall be made to the city's license investigator. For purposes of this section, the term "catered event" shall mean a scheduled special social event, reception, party or similar activity for which the caterer or the event location has prepared substantial food items to be served with appropriate serving facilities (tables, etc.) and personnel, provided the food items requirement shall not apply to an event lasting two hours or less. (b)  In order for the holder of an off-premises license to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine at an authorized catered function, the license holder shall apply to the city's license investigator for an event permit. The event permit application must include not only the caterer's name, but also the date, address and time of the event, the caterer's alcohol license number as well as any information deemed relevant by the license investigator. The hours of the event permit are governed by section 6-5. No event permit will be issued for any location with respect to which any alcohol license has been denied or revoked within the past 12 months; nor for any location with respect to which the conduct set forth in section 6-107 has previously occurred. (c)  The holder of an off-premises license is authorized to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine by the drink off-premises only in connection with the authorized catered function described in the event permit. (d)  The cost of such off-premises license is $2,500.00. (Ord. No. 06-131, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 6-112. - Time limit on opening for business.     All licensees must, within 180 days after the issuance of a license under this chapter, open to the general public for business and begin the sale of the product or products authorized by such license. Failure to open the business to the general public and begin the sale referred to herein shall result in the forfeiture and cancellation of the license and no refund of license fees or occupational taxes shall be made. A licensee unable to comply with this time limit may, within the 180 day time limit, make written request to the city manager, or his/her designee, for an extension of time not to exceed 90 days. (Ord. No. 13-135, § 1, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 6-113. - Time limit on continuing business.     Any license issued under this chapter shall automatically be null and void where the licensed business has not been operated or been open to the general public for six consecutive months. Such license shall automatically become null and void without the necessity of any action of the mayor and board of commissioners. (Ord. No. 13-135, § 1, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 6-114. - Reporting of disciplinary actions. (a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1, the marshal/director of the license and business support department shall be required to provide notification to the Georgia Department of Revenue within 45 days of any officer, department, agency, or instrumentality of the municipality taking disciplinary action against any person issued a license to operate any premises at which 75 percent or more total gross annual revenue is derived from the sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. (b)  The notification required under paragraph (a) of this Code section shall be in the format for the reporting of disciplinary actions set by the Georgia Department of Revenue. (c)  For purposes of this Code section, "disciplinary action" shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1(a)(1), which includes any citation or arrest arising out of the violation of any law, rule, regulation, resolution, or ordinance of a governmental entity relating to the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of alcoholic beverages against a licensee, any employee of a licensee, or any person holding a financial interest in the license of a licensee on the premises or place of business of any licensee. (Ord. No. 16-121, § 1, 10-11-2016) 
Sec. 6-115. - Growler license. (a)  The retail sale of growlers is authorized for establishments licensed pursuant to this article. At this time, there is no annual fee for a growler license. (b)  A growler license may be obtained only by establishments engaged in the retail sale of growlers. (c)  Growlers may only be filled with beer or wine from kegs or barrels procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. (d)  After a growler is filled at the licensed premises, it must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original condition and cannot be opened or consumed on the premises. (e)  Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. (Ord. No. 18-113, § 2, 9-11-2018) Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-113, § 2, adopted Sept. 11, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as § 6-102. Inasmuch as section so numbered already exists, said provisions have been redesignated as § 6-115 at the discrection of the editor. 
Secs. 6-116—6-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HANDLERS' IDENTIFICATION CARDS 
Sec. 6-136. - Required; exemption.     All persons who are actively engaged in the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages in any establishment holding a city alcoholic beverages license for consumption or retail sale are required to obtain and to carry on their person at all times while on the job an alcoholic beverage handlers identification card from the city. Persons who make application for an alcoholic beverage license identification card in which they certify that they have been trained in, and made aware of, the penalties for the sale of alcoholic beverages to minors and for the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays are provided a grace period extending: (1)  30 days from the date of application; or (2)  To the date their application is denied whichever is less. One-day charitable license holders are exempt from the requirements of this Code section. (Code 1975, § 4-56(1); Code 1985, § 4-86; Ord. No. 81-137, § 13(4-56(1)), 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 13(4-56(1)), 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 85-214, § 1, 8-27-1985; Ord. No. 03-133, § 1, 9-23-2003) 
Sec. 6-137. - Application. (a)  Upon application and prior to issuance of an alcohol beverage handler's card, all applicants will be required to certify that they have been trained in, and made aware of, the penalties for the sale of alcohol beverages to minors and for the sale of alcohol beverages on Sundays. (b)  Applicants shall make application in writing to the chief license inspector on application forms to be provided and approved by the chief license inspector. (Code 1975, § 4-56(2); Code 1985, § 4-88; Ord. No. 81-137, § 13(4-56(2)), 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 13(4-56(2)), 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 03-133, § 3, 9-23-2003) 
Sec. 6-138. - Denial of application; appeal. (a)  If any applicant is found to have a record of violations of the type specified in section 6-74(8), or if the applicant has been convicted of a felony, a crime involving moral turpitude, or the violation of any state statute, this Code or any other ordinance of the city respecting alcoholic beverages, the chief license inspector shall deny the application and shall issue a letter to the employee and to the employer stating that the employee is ineligible for employment. (b)  Within ten days of such action, the applicant may appeal therefrom to the board of city commissioners, which board may reverse the action of the chief license inspector if it determines that because of the nature and age of the offenses, the applicant's record and conduct since the offenses were committed and other circumstances, it is not contrary to the public interest to issue the identification card. (Code 1975, § 4-56(3); Code 1985, § 4-89; Ord. No. 81-137, § 13(4-56(3)), 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 13(4-56(3)), 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 82-134, § 1, 4-27-1982) 
Sec. 6-139. - Issuance; fee.     If none of the violations in section 6-74(8) are found, the chief of police shall furnish the applicant an identification card with pertinent information thereon relating to the height, weight, hair color, eye color, date of birth, social security number, name of establishment employing the card holder and containing a photograph of the holder of such identification card. A fee in the amount of $15.00 shall be charged to cover the expense of processing the application and issuing the identification card. (Code 1975, § 4-56(4); Code 1985, § 4-90; Ord. No. 81-137, § 13(4-56(4)), 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 13(4-56(4)), 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 03-134, § 1, 9-23-2003) 
Sec. 6-140. - Obtaining under false pretenses prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person not to obtain an alcoholic beverage handler's identification card or to obtain same upon false information or by the concealment of information. (Code 1975, § 4-56(10); Code 1985, § 4-91; Ord. No. 81-137, § 13(4-56(10)), 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 13(4-56(10)), 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 6-141. - Replacement; possession.     Identification cards may be replaced upon mutilation or when photograph or writing thereon is not clearly legible. This card must be in the possession of the person affected when engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages. (Code 1975, § 11-56(6); Code 1985, § 4-92; Ord. No. 81-137, § 13(4-56(6)), 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 13(4-56(6)), 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 81-183, § 1, 7-28-1981; Ord. No. 85-214, § 2, 8-27-1985) 
Sec. 6-142. - Expiration; renewal.     Alcoholic beverage handlers identification cards shall expire four years from the date thereof, and the holder shall apply for renewal in the same manner as original applications are made. The fee for renewal shall be $5.00 payable at the time of the filing of the application for renewal. (Code 1985, § 4-92.1; Ord. No. 85-214, § 2, 8-27-1985) 
Sec. 6-143. - Employers responsibility.     It shall be the duty and responsibility of every employer of employees covered under this section to see that all employees are carrying on their persons an alcoholic beverage handler's identification card at all times while on the job. (Code 1975, § 4-56(7); Code 1985, § 4-93; Ord. No. 81-137, § 13(4-56(7)), 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 13(4-56(7)), 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 6-144. - Change of employment.     Whenever an identification card holder becomes employed by an establishment other than the one named in the card, the card holder shall notify the chief of police of the change within 15 days after such change. (Code 1975, § 4-56(5); Code 1985, § 4-94; Ord. No. 81-137, § 13(4-56(5)), 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 13(4-56(5)), 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 6-145. - Authority of city commissioners.     Nothing in this article shall be construed to restrict the authority of the board of city commissioners to give special consideration to those cases which, in the judgment of at least four commissioners, is deserving of such consideration due to extraordinary circumstances, such as being shown false identification by a purchaser. (Code 1985, § 4-95; Ord. No. 81-137, §s; 13(4-56(14)), 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 13(4-56(14)), 5-12-1981) 
Sec. 6-146. - Suspension; revocation.     Any person who, while employed on premises operating under an alcoholic beverage license, shall violate section 6-39 by selling alcoholic beverages to a person not of lawful age to purchase the same, or who shall violate section 6-5 by selling alcoholic beverages on Sunday, shall have his or her identification card suspended by the chief of police for a period of two weeks, and until a reinstatement fee of $50.00 is paid. If another offense of either kind is committed by such person within 24 months after payment of the reinstatement fee and reinstatement of the identification card, the identification card shall be revoked by the chief of police. No identification card shall be suspended or revoked for selling to a person not of lawful age to purchase where the sale was induced by the furnishing of false identification by the purchaser. (Code 1985, § 4-96; Ord. No. 81-137, § 13(4-56(11)), 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 13(4-56(11)), 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 02-133, § 1, 10-22-2002) 
Sec. 6-147. - Violation; penalty. (a)  Acts or omissions enumerated in this section shall constitute offenses punishable as provided in section 1-17. The code enforcement director shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke the alcoholic beverage handler's identification card for any of the acts or omissions stated in this section. Any person whose alcoholic beverage handler's identification card is revoked or suspended for a period of time in excess of 15 days may petition the board of city commissioners to review the decision, and the board may, in its discretion, either review or refuse to review the same. If the board of city commissioners elects to review the decision, it may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the code enforcement director. (b)  The acts and omissions enumerated in this subsection shall constitute grounds for the revocation or suspension of the alcoholic beverage license by the board of city commissioners or such other disciplinary action as shall be determined by the board: (1)  Employing or permitting to work, knowingly or unknowingly, without a current and valid alcoholic beverage handlers identification card, or a current unrejected application on file with the license inspector for same, any person required by this article to obtain and carry such a card, it being the responsibility of such owner or manager to ascertain at all times that all such persons are complying with this article; (2)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this article by any person covered under the terms hereof; (3)  Violation by the card holder of any state law or regulation or of this Code or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city pertaining to the sale, dispensing, serving or possession of alcoholic beverages. (Code 1975, § 4-56(9); Code 1985, § 4-97; Ord. No. 81-137, § 13(4-56(9)), 4-14-1981; Ord. No. 81-152, § 13(4-56(9)), 5-12-1981) 
Secs. 6-148—6-177. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXCISE TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 6-178. - Application of article.     The provisions of this article shall apply to all wholesalers of malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits selling to the retail trade within this city, regardless of the residence or place of business of such wholesaler. (Code 1975, § 4-72; Code 1985, § 4-111) 
Sec. 6-179. - Imposed. (a)  There is hereby imposed, levied and assessed a special or excise tax upon the wholesale sale of malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits, at the following rates: (1)  Wholesale dealers in distilled spirits, per liter: $0.0022. (2)  Wholesale dealers in wines, per liter: $0.0022. (3)  Wholesale dealers in malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, per each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons: $6.00. (4)  Wholesale dealers in malt beverages sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, per 12 ounces: $0.0005. (b)  The taxes assessed by subsection (a) of this section shall be in addition to any and all other taxes or licenses now imposed upon such wholesale dealers. (Code 1975, § 4-71; Code 1985, § 4-112; Ord. No. 84-108, § 2, 2-14-1984) 
Sec. 6-180. - Payment due.     The taxes imposed by this article upon wholesale sales shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the city treasurer by the tenth of each month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of within the city, based upon the volume in gallons of beer, wine and liquor sold. (Code 1975, § 4-73; Code 1985, § 4-113) 
Sec. 6-181. - Delinquency.     If after 45 days an excise tax imposed by this article is not paid by a given wholesale dealer, the tax shall become wholly delinquent and all of the provisions of the Code relative to the collection of delinquent taxes shall be applicable for the collection of this tax. (Code 1975, § 4-73; Code 1985, § 4-114) 
Sec. 6-182. - Manner of collection.     Wholesale dealers in malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits are hereby required to collect the taxes imposed upon dealers in such malt beverages, wines and liquors by this article in accordance with the provisions of section 6-206, and to comply with all requirements of state law as they may exist from time to time with respect to the keeping of records and making of reports showing the collection of said taxes and for their services rendered in collecting and remitting to the treasurer the sum collected. (Code 1975, § 4-74; Code 1985, § 4-115) 
Secs. 6-183—6-202. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS BY THE DRINK 
Sec. 6-203. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Agent means the person designated as such by a licensee in the licensee's application for a permit to sell distilled spirits by the drink in the city.     Drink means any distilled spirits served for consumption on the premises which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid.     Licensee means any person who holds a license from the city to sell distilled spirits by the drink.     Monthly period means the calendar month of the year.     Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided in this division.     Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.     Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any distilled spirits by the drink.     Tax means the tax imposed by this division. (Code 1985, § 4-126; Ord. No. 81-161, § I(b)—(i), 6-9-1981) 
Sec. 6-204. - Imposition and rate of tax.     There is hereby imposed and levied upon every sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of such beverage. (Code 1985, § 4-127; Ord. No. 81-161, § II, 6-9-1981) 
Sec. 6-205. - Persons liable for tax.     Every licensee or licensee's agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed by this division from the purchasers of distilled spirits by the drink sold within such licensee's licensed premises. Such licensee or licensee's agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the license inspector to facilitate the collection of this tax. (Code 1985, § 4-128; Ord. No. 81-161, § III, 6-9-1981) 
Sec. 6-206. - Determination; returns; payments. (a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the license inspector monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth in section 6-205. (b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the license inspector showing the gross revenues from sale of distilled spirits, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the license inspector. (c)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use taxes under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50. (Code 1985, § 4-129; Ord. No. 81-161, § IV, 6-9-1981) 
Sec. 6-207. - Deficiency determinations. (a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis. If the license inspector is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, the license inspector may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. (b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes. (c)  Notice of determination; service. The license inspector shall give to the operator written notice of his or her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the operator at his or her address as it appears in the records of the license inspector. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. (d)  Time within which notice is to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. (Code 1985, § 4-130; Ord. No. 81-161, § V, 6-9-1981) 
Sec. 6-208. - Determination if no return made. (a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the license inspector shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the license inspector. Written notices shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 6-207(c). (b)  Interest on amount due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. (Code 1985, § 4-131; Ord. No. 81-161, § VI, 6-9-1981) 
Sec. 6-209. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax.     Any licensee who fails to pay the tax imposed by this division to the city, or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the city, within the time required, shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax, or amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof. (Code 1985, § 4-132; Ord. No. 81-161, § VII, 6-9-1981) 
Sec. 6-210. - Collection of delinquent taxes. (a)  Action for tax. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the license inspector may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. (b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator. If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his or her business or quits the business, such operator's successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the license inspector showing that he or she has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. (c)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him or her to the extent of the purchase price. (d)  Tax credit. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this division, it may be offset by the license inspector. If the operator or person determines that he or she has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the license inspector, he or she will have three years from date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the license inspector, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or such person's administrators or executors. (Code 1985, § 4-133; Ord. No. 81-161, § VIII, 6-9-1981) 
Sec. 6-211. - Administration of division. (a)  Authority of license inspector. The license inspector shall administer and enforce the provisions of this division for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this division. (b)  Rules and regulations. The license inspector shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this division or other laws of the city and state, or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this division and the collection of taxes under this division. (c)  Records required for operators, form. Every licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the license inspector may require. (d)  Examination of records; audits. The license inspector or any person authorized in writing by the license inspector may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. (e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this division, the license inspector may require the filing of reports by any person having in such person's possession or custody information relating to the sales of distilled spirits which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the license inspector when required by the license inspector and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the date of sale and such other information as the license inspector may require. (f)  Disclosure of business of operators, limitations on rule. The license inspector or any person having an administrative duty under this division shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount of source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this division, except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax hereby levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustee, executors, administrators and assignees, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. (Code 1985, § 4-134; Ord. No. 81-161, § IX, 6-9-1981) 
Sec. 6-212. - Revocation of license.     The continuous failure to pay the above-prescribed tax shall render the dealer or person liable therefor subject to revocation of their alcoholic beverage license in accordance with the procedures set out in section 6-109. (Code 1985, § 4-135; Ord. No. 81-161, § X, 6-9-1981) 
Secs. 6-213—6-232. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BROWN BAGGING 
Sec. 6-233. - Prohibited; exceptions.     Brown bagging is prohibited within the corporate limits of the city unless the business has met the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section: (1)  The business must purchase and maintain a license to sell beer and/or wine on the premises; and (2)  The business must pay an annual "brown bagging permit fee" of $1,000.00 to the business license office of the department of finance at the time the license to sell beer is purchased or renewed. (Code 1985, § 4-140; Ord. No. 04-111, § 3, 3-23-2004) 
Sec. 6-234. - Provisions.     Brown bagging establishments will be subject to all provisions in article IV of this chapter, and including, but not limited to the provisions of section 6-5 (hours of operation), section 6-10 (telephone required), section 6-14 (certain attire and conduct prohibited upon premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages), section 6-41 (unlawful for any person who has not attained legal age to be on licensed premises), section 6-74 (qualifications for person seeking alcoholic beverage license), and section 6-107 et seq. (procedure for suspension and revocation of license). (Code 1985, § 4-141; Ord. No. 04-111, § 3, 3-23-2004) 
Sec. 6-235. - Violations; penalties.     Every person, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of an owner or operator for an owner or whether acting as an agent or independent contractor for the owner, employee or operator, who participates in or allows, directly or indirectly, brown bagging in violation of this section shall be guilty of an offense hereunder. Upon conviction such person shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of section 1-17. (Code 1985, § 4-142; Ord. No. 04-111, § 3, 3-23-2004) 
Chapter 8 - AMUSEMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 8-1—8-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GAME ROOMS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Power of local governments to license, regulate and tax billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 8-19. - Definition.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Game rooms means those establishments whose primary source of revenue is from coin-operated pool or billiard tables, or coin-operated game machines of assorted design, such as pinball, baseball or video games. (Code 1975, § 23-2; Code 1985, § 5-16) 
Secs. 8-20—8-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
Sec. 8-44. - Required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct for hire or profit in the city any pool table, billiard table or game room without first having made written application for and obtained from the board of city commissioners a permit to do so. (Code 1975, § 23-21; Code 1985, § 5-26) 
Sec. 8-45. - Application; information required.     Applications for permits to conduct a pool table, billiard table, or game room shall be made in the name of the person desiring to engage in the business and, in the case of firms or corporations, the individual names of those composing the firm and the managing officers of the corporation. The application shall specify: (1)  The year which the permit is to cover; (2)  The location of the place of business; (3)  The number and kind of tables to be operated; (4)  The number and type of game machines to be operated; (5)  If such business is to be operated in connection with any other kind of business, the nature of that business. (Code 1975, § 23-22; Code 1985, § 5-27) 
Sec. 8-46. - Initial action.     Upon receipt of any application for the operation of a pool table, billiard table or game room, the code enforcement department shall conduct an investigation, and following such investigation, shall forward said application to the commission with their recommendation of approval or disapproval, for such study and consideration as it shall deem necessary prior to their approval or disapproval of the application. (Code 1975, § 23-23; Code 1985, § 5-28) 
Sec. 8-47. - Objection by property owners, etc.; granting of permit.     When an application for a permit under this division is presented to the board of city commissioners and before the same is finally acted upon and adjoining property owners or tenants or any property owner or tenant within a radius of 300 feet of the main entrance of the building in which such proposed pool or billiard table or game room is to be operated may file with the board any objections, in person or in writing, that they may have to the granting of such permit. The board may hear evidence on such objections after notice and opportunity to be heard to all parties and if, in the opinion of the board, such permit should not be granted, the board may refuse such application for a permit. (Code 1975, § 23-24; Code 1985, § 5-29) 
Sec. 8-48. - Suspension and revocation.     Any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners where, after notice to the holder of such permit and an opportunity to be heard, the board of commissioners finds and determines that: (1)  Illegal sales of controlled substances take place on the premises with such frequency that, in the judgment of the board of commissioners, the owner or operator or manager in charge of the business knew, or in the exercise of ordinary care should have known, that such sales were taking place and such owner or operator or manager in charge has failed to take effective action to stop each sales; or (2)  Persons have been permitted to loiter on the premises without legitimate business reasons who are known to the owner or operator or manager in charge of such business, or in the exercise of ordinary care should be known to them, or who are reputed to be, illegal sellers or purveyors of controlled substances. (Code 1985, § 5-30; Ord. No. 87-205, § 2, 11-24-1987) 
Sec. 8-49. - Class B bona fide coin operated amusement machines. (1)  Definition. Class B bona fide coin operated amusement machines means a bona fide coin operated amusement machine as defined at O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1(2) that rewards a successful player with any combination of items listed in subparagraphs (d)(1)(B) and (d)(1)(C) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35. (2)  Authorization. A business owner or business operator as defined at O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1(2.1) may have available for use the number of Class B bona fide coin operated amusement machines in one place of business they deem advisable (which may be in excess of nine); provided, however, each Class B bona fide coin operated amusement machine shall meet the following criteria: a.  It rewards the player or players with tickets, tokens, or other non-cash representations of value redeemable for merchandise prizes; b.  The outcome of the game involves some skill in its operation; c.  The award of tickets, tokens or other non-cash representations of value is based solely on the players achieving the object of the game or player's score; d.  Only merchandise prizes and novelty candy may be redeemed; e.  The average wholesale value of the prizes awarded in lieu of tickets or tokens for a single play of the machine does not exceed $5.00; and f.  The redemption value of each ticket, token or other non-cash representation of value that may be accumulated by a player or players to redeem prizes of greater value does not exceed the cost of a single play of the machine. (Ord. No. 10-142, § 1, 12-14-2010) 
Secs. 8-50—8-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-120, §§ 1—17, adopted June 22, 2010, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 8-70—8-90, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to adult entertainment establishments and derived from Code 1985, §§ 5-51—5-71; Ord. No. 93-144, §§ 1—21, 6-22-1993. 
Sec. 8-71. - Purpose and findings. (a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Albany, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. (b)  Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the board of city commissioners, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. , 124 S.Ct. 2219 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc. , 535 U.S. 425 (2002); Pap's A.M. v. City of Erie , 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. , 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres , 426 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. , 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue , 409 U.S. 109 (1972); and Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robbins, GA , 331 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robbins, GA , 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange , 217 F.3d 1257 (11 th Cir. 1999); Boss Capitol, Inc. v. City of Casselberry , 187 F.3d 1251 (11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County , 200 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile , 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v City of Jacksonville , 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); This That and The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County , 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga , 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker , 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); International Food & Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale , 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane , 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset , 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); and other cases, including: Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston , 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State , 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Sewell v. Georgia , 233 S.E.2d 187 (Ga. 1977), dismissed for want of a substantial federal question, 435 U.S. 982 (1978) (sexual devices); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan , 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County , 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee , 270 Ga. 33 (1998); World Famous Dudley's Food & Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park , 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson , 242 Ga. 214 (1978); and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to: Los Angeles, California — 1977; Whittier, California — 1978; Phoenix, Arizona — 1979; Islip, New York — 1980; Austin, Texas — 1986; Manatee County, Florida - 1987; Garden Grove, California — 1991; Times Square Business Improvement District, New York, New York — 1994; St. Cloud, Minnesota — 1994; St. Mary's, Georgia — 1996; Ellicottville, New York — 1998; Denver, Colorado — 1998; Daytona Beach, Florida — 2004; Fort Worth, Texas — 2004; and the Report to the American Center for Law and Justice On the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses, (March 31, 1996, State of Pennsylvania), and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation of Sexually-Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), and; Rural Hot Spots: The Case of Adult Businesses by Richard McCleary; Crime Impact Studies by Municipal and State Government on Harmful Secondary Effects of Sexually-Oriented Businesses; Do "Off-Site" Adult Businesses Have Secondary Effects? Legal Doctrine, Social Theory, and Empirical Evidence; Negative Secondary Effects of Sexually Oriented Businesses: Summaries of Key Reports; Report To: The American Center for Law & Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Business; Crime Risk in the Vicinity of Sexually Oriented Business: A Report to the Centralia City Attorney's Office; Starship Enterprise of Atlanta, Inc. v. Fulton County, et al.; Reliable Consultants, Inc., et al. v. City of Kennedale, Texas ; Survey of Appraisals, Fort Worth & Dallas — Effects of Land Uses on Surrounding Property Values; The Evidence of Relationships between Adult-Oriented Businesses and Community Crime and Disorder; Evaluation Potential Secondary Effects of Adult Cabarets in Daytona Beach, FL — A Study of Calls for Service to the Police in Reference to Ordinance 02-496; Report on the Secondary Effects of the Concentration of Adult Use Establishments in the Time Square Area; Study & Recommendations for Adult Entertainment Businesses in the Town of Islip; Adult Business Study — Town and Village of Ellicottville — Cattaraugus County, NY; Summary of Review and Conclusions Regarding the City of St. Cloud's Regulation of Adult Use Businesses; and Adult Entertainment Business Study for Manatee County, the board of city commissioners finds: (1)  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on property values, urban blight, litter and sexual assault and exploitation. (2)  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from certain land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses and the surrounding area, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. (3)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city's rationale for this article, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and nonsexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented business that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this article are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 1, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-72. - Definitions.     Sexually oriented business is any one or more of the following: (a)  Adult bookstore. An establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, printed material, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their substantial emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. For purposes of this subsection, the aforementioned items shall be collectively referred to as "adult material." It shall be presumed that a business has a "significant portion of its stock in trade" in adult material if any one of the following criteria is satisfied: (1)  Twenty percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of adult material; (2)  Twenty percent or more of the stock in trade consists of adult material; (3)  Twenty percent or more of all inventory consists of adult material; (4)  Twenty percent or more of the retail floor area is devoted to adult material (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public); (5)  Twenty percent or more of the gross sales (including rentals) result from the sale or rental of adult material; or (6)  Twenty percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to adult material. (b)  Adult novelty store. An establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade, "sexually oriented devices," which means any artificial or simulated "specified anatomical area" or other device or paraphernalia that is designed in whole or part for "specified sexual activities" but shall not mean any contraceptive device. It shall be presumed that a business shall have a "significant portion of its stock in trade" in "sexually oriented devices" if any one of the following criteria is satisfied: (1)  Twenty percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of "sexually oriented devices"; (2)  Twenty percent or more of the stock in trade consists of "sexually oriented devices"; (3)  Twenty percent or more of all inventory consists of "sexually oriented devices"; (4)  Twenty percent or more of the retail floor area is devoted to "sexually oriented devices" (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public); (5)  Twenty percent or more of the gross sales result from the sale of "sexually oriented devices"; or (6)  Twenty percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to "sexually oriented devices". (c)  Adult video store. An establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes, digital video services (DVDs), movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their substantial emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. For purposes of this subsection, the aforementioned items shall be collectively referred to as "adult material." It shall be presumed that a business shall have a "significant portion of its stock in trade" in adult material if any one of the following criteria is satisfied: (1)  Twenty percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of adult material; (2)  Twenty percent or more of the stock in trade consists of adult material; (3)  Twenty percent or more of all inventory consists of adult material; (4)  Twenty percent or more of the retail floor area is devoted to adult material (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public); (5)  Twenty percent or more of the gross sales (including rentals) result from the sale or rental of adult material; or (6)  Twenty percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to adult material. (d)  Adult business. An establishment, other than those expressly specified in this section, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities. (e)  Adult theater. An enclosed building, or enclosed or semi-enclosed room or booth within an enclosed building, with a capacity of two or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by a substantial emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. (f)  Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by a substantial emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. (g)  Erotic entertainment/dance establishment. A nightclub, theater, or other establishment which features live performances by dancers, entertainers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by a substantial emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. (h)  Adult movie house. Any movie theater which on a regular, continuing basis shows films rated "X" by the Motion Picture Coding Association of America or any movie theater which presents for public viewing on a regular, continuing basis so-called "adult films" depicting sexual conduct. (i)  Explicit media outlet. Any commercial establishment which has an inventory of goods that is composed of at least of 50 percent of books, pamphlets, magazines, or other printed publications, films, or other media which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Public place of worship. A permanent stand alone building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and shall be publicly designated as a church, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes.     Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: (a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (b)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.     Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: (a)  Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism, zooerasty; (b)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; (c)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; (d)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts; (e)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; (f)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or (g)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation vaginal or anal irrigation. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 2, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-73. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. (a)  Sexually oriented businesses, as defined by this article, shall be located: (1)  On only a major thoroughfare that is W. Broad Avenue, Slappey Blvd., Oglethorpe Blvd., or Dawson Rd.; and that is within a portion of a parcel zoned as district C3, M1, or M2; and (2)  At least 250 feet from any parcel occupied by a school building, school grounds, college campus, public place of worship, licensed daycare, neighborhood public park or public playground, library, or any area zoned primarily for residential purposes. (b)  It shall be unlawful, in the City of Albany, to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business outside the areas specified in subsection (a) of this section, unless permitted elsewhere in this article. (c)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated an adult movie house, explicit media outlet or erotic entertainment/dance establishment, as specified, in the city, unless said sexually oriented business is at least: (1)  One thousand feet from any parcel occupied by a school building, school grounds, college campus, public place of worship, licensed daycare, neighborhood public park or public playground, library, or any area zoned primarily for residential purposes. (d)  Measurement. For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest part of any structure on the parcel containing the sexually oriented business, including signs and roof overhangs that is used in conjunction with the sexually oriented business, to the closest point on a property boundary or right-of-way associated with any of the land use(s) or zoning districts identified in subsection (a) above. (e)  Nonconforming uses. A sexually oriented business that does not conform to this section but which was legally established and lawfully operating under local and state law prior to the effective date of this article may continue to operate for two years following that date in order to make a reasonable recoupment of its investment in the real property at the current location. At the conclusion of said two years, the use will no longer be recognized as a lawful nonconforming use, and shall be terminated unless an extension of time has been granted, upon a showing of financial hardship, pursuant to the procedure set forth in the following subsection (d). An application for an extension based upon financial hardship ("hardship exception") shall be filed at least 60 days, and not more than 180 days, before the conclusion of the initial two-year period. (f)  Procedure for seeking hardship extension. An application for a hardship extension shall be filed in writing with the director of code enforcement and shall state the grounds for requesting an extension of time. Within ten days after receiving the application, the director of code enforcement shall schedule a public hearing on the application before the director of planning and developmental services, and the public hearing shall be conducted within 30 days after the receipt of the application. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be mailed to the applicant, shall be published at least ten days before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published within the city, and shall contain the particular location for which the hardship extension is requested. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to offer testimony, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. The director of planning and developmental services shall issue a written decision within ten days after the public hearing on the application for a hardship extension. An extension under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved, if the following criteria are met: (1)  The applicant has made a substantial investment, including but not limited to lease obligations incurred in an arms-length transaction, in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted to another, conforming use; and such investment was made prior to the effective date of this article; (2)  The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and (3)  The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment and to relocate the use to a location in conformance with this section. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 3, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-74. - License required. (a)  Business license. It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate a sexually oriented business, as defined by this article, in the city without a valid sexually oriented business license. (b)  Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall file in person at the code enforcement office a completed application made on a form provided by the code enforcement office. A sexually oriented business may designate an individual with an influential interest in the business to file its application for a sexually oriented business license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be signed as required by this article and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items in this subsection accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: (1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. (2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. (3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. (4)  The business name, location, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business. (5)  A written statement of the precise nature of the use for which the license is sought. (6)  Signature of the applicant. (c)  Incomplete application. Any submitted application that does not contain all required information, as set forth herein shall be deemed incomplete and shall be denied. (d)  Registered agent. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall have a registered agent in the county upon whom may be served any notices contemplated by this article. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 4, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-75. - Fees.     The occupational tax certificate contained in this code shall be paid by the holder of any sexually oriented business license. This tax will be calculated as specified in subsection 16-37(c), et seq. of this Code and section 16-1000. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 5, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-76. - Inspection.     Sexually oriented businesses shall permit agents of the city's code enforcement department, from time to time on an occasional basis, to inspect portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this article, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. The city's fire department shall have authority to regularly inspect sexually oriented businesses, to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes of the city. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize only reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 6, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-77. - Expiration and renewal of license. (a)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this article. (b)  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least 90 days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made less than 90 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current license will not be affected. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 7, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-78. - Suspension of license. (a)  The director of code enforcement shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article. (b)  The director of code enforcement shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business employee license if the employee has knowingly violated this article. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 8, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-79. - Revocation of license. (a)  The director of code enforcement shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly violates this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article and a suspension of the licensee's license has become effective within the previous 12-month period. (b)  The director of code enforcement shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if: (1)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the sexually oriented business license. (2)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of alcohol and/or controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented business; (3)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business; (4)  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; or (5)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity, as defined by the ordinance [this article], to occur in or on the premises of the sexually oriented business. (c)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. (d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this article, the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 9, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-80. - Hearing for denial, revocation, and/or suspension of license and appeal. (a)  When the director of code enforcement issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the director of code enforcement shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the code enforcement department. The notice shall specify a date, not more than ten business days after the date the notice is issued, on which the hearing officer, the city manager, shall conduct a hearing on the code enforcement director's written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license.     At the hearing, the respondent (licensee) shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the code enforcement director's witnesses. The code enforcement director shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer (city manager) shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five days after the hearing.     If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall not become effective until the 30th day after it is rendered, and the decision shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction, pursuant to the Georgia Rules of Civil Procedure. If the city manager, finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the city manager shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the code enforcement director to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the code enforcement director shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. (b)  If any court action challenging the decision of the hearing officer is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within ten days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any sexually oriented business that is operating as a sexually oriented business, on the date on which the completed business application, as applicable, is filed with the office of code enforcement. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's final administrative denial, suspension, or revocation decision, the code enforcement director shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the sexually oriented business and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's final administrative decision. The provisional license shall not be construed to provide the applicant with any substantive right, entitlement, or claim of estoppel beyond the ability to operate until the court enters judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's final administrative decision. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 10, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-81. - Transfer of license.     A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 11, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-82. - Regulations pertaining to sexually oriented business establishments. (a)  Employees. Employees of a sexually oriented business shall be not less than 18 years of age. (b)  Hours of operation. A sexually oriented business may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. (c)  Display of licenses. A sexually oriented business licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this article. (d)  Performance area. All dancing by adult entertainers at sexually oriented businesses shall occur on a platform, intended for that purpose, raised at least 19 inches from the level of the floor. (e)  Booths or viewing rooms. All booth and viewing rooms on the premises shall be visible from the front entrance of the establishment. All seating surfaces inside booths or viewing rooms shall have doors where the bottom of the door is at least 42 inches from the floor. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. (f)  Lighting. All areas of a sexually oriented business licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. (g)  Covering of windows and doors. All sexually oriented businesses which are licensed and permitted by this article shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 12, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-83. - Penalties and enforcement. (a)  A person who knowingly violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by fines not to exceed $500.00 per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed three months, or by both. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as such. (b)  The city's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this article to prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including injunction, shall be brought in the name of the city, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this article, or any of the laws in force in the city or to exempt anyone violating this Code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 13, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-84. - Applicability of article to existing businesses.     Existing business licenses. All existing sexually oriented businesses are hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operation or employment for a period of 90 days following the effective date of this article. By the end of said 90 days, all sexually oriented businesses must conform to and abide by the requirements of this article.     Existing building permits. All landowners and property owners who possess a legally obtained and valid building permit prior to the enactment of this article shall not be required to relocate their businesses to the land parcels C-3, M-1, and M-2, if such landowners' and property owners' businesses constitute sexually oriented businesses under this article. All other regulations and requirements set forth in this article shall apply to such landowners and property owners of sexually oriented businesses. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 14, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-85. - Prohibited conduct.     It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business operator to knowingly violate the following regulations or to knowingly allow an employee or any other person to violate the following regulations. (a)  Advertising without a license. No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued pursuant to this article. (b)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at a sexually oriented business shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any sexually oriented business. (c)  Employment of minors or prohibited persons. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to knowingly allow a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. (d)  Contact between patrons and employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at a sexually oriented business shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. (e)  Sale and consumption of alcohol. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell, serve, distribute, use, consume or allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of any sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, an erotic entertainment/dance establishment. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 15, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-86. - Severability.     This article and each section and provision of said article hereunder, are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this article be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this article. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 16, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 8-87. - Conflicting code provisions repealed.     Any provision(s) in this Code specifically in conflict with any provision in this article is hereby deemed inoperative and repealed. (Ord. No. 10-120, § 17, 6-22-2010) 
Secs. 8-88—8-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CLOSING HOURS FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES 
Sec. 8-107. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to respond to complaints of criminal activity associated with late-night entertainment venues which remain open past the operating hours of businesses licensed to sell alcohol. Therefore, this article is adopted to protect the public's health, safety and welfare. (Code 1985, § 5-72; Ord. No. 03-143, § 1, 12-23-2003) 
Sec. 8-108. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Dance hall means a dance hall includes any business where one of its purposes is promoting, facilitating or conducting public dancing on its premises.     Entertainment means any musical performance, theatrical performance, literary reading, and disc jockey performance where the audience is present at the actual time of occurrence. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a jukebox, tape deck or other means of playing music constitutes entertainment.     Public entertainment facility means a business located within the corporate limits of the city that is licensed and provides dancing and/or entertainment. (Code 1985, § 5-73; Ord. No. 03-143, § 1, 12-23-2003) 
Sec. 8-109. - Prohibited hours. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any public entertainment facility located within the corporate limits of the city to offer and/or provide public entertainment between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Tuesday through Saturday. All public entertainment facilities located within the corporate limits of the city shall be closed and cleared of all persons by 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and shall not resume business any earlier than 8:00 a.m. the following Monday morning. (b)  Every person, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of an owner or operator for an owner or whether acting as an agent or independent contractor for the owner, employee or operator, who participates in or allows, directly or indirectly, the operation of a public entertainment facility in violation of this section shall be guilty of an offense hereunder. Upon conviction such person shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of section 1-17. (Code 1985, § 5-74; Ord. No. 03-143, § 1, 12-23-2003; Ord. No. 04-125, §§ 1, 2, 8-24-2004) 