THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA ____________ Published by Order of the Board of City Commissioners 2009 ____________ > OFFICIALS of the CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Willie Adams, Jr., M.D. Mayor ____________ Jon Howard Dorothy Hubbard Morris Gurr Roger Marietta Bob Langstaff, Jr. Tommie Postell City Commissioners ____________ Alfred D. Lott City Manager ____________ C. Nathan Davis City Attorney ____________ Sonja Tolbert City Clerk PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented through Ord. No. 07-111, adopted April 24, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of city commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Shelly Hayes, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Alfred D. Lott and city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. © Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. 2009. AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED 09-141 AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Albany, Georgia and it is hereby ordained by authority of same:     Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 64, each inclusive, is adopted.     Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 22, 2009 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.     Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.     Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of City Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.     Section 5. Ordinances adopted after September 22, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.     Section 6. The last sentence of Section 38-69(d) of the Code is changed to read "within five business days."     Section 7. The reference at lines 2 and 3 of Section 52-33 of the Code "but not less than semiannually" is deleted.     Section 8. There is added in alphabetical order to Section 60-127 of the Code "PTP means Pilot Testing Program."     Section 9. To the list of priority pollutants at Section 60-196(c) of the Code, there is added "Bis (2-chloroisopropyl) ether" and "1, 12-Benzofluoranthene" is deleted and in its place is "11, 12-Benzofluoranthene."     Section 10. The penultimate sentence of Section 60-131 (f) of the Code is changed to read "If no building permit is required, the appropriate charge shall be paid to the city at the time the water meter is installed or the size changed."     Section 11. The last sentence of Section 60-949(1) of the Code is changed to read "For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utility facilities is defined as a strip of land at least four (4) feet wide, but not wider than the width of the utility facility plus two (2) feet on either side thereof."     Section 12. This ordinance in no way changes any provisions of the City Charter and shall become effective upon its adoption. /s/         Dorothy B. Hubbard       Mayor Pro Tem   ATTEST: /s/         Sonja Tolbert       City Clerk   Adopted: December 15, 2009 Introduced by Commissioner:  Postell                       Date(s) read:  Dec. 15, 2009       
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; the state Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; rabies control and licensing of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Adequate food and water means food and water which is sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from lack of food or water.     Animal means any wild or domestic animal except members of the rodent family, which are excluded from the provisions of this chapter; except as otherwise expressly provided.     Animal control board means the chief of police of the city police department, or said chief's designee; the president of the Albany Humane Society, or said president's designee; and one other individual to be appointed by the board of commissioners of the city.     Animal control officer means the chief of police of the city police department, or said chief's designee, to carry out the duties of an animal control officer as provided in this division. The animal control officer shall also be designated as the dog control officer for carrying out various duties under this division.     At large means that an animal is off the property of its owner and not under restraint.     Dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. (1)  The term "dangerous dog" means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: a.  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being or other animal without provocation on public or private property at any time after adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; or b.  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or other animals without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. (2)  The term "potentially dangerous dog" means any dog that, without provocation, causes injury to or endangers the safety of a human being or another animal on public or private property at any time after adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a dog may be considered potentially dangerous if the dog has been chained as a permanent means of confinement. (3)  A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this definition. A dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this definition if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person over the age of five who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. (4)  The term "owner," as used in this definition and as pertinent to dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs, means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the city. (5)  The term "records of an appropriate authority," as used in this definition means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of an animal control officer provided for in this chapter. (6)  The term "severe injury," as used in this definition, means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death.     Exposed to rabies means that an animal has been bitten by, or exposed to, any animal known or suspected to have been infected with rabies.     Free running line means a line which is attached or is secured by a swivel or other device which will prevent the line from being wrapped around some object.     Humane care of animals means, but is not limited to the provision of adequate medical attention, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, and wholesome and adequate food and water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species, and breed.     Kennel means any person engaged in the commercial business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding wild or domestic animals or livestock.     Livestock means all animals of the equine or bovine class, including goats, sheep, mules, horses, cattle, and other grazing animals, and all domestic fowl.     Owner means any person owning, keeping or harboring any wild or domestic animal or livestock.     Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a well ventilated securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog and shall be at least 200 square feet per dog.     Restraint means an animal is controlled by a leash, at heel or beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, or on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets, or confined within the property limits of its owner.     Spayed female means any female animal which has been operated upon to prevent conception as evidenced by the certificate of a licensed veterinarian.     Suffering means deprived of adequate food and water and/or humane care. (Code 1975, §§ 5-1, 5-3; Code 1985, §§ 6-1, 6-21(g)—(i), 6-98; Ord. No. 82-158, § 1, 6-30-1982; Ord. No. 03-137, § 1, 11-25-2003; Ord. No. 87-137, § 1(1), (2)(g)—(i), 5-12-1987; Ord. No. 10-106, § 1, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 10-119, §§ 1, 2, 4-27-2010) 
Sec. 10-2. - Exemptions.     The vaccination requirements of section 10-126 shall not apply to any dog belonging to a nonresident of the city kept within the city for not longer than 30 days, providing that all such dogs shall at all times while in the city be kept within a building, enclosure, or vehicle or be under restraint by the owner. (Code 1975, § 5-2; Code 1985, § 6-2) 
Sec. 10-3. - Designation of bird sanctuary.     The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. (Code 1975, § 5-31; Code 1985, § 6-3) 
Sec. 10-4. - Protection of birds.     It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl, or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests. (Code 1975, § 5-32; Code 1985, § 6-4) 
Sec. 10-5. - Humane treatment. (a)  Animals shall be fed no less than once daily and shall be fed a diet that meets the basic nutritional needs of the animal according to its species and breed. Food shall be kept in clean containers and shall not be allowed to mold or spoil. (b)  Clean drinking water of median temperature shall be provided at all times in a secured container; that is, a container that is stationary and cannot be spilled or overturned by the animal. (c)  All animals shall be provided with shelter to protect them from the elements. (1)  Winter: shelter for dogs will be a structure with a roof and floor that is small enough to allow the animal's body heat to warm it and large enough that the dog can stand up and turn around. Metal barrels are prohibited. Plastic barrels are allowed so long as they are secured to prevent movement of the barrel. (2)  Summer: doghouses, barrels, or similar structures must be provided in addition to adequate shade. (d)  All owners of diseased/injured/malnourished animals shall in a timely manner obtain veterinary care (by a licensed veterinarian) to the extent that the animal is free from excessive pain, suffering, and/or disfigurement. (e)  Tethering. (1)  Tethering dogs as a primary means of confinement is prohibited. (2)  Tethered animals must wear collars. (3)  Tethered animals must be secured in such a way as to prevent tangling, twisting, or wrapping. (4)  Animals may not be tethered so that they can reach fences or any other structures by which they can hang themselves. (5)  Animals may not be tethered so that they can reach any public area, including but not limited to alleys, streets, sidewalks, common areas, etc. (6)  Each tethered animal must have access to its own shelter, food, and water, separate from other animals. (7)  Animals may be tethered with cables or chains. Chains must be of minimal weight and thickness to secure the particular animal. Large, heavy chains are prohibited. (8)  No animal shall be fitted with weights of any kind at any time. (9)  Cats may not be tethered. (f)  Any such physical abuse that is unlawful to commit against humans shall also be unlawful to commit against animals, including but not limited to striking, cutting, burning, shaking, throwing, strangling, terrorizing, or depriving of sustenance. (g)  It shall be unlawful for the fur of long-coated animals to become matted to the point that the animal's skin is pulled, sores develop, and/or vision, hearing, normal walking, urinating, or defecating become impaired. (h)  It shall be unlawful to incite animals or fowl to fight, or to attend, participate in, or watch any such fight. (i)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensed veterinarian to crop or attempt to crop the ears, tail, or any other body part of an animal. (j)  It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle owner or operator to place or confine an animal or allow it to be placed or confined or to remain in an unattended motor vehicle without sufficient ventilation or under conditions for such a period of time as may reasonably be expected to endanger the health or well-being of such animal due to heat, lack of water, or such other circumstances as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or death of the animal. Officers finding an animal under such conditions may rescue such animal from the vehicle. Any officer who acts in substantial compliance with the requirements of this section shall make the officer and/or the city immune from any criminal or civil liability. (Code 1975, §§ 5-6, 5-7; Code 1985, § 6-5) 
Sec. 10-6. - Confinement of animals.     Every owner of animals shall confine such animals in secure confinement to prevent their being at large. When animals are off the owner's premises, they must be at all times under the direct control of such owner or other competent person by means of a secure leash not over ten feet in length, or at heel or beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, or by some other equivalent means of positive physical control. No dog shall be confined on the owner's premises by a leash of less than ten feet in length except by a leash which is a free running line. (Code 1975, § 5-8; Code 1985, § 6-6) 
Sec. 10-7. - Facilities for keeping animals. (a)  Every person desiring to keep animals within the city limits shall provide and maintain adequate and sanitary facilities for the keeping of such animals in accordance with the standards required by the provisions of this article. (b)  Enclosures for the confinement of animals shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. (Code 1975, §§ 5-41, 5-45; Code 1985, § 6-7) 
Sec. 10-8. - Tying animals to trees, poles, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person to tie any animal to any shade tree growing in any street or to any box around any tree planted or growing in any street or other public place or to any fire hydrant, lamppost or telephone, telegraph, electric light or electric railway pole in any street or public place within the city. (Code 1975, § 5-10; Code 1985, § 6-8) 
Secs. 10-9—10-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sec. 10-35. - Investigation; seizure; disposition. (a)  For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this article and of enforcing its provisions, police officers are hereby empowered to lawfully enter upon any premises upon which a dog is kept or harbored and demand the exhibition by the owner of any such dog and the license for such dog. (b)  Police officers may lawfully enter any premises for the purpose of impounding a dog or making a case against an owner after the dog has been seen in violation of any section of this Code. (c)  In the event an animal control officer finds any dog, cat, horse, mule, hog or other animal to be suffering, as herein defined, the officer may forthwith seize any such animal and remove it to the animal shelter. All expenses incurred in seizing, transporting and maintaining any such animal shall be for the account of the owner and shall be paid in full before the owner is allowed to reclaim any such animal. (d)  Where the condition of any seized animal is, in the opinion of the health officer or any licensed veterinarian, such as to justify it, such animal may be disposed of by euthanasia. (e)  In the event that the owner of any animal seized for violation of or held as evidence in connection with an alleged violation of O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-4 or 4-11-10, or any ordinance of the city requiring humane treatment of animals, pleads guilty or nolo contendere to any such offense, or is found guilty thereof, the owner shall forfeit all rights to the animal, and the city may, in its discretion, offer the animal for adoption or retain the same for its use. No animal may be reclaimed by an owner while any such charges are pending. (f)  When any animal has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Code because the owner has allegedly not provided humane care, the city may notify said owner to deposit an amount fixed and determined by the city to pay for the expense of the maintenance of the animal by the city until the question of forfeiture of ownership has been legally determined. If the deposit is depleted prior to such determination, additional deposits may be required from time to time. If the owner cannot be located after reasonable diligence, notification may be given by a notice published one time in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements are published. If the owner shall fail to make such deposit within three days after such notification or publication, the owner shall forfeit all rights to the animal, and the city may, in its discretion, offer the animal for adoption, or retain it for the use of the city. (Code 1975, § 5-3; Code 1985, § 6-21; Ord. No. 87-137, § 1(1), (2), 5-12-1987) 
Sec. 10-36. - Interference.     No person shall resist, interfere with, hinder, or molest any animal control officer in the performance of the duties imposed upon them by this chapter, or seek to release any animal in the custody of an animal control officer except as provided in this chapter. (Code 1975, § 5-4; Code 1985, § 6-22) 
Secs. 10-37—10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL 
Sec. 10-61. - Quarantine of suspected animal.     Every animal which bites a person or another animal shall be promptly reported to the county rabies control officer, and shall thereafter be securely quarantined at the direction of the officer for a period of ten days and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the officer. In the discretion of the county rabies control officer such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner or at the animal control shelter, or, at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of the owner's choice. In the case of stray animals whose ownership is not known, quarantine shall be at the animal control shelter. (Code 1975, § 5-101; Code 1985, § 6-36) 
Sec. 10-62. - Surrender of animal; redemption.     The owner, upon demand by the county rabies control officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human or which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies for supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner. Such animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies upon payment of the impoundment and board fees therefor and upon compliance with the licensing provisions of this article. (Code 1975, § 5-102; Code 1985, § 6-37) 
Sec. 10-63. - Disposition of dead rabid animal.     When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or is suspected by a licensed veterinarian of being rabid, dies while under observation, the county rabies control officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for pathological examination. (Code 1975, § 5-103; Code 1985, § 6-38) 
Sec. 10-64. - Area-wide quarantine authorized.     When one or both reports provided for by this article give a positive diagnosis of rabies, the county rabies control officer shall recommend a city-wide quarantine for such period of time as the rabies control officer shall deem proper, and while such quarantine is in effect no animal shall be taken or allowed upon the streets or off the property of the owner, nor shall any animal be taken or shipped from the city without written permission of such officer. (Code 1975, § 5-104; Code 1985, § 6-39) 
Sec. 10-65. - Extension of quarantine.     If there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended at the discretion of the county rabies control officer. (Code 1975, § 5-105; Code 1985, § 6-40) 
Sec. 10-66. - Destruction, isolation of bitten animals. (a)  Unvaccinated dogs and cats that are bitten by a proven rabid animal shall be destroyed immediately. If the owner is unwilling to have this done, such animals must be confined and quarantined for six months by the owner or at the owner's expense. One month before release, i.e., five months after being bitten, the animal shall be vaccinated against rabies. If the animal was vaccinated at least one month before the exposure, it shall be revaccinated immediately and placed in strict confinement for at least 30 days by the owner or at the owner's expense. (b)  Any cattle or livestock known to have been bitten by rabid animals shall be destroyed immediately. If the owner is unwilling to have this done, the animal shall be vaccinated and placed in strict confinement for six months, by the owner or at the owner's expense. (c)  Where quarantine or confinement is carried out pursuant to the foregoing provisions, such quarantine or confinement shall conform to the requirements of section 10-61. (Code 1975, § 5-106; Code 1985, § 6-41; Ord. No. 85-240, § 1, 11-12-1985) 
Sec. 10-67. - Killing, removal of rabid animals.     It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal which has bitten a human, except as provided in this article, nor shall any person remove such animal from the city limits without the written permission of the county rabies control officer. (Code 1975, § 5-107; Code 1985, § 6-42) 
Sec. 10-68. - Disposition of rabid animals.     The county rabies control officer shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies. (Code 1975, § 5-108; Code 1985, § 6-43) 
Sec. 10-69. - Surrender of carcass.     The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the county rabies control officer. (Code 1975, § 5-109; Code 1985, § 6-44) 
Sec. 10-70. - Reports of bite cases.     It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the county rabies control officer the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as may be required by such officer for the purpose of rabies control. (Code 1975, § 5-110; Code 1985, § 6-45) 
Sec. 10-71. - Responsibilities of veterinarians.     It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the county rabies control officer his or her diagnosis of any animal observed by him or her as a rabies suspect. The county rabies control officer shall furnish full information for each suspect to all licensed veterinarians. (Code 1975, § 5-111; Code 1985, § 6-46) 
Secs. 10-72—10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LIVESTOCK 
Sec. 10-101. - Swine prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the city any live pigs or hogs at any time. (Code 1975, § 5-42; Code 1985, § 6-61) 
Sec. 10-102. - Keeping of certain animals restricted.     No livestock, shall be kept, fed or used within the city limits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the riding of saddle horses on private property, or the riding of saddle horses and the drawing of horse or mule drawn vehicles on the public streets and ways of the city. (Code 1975, § 5-43; Code 1985, § 6-62) 
Sec. 10-103. - Keeping of domestic fowl restricted. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any persons to have, store, keep, pen or possess, for commercial purposes, trade purposes or resale, any chickens, geese, turkeys, ducks or other domestic fowl in the city within 25 feet, in any direction, of any dwelling house or place or building occupied as a residence or office by any person. The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply in the city limits when domestic fowl are kept on a constructed and graded-to-drain concrete or other impervious flooring and the same is maintained uncracked in a sanitary condition. (b)  When any chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys or other domestic fowl are enclosed in pens, coops, or the like in the city, for commercial purposes or trade purposes or for resale, such coop or pen shall be built at least 25 inches from the ground with a hardware cloth floor and a mesh of not less than one-half inch. Underneath the hardware floor and mesh shall be placed, of equal length and width with such coop or pen, a removable pan or metal vessel or a pan or vessel of tongue and groove flooring, which shall be kept and maintained at all times in a sanitary and clean condition. (Code 1975, § 5-44; Code 1985, § 6-63) 
Sec. 10-104. - Driving animals.     It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or assist in driving any horse, mule or cow or any number of either or all through, on or in any of the streets or alleys of the city without having the same securely haltered, roped or otherwise fastened together and held by one or more persons. (Code 1975, § 5-11; Code 1985, § 6-64) 
Sec. 10-105. - Storage of feed.     It shall be unlawful for any person to store anywhere within the city any feed for chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys, or other domestic fowl or horses or cows unless the same shall be stored or kept in a ratproof container or a container not accessible to rats. This section shall not apply to wholesale and retail dealers of such feed for sale or resale. (Code 1975, § 5-46; Code 1985, § 6-65) 
Sec. 10-106. - Manure pits; hauling manure through streets, etc. (a)  Every person owning, operating or controlling the use of any building or part of a building or any place within the city who keeps one or more head of livestock shall maintain in connection therewith a bin or pit in which manure shall be placed pending removal. Such bin or pit shall be located at a point most remote from any dwelling or other structure owned or occupied by others than the owner of the premises mentioned and shall likewise be placed at a point most remote on the premises from any street or avenue. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any such person to hold manure on such person's premises in bins or pits after two days from date of written notice from the city to remove the same. Any person may use manure upon his or her premises for the purpose of enriching his or her own ground or for any other use to which manure can properly be put when the same is not offensive or unsanitary. Any person may remove manure from bins, pits or other places where deposited as required by this section for any purpose where such manure has not become offensive or unsanitary. (c)  All equipment used for the removal of manure shall be so constructed as to prevent the same from being dropped or spilled along the streets or otherwise being dropped, spilled or scattered along the streets or public places within the city. (Code 1975, § 5-47; Code 1985, § 6-66) 
Secs. 10-107—10-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 10-126. - Inoculation of dogs required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any dog over the age of three months within the city unless such dog has been inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. (Code 1975, § 5-61; Code 1985, § 6-91) 
Sec. 10-127. - Time, proof of inoculation.     It shall be the duty of every owner to ensure that dogs are inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian prior to March 31 of each year and that the current county rabies tag is securely fastened around the dog's neck and worn by the dog at all times. (Code 1975, § 5-62; Code 1985, § 6-92) 
Sec. 10-128. - Unlawful use of tag.     It shall be unlawful for any person to use for any dog a rabies tag issued for another dog. (Code 1975, § 5-63; Code 1985, § 6-93) 
Sec. 10-129. - Duplicate tags.     It shall be the duty of every owner to obtain duplicate rabies tags from veterinarians to replace lost tags. (Code 1975, § 5-64; Code 1985, § 6-94) 
Sec. 10-130. - Female dogs in heat to be confined.     No unspayed female dog, while such dog is in season, shall be allowed to remain upon the premises of the owner unless kept in adequate enclosure, nor shall any such dog be allowed to be upon the streets or other public or private places of the city. (Code 1975, § 5-9; Code 1985, § 6-95) 
Secs. 10-131—10-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL 
Sec. 10-160. - Short title.     This division may also be known as the "Dangerous Dog Ordinance." (Code 1985, § 6-96; Ord. No. 03-137, § 1, 11-25-2003) 
Sec. 10-161. - Intent.     This article shall clearly define local government responsibility, as well as limit the administrative and liability burdens upon the city with regard to potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs. This article is authorized by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. (Code 1985, § 6-97; Ord. No. 03-137, § 1, 11-25-2003) 
Sec. 10-162. - Designation of a dog control officer.     The chief of police of the city police department shall be designated the dog control officer for purposes of this Dangerous Dog Control Ordinance. It shall be the dog control officer's duty to investigate and classify as appropriate suspected, dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. However, the dog control officer's duty of investigation and classification rises only when a report of an occurrence warranting such classification occurs in the corporate limits of the city from any law enforcement agency, rabies control office, county or state board of health, Albany Humane Society, or a written report by a citizen of the city. (Code 1985, § 6-99; Ord. No. 03-137, § 1, 11-25-2003) 
Sec. 10-163. - Responsibilities of dog control officer. (a)  Upon receiving a report that a dog has acted in a dangerous, or potentially dangerous manner, the dog control officer shall investigate the allegations and make a determination as to the truthfulness of said allegations. After concluding the investigation, the dog control officer shall: (1)  Decide the dog should not be classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous; (2)  Classify the dog as potentially dangerous; or (3)  Classify the dog as dangerous. (b)  In the event that the dog control officer classifies the dog under investigation as "dangerous" or "potentially dangerous," the dog control officer must notify the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall include a summary of the reason for which the animal has been classified and provide the owners with a form to request a hearing to contest the classification within 15 days of the notice date. If no hearing is requested, the dog's classification goes into effect on the 15th day. (c)  When the animal control board receives a request for a hearing it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The animal control board shall notify the owner in writing, certified mail, return receipt requested, of the date, time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence. In addition thereto, the animal control board shall receive such other evidence and testimony as it may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify or overrule the dog control officer's classification of the dog. Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the animal control board shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of its determination. In the event that the animal control board pursuant to the foregoing hearing classifies the dog as "dangerous" or "potentially dangerous," the effective date of such classification shall be the date of the notice. (Code 1985, § 6-100; Ord. No. 03-137, § 1, 11-25-2003) 
Sec. 10-164. - Animal owner responsibilities. (a)  The owner of any dog which has been classified as "dangerous" or "potentially dangerous" must register said dog with the dog control officer of the city on an annual basis. Failure to register a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on an annual basis shall be grounds for confiscation of the dog by the dog control officer. In order to obtain registration or re-registration of such an animal, owners must present or provide evidence to the dog control officer of the following requirements: (1)  Proof of proper enclosure adequate to confine the dog, i.e., a well ventilated pen, fence, or structure that prevents the dog from escaping and prevents children from coming into contact with the dog. The enclosure must also protect the dog from the elements and be at least 200 square feet per dog; (2)  Proof that a uniform warning sign is present on the owner's premises. The warning sign may be obtained from the department of natural resources and shall be available through the dog control officer. Dog owner signs must conform to the department of natural resources uniform design; (3)  For dangerous dogs only, a policy of insurance in an amount equal to the minimum required under state law, issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; and (4)  For dangerous dog only, a surety bond in an amount equal to the minimum required under state law, issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state, payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. (b)  A person applying for registration or re-registration of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual registration fee. Any such dog that has been spayed/neutered may be registered or re-registered for an annual registration fee. The amounts of the annual registration and re-registration fees for dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs and dogs that have been spayed/neutered shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (c)  Owners of classified dogs must notify the dog control officer within eight hours if the dog is on the loose, unconfined, has attacked a person, has died, or been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the dog control officer and Albany Humane Society with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. Failure to so notify the dog control officer and Albany Humane Society shall be grounds for confiscation of said dog. (d)  An owner of a classified dog shall keep the dog in a proper enclosure unless the dog is on a secure leash, is walked or taken to or from the pen by a responsible individual. Nothing contained herein shall permit an owner to use a chain or muzzle as a permanent means of confinement. Violation of this provision, in addition to constituting a misdemeanor, shall be grounds for confiscation of the dog. (e)  An owner of a classified dog shall notify the dog control officer when moving from the jurisdiction of the city. This notice must be in writing. Failure of the owner to comply with this provision, in addition to being a misdemeanor hereunder shall be grounds for confiscation of the dog. (f)  Any owner of a dog which has been classified as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, or similarly classified in another jurisdiction within this state, must notify the dog control officer of the city within ten days of residency. Violation of this provision, in addition to being a misdemeanor, shall be grounds for confiscation of the dog. (g)  Any owner of a dog meeting the classification requirements hereunder moving into the city from outside the state must notify the dog control officer within 30 days of residency. Violation of this provision, in addition to being a misdemeanor, shall be grounds for confiscation of the dog. (h)  The dog control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. (i)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the dog control officer does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in this division are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. (Code 1985, § 6-101; Ord. No. 03-137, § 1, 11-25-2003) State Law reference— Owners of dogs designated as "dangerous dogs" required to have a surety bond of at least $15,000.00 or a policy of insurance of at least $15,000.00 against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25(c). 
Sec. 10-165. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. (a)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer if the: (1)  Owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond required by this division; (2)  Dog is not validly registered as required by this division; (3)  Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or (4)  Dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of this division. (b)  A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: (1)  Not validly registered as required by this division; (2)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or (3)  Outside a proper enclosure in violation of this division. (c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon proper proof to the animal control board that the owner has complied with the provisions of this division and upon the payment of the costs to the city for confiscating and boarding the dog. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this division within four days of the date the dog was confiscated, said dog shall be placed into custody of the Albany Humane Society for disposition as it deems proper. The costs for confiscating, boarding, and disposal of said dog shall remain the responsibility of the owner of the dog. (Code 1985, § 6-102; Ord. No. 03-137, § 1, 11-25-2003) 
Sec. 10-166. - Limits of city liability.     It is the intent of this division that the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such dog. Under no circumstances shall the city or any of its employees or officials which enforce or fail to enforce the provisions of this division be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, or by a dog that has been reported to the proper authorities as being a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, or by a dog that a dog control officer has failed to identify as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, or by a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in this division, or by a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in this division. (Code 1985, § 6-103; Ord. No. 03-137, § 1, 11-25-2003) 
Sec. 10-167. - Violations; penalty. (a)  The owner of a dangerous dog who violates this division or whose dog is subject to confiscation under this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this division, for the second conviction a fine of not less than $750.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $1,000.00 shall be imposed. (b)  The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who violates this division or whose potentially dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this division, for a second conviction a fine of not less than $300.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $500.00 shall be imposed. (c)  In addition to the penalties for violations as hereinabove set out, the dangerous dog involved shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer and placed in quarantine for the property length of time as determined by the dog control board, and thereafter, the dangerous dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. (d)  In lieu of the fines in subsections (a) or (b) of this section, the owner may surrender the dog to the Albany Humane Society; or if the dog has been spayed or neutered, the animal control board may reduce the fine as it deems appropriate. (e)  No owner of a dangerous dog shall be held criminally liable under this division for injuries inflicted by said owner's dog to any human being over the age of five while both the dog and victim are on the dog owner's property. (Code 1985, § 6-104; Ord. No. 03-137, § 1, 11-25-2003) 
Secs. 10-168—10-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IMPOUNDMENT 
Sec. 10-180. - Authority.     It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to seize and impound all animals found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter within this city, whether such animal shall be in the immediate presence of its owner or custodian or otherwise. (Code 1975, § 5-81; Code 1985, § 6-106; Ord. No. 82-158, § 3, 6-30-1982) 
Sec. 10-181. - Election of enforcement procedure.     When an animal is impounded and its ownership is known, the animal control officer may either deliver the animal into the custody of the Albany Area Humane Society for impoundment, or cite the owner to appear in the municipal court to answer to charges of the violation of this chapter, or both. (Code 1975, § 5-82; Code 1985, § 6-107; Ord. No. 82-158, § 4, 6-30-1982) 
Sec. 10-182. - Custody of impounded animals.     The city manager is authorized to contract with the Albany Area Humane Society or other organization having an interest in the humane treatment and disposition of animals for the care, custody, adoption and disposition of all animals impounded under this chapter. It shall be unlawful for anyone to interfere with the operation of any facility maintained for the impoundment of animals under contract with the city, or to remove from such facility without the consent of the operator of the facility any animal kept there, or to resist, hinder, interfere with or molest any agent or employee or member of any organization operating such facility in the performance of his or her duty. (Code 1985, § 6-108; Ord. No. 82-158, § 5(5-21), 6-30-1982) 
Chapter 12 - AVIATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Aviation generally, O.C.G.A. § 6-1-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 12-1. - Soliciting at airport restricted.     It shall be unlawful for any person, either for himself or as agent or employee of any other person, to solicit the sale, use, hiring or rental of goods, wares, merchandise or services of any kind in the lobby of the airport terminal or at any other place on the property of the Southwest Georgia Regional Airport, except at a location duly assigned and licensed by contract for that purpose, and by a person under contract with the city to sell or rent such goods or to render such services at such location. (Code 1975, § 3-1; Code 1985, § 7-1; Ord. No. 88-153, § 1, 8-23-1988) 
Sec. 12-2. - Vehicles for hire—Use generally.     Except as permitted by contract with the city, it shall be unlawful for any taxicab or other vehicle for rent or hire to park, linger or remain on the property of the Southwest Georgia Regional Airport, except for the purpose of discharging passengers, or of picking up passengers or delivering vehicles for rent or hire in response to an arrangement previously made with the customers and not pursuant to any solicitation of business on the airport premises. (Code 1975, § 3-2; Code 1985, § 7-2; Ord. No. 88-153, § 1, 8-23-1988) 
Sec. 12-3. - Same—Delivery.     All vehicles for hire delivered to or for a customer at the airport by or on behalf of persons not operating inside the airport terminal building under contract with the city shall be delivered to the customer at such point outside the airport terminal building as shall be designated by the city for that purpose. No person delivering such vehicles for hire shall enter the airport terminal building for any purpose whatsoever. (Code 1975, § 3-3; Code 1985, § 7-3) 
Sec. 12-4. - Same—Advertising.     It shall be unlawful for any person to display inside the airport terminal building any advertisement, insignia, badge or other device or article of clothing containing the name, trademark or other mark identifying any business offering vehicles for rent or hire, or other otherwise advertising the same, except as authorized by contract with the city. (Code 1975, § 3-4; Code 1985, § 7-4) 
Sec. 12-5. - Authority of airport director to establish traffic regulations; penalties; conflicts. (a)  The airport director, or the chief safety officer of the airport when authorized by the airport director, shall determine and designate from time to time those areas of airport properties, including access roads and other roads, which shall be accessible to vehicular traffic and shall determine and establish the conditions and regulations under which such access shall be exercised. Suitable signs shall be posted by the airport director or the chief safety officer or under their direction giving notice of accessible areas and prohibited areas. (b)  The airport director, or the chief safety officer of the airport when authorized by the airport director, shall determine from time to time the speed limits which shall be in effect upon the accessible airport properties and upon the public roads lying within the boundaries of the airport properties and shall determine what portions of areas and public roads may be used for parking and upon what conditions. Suitable signs shall be posted by the airport director or the chief safety officer giving notice of the speed limits and parking regulations. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any traffic regulations or parking regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section or to enter any areas not designated as accessible areas pursuant thereto. (d)  Except to the extent that they may conflict with anything contained in this section, the rules and regulations of the Southwest Georgia Regional Airport, heretofore approved by the board of city commissioners by Resolution No. 76-R181, adopted August 10, 1976, are hereby reaffirmed, ratified, enacted and ordained, and shall remain in full force and effect. (Code 1975, § 3-5; Code 1985, § 7-5; Ord. No. 88-153, § 1, 8-23-1988) 
Secs. 12-6—12-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AVIATION COMMISSION 
Sec. 12-29. - Creation.     There is hereby created and established the Albany-Dougherty County Aviation Commission, hereinafter referred to in this article as the aviation commission. (Code 1975, § 3-21; Code 1985, § 7-16) 
Sec. 12-30. - Composition.     The aviation commission shall be composed of seven members, one of who shall be the mayor of the city, who shall serve for the duration of his/her term as such, or his/her designee who shall serve at the mayor's pleasure, one member of the board of city commissioners who shall be appointed for a term of one year, and five members at large. (Code 1975, § 3-22; Code 1985, § 7-17; Ord. No. 12-116, § 1, 10-23-2012) 
Sec. 12-31. - Qualification of members.     All appointees of the aviation commission shall be citizens of the county who have had at least five years of business or professional experience and have manifested some interest in the advancement of aviation. (Code 1975, § 3-23; Code 1985, § 7-18) 
Sec. 12-32. - Appointment, terms of at-large members.     The members at-large of the aviation commission shall be appointed to the commission by the board of city commissioners for terms of three years. All members of the aviation commission shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. (Code 1975, § 3-24; Code 1985, § 7-19; Ord. No. 90-146, 9-11-1990; Ord. No. 00-140, § 1, 8-22-2000; Ord. No. 01-100, § 1, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 12-33. - Filling vacancies.     When a vacancy occurs on the aviation commission for any cause, it shall be the duty of the board of city commissioners to appoint a member to complete the unexpired term of the member whose absence created the vacancy. The aviation commission will submit nominations of members at large to the board of city commissioners for their consideration. (Code 1975, § 3-25; Code 1985, § 7-20; Ord. No. 84-166, § 1, 8-14-1984; Ord. No. 00-140, § 1, 8-22-2000; Ord. No. 01-100, § 1, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 12-34. - Compensation.     All members of the aviation commission shall serve without compensation. (Code 1975, § 3-26; Code 1985, § 7-21) 
Sec. 12-35. - Election of chairman.     The chairman of the aviation commission shall be elected annually by the members of the commission. (Code 1975, § 3-27; Code 1985, § 7-22) 
Sec. 12-36. - General management of airport. (a)  The aviation commission shall have the charge and management of all property incidental to the operation of the Southwest Georgia Regional Airport and the McAfee Air Terminal, and the aviation commission shall take all steps necessary, subject to the approval of the board of city commissioners where otherwise required, toward constructing, improving and maintaining such properties; including the construction, alteration and repair of airport buildings and the removal, lowering, marking and lighting of airport obstructions. The aviation commission shall make recommendations to the board of city commissioners for the acquisition of such lands or property interests therein as the commission shall deem necessary either for the construction or expansion of the airport, or to protect the airport and the approaches thereto, and for this purpose the aviation commission shall make surveys, prepare plans and specifications, and employ adequate personnel therefor. (b)  The aviation commission shall, subject to approval of the board of city commissioners where required, be authorized and empowered to: (1)  Enter into contracts, either as lessor or lessee, for the rental of buildings or portions of buildings, lands, office space, equipment and any other property now owned or hereafter acquired by the city located at or upon airport property; (2)  Contract for concessions and other rights thereon; (3)  Adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the aviation commission and of the airport; (4)  Receive all revenues from leases of properties used in connection with the airport, from concessions, rentals, fees, grants, contributions and other sources, and to make payment out of such funds for salaries, improvements, repairs and other expenses; (5)  In all respects to include hire and discharge all employees necessary to fulfill the duties of the aviation commission, and to fix the salaries and compensations of such employees, provided the airport's director shall be hired by and report to the city manager. Additionally, as with other department heads, the airport's director maybe terminated by the city manager. Further, the airport director shall receive such compensation as may be prescribed by the city manager. (6)  Have exclusive control, custody and direction of all land, properties, and improvements, and the general direction of the same. (c)  The aviation commission shall make no sales or conveyances of property, or agreements for the lease, rental or sale of any property, until such transactions have been approved by the board of city commissioners. All agreements or contracts for the expenditure of any sum in excess of $40,000.00 for any single project or purchase or undertaking shall be approved by the board of city commissioners. Expenditures in excess of $5,000.00 but less than $40,000.00 must receive approval of the city manager. Expenditures of $5,000.00 or less may be approved by the aviation commission. (Code 1975, § 3-28; Code 1985, § 7-23; Ord. No. 88-153, § 1, 8-23-1988; Ord. No. 13-110, § 1, 3-26-2013) 
Sec. 12-37. - Financial procedures. (a)  The aviation commission shall operate on the same fiscal year as the city. The commission shall furnish to the board of city commissioners a detailed statement of its operations for the current fiscal year, and a proposed budget for the next fiscal year showing anticipated revenues and anticipated expenditures, which shall be filed with the city's finance department, and shall return to the city treasurer all funds that have not been expended by the end of the fiscal year and which are not contracted for or set aside to match federal or state funds or reserved for the payment of debts which have been made but not yet matured. (b)  The board of city commissioners shall have the right of revision of the proposed budget, and upon approval of a budget for the aviation commission, the board of city commissioners shall appropriate for the coming fiscal year a sufficient amount to equal the deficiency between the estimated revenues of the aviation commission and the estimated expenditures commencing July 1 of the fiscal year. (c)  The aviation commission shall have the right to apply for and to receive and utilize any federal or state funds which may be or become available for the acquisition, improvement, alteration or maintenance of airports or airport or terminal facilities, and to enter into any agreements with the federal government in connection therewith, particularly grant agreements necessary under the provisions of such federal or state laws in order to become the recipient of federal or state aid, under such terms and conditions as might be required by the federal or state government under grant or aid agreements, and also shall have the right to apply for and receive state aid or grants for such purposes under such conditions as the state government might prescribe. The aviation commission shall also have the right to receive contributions from any other source; provided, however, that the aviation commission shall not match or agree to match any funds for any purpose from any agency without the consent of the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 3-29; Code 1985, § 7-24) 
Sec. 12-38. - Salaries, duties and airport personnel.     Employees of the aviation commission shall be eligible to receive the benefits of any present or future pension or retirement plans of the city, and any life insurance, hospitalization or other employee benefits in effect now or in the future by the city, or any successor form of government, except that for airport employees any matching contribution to any such plans or benefits shall be made by the aviation commission. (Code 1975, § 3-30; Code 1985, § 7-25) 
Sec. 12-39. - Rules, reports.     The aviation commission shall make its own rules with reference to meetings, and shall make periodic reports to the board of city commissioners. All minutes and documents of the aviation commission shall be available at all times to the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 3-31; Code 1985, § 7-26) 
Sec. 12-40. - Termination.     If the aviation commission shall become ineffective, or shall function at the displeasure of the city, the commission can be dissolved at any time by a majority vote of the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 3-32; Code 1985, § 7-27) 
Sec. 12-41. - Airport police and firefighting personnel. (a)  The aviation commission is authorized to employ police and firefighting personnel for the city's airport facilities. Such personnel shall be under the control of the chief security and firefighting officer. (b)  Persons employed as safety, police, and firefighting personnel are required to meet the qualifications and training requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 25-4-31 and 35-8-1 to 35-8-18 and be so certified. They shall be required to take the oath required of police officers by Charter section 23, and by section 2-130. The oath shall be administered by the chairman of the aviation commission. (c)  Police and firefighting personnel employed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall have general powers of arrest for violations of federal or state law or ordinances of the city, committed upon the airport premises. Such officers shall also have the power and authority to issue citations and summons for violations of traffic laws and regulations or other ordinances of the city or the county committed upon the airport premises. (Code 1975, § 3-33; Code 1985, § 7-28) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 
Sec. 14-1. - Adoption by reference.     Unless otherwise provided for by subsequent ordinance or another provision of this Code, the listed technical building and construction codes in subsection (a)(1) and (2) of this section are adopted by reference and incorporated into this Code as if set out fully herein, including the administration and appendix chapters also contained in those codes: The state minimum codes enumerated under O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9), as now or hereafter revised or modified pursuant to state law: (1)  International Building Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007. (2)  International Residential Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. (3)  International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2008. (4)  International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. (5)  International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. (6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. (7)  National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2006. (8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments 2008. (9)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition, as amended. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 1, 1-12-2009; Ord. No. 09-109, § 3, 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 14-2. - Conflicts and enforcement. (a)  If any of the publications listed in section 14-1 are adopted as a state minimum code pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the edition adopted by the state shall control. If any of the publications listed in section 14-1 are less stringent than the state minimum codes promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., the state minimum code shall control. (b)  A copy of each of the publications listed in section 14-1, as adopted by the state, is filed in the office of planning and development and available for review by the public. The same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city and the unincorporated areas of Dougherty County, Georgia. (c)  The city manager or the city manager's designee shall enforce the state minimum codes adopted herein. (Ord. No. 08-118, § 3(8-39), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 14-3. - References to officials in adopted technical codes.     Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this chapter, then that designated official of the city, who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code, shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
Sec. 14-4. - Permitting process; building permits and administration of construction codes. (a)  All applications for building permits, grading plans, land disturbance permits will be made to the inspection department. Only two complete sets of plans will be submitted at this time. No other department will accept these type of plans. (b)  On Tuesday and Thursday of each week staff of the inspection, engineering, environmental health, planning and water, gas, and light departments will meet to review all plans submitted since the previous meeting. These plans will be reviewed to determine if all required information has been submitted, not that the plans meet all codes. If the plans are complete the applicant will be notified and the appropriate number of plans will be submitted to inspection. If the plans are incomplete the applicant will be notified in writing with every specific deficiency noted. When corrected the plans will be resubmitted and the process will begin again. (c)  After certification that plans are complete and the appropriate number of sets of plans are submitted to the inspection department only, the inspection department will route plans to the departments whose review is required. Those departments will have the number of days as listed in the developers handbook to complete their review. All approved plans will be submitted to the inspection department by the various departments and a permit will be issued. If there are deficiencies in the plans the reviewing department will notify the inspection department in writing as soon as possible, but not wait until the end of the review period. The inspection department will then notify the applicant in writing of the needed corrections. When all items have been corrected permits will be issued. (d)  All progress and final inspections will be coordinated through the inspection department. Applicants/contractors will call inspection and a log will be made of each type of inspection requested. At the end of each day inspection will fax a list of all scheduled inspections to the appropriate department. When all final inspections have been completed a certificate of occupancy will be issued. To make this work correctly several points are important. (1)  Plans will no longer be accepted for review at any department other than inspection. This will insure that the review is coordinated and maintained. Additionally, all fees will be paid at the inspection department. (2)  Should a department have a question regarding something in the plan, it will be possible for that department to contact the applicant/engineer to resolve the question. (3)  The inspection department will monitor all of the review process. On a weekly basis the city manager will be provided a report on the status of all project reviews. (e)  The fees for the reinspections, review of plans, subsequent reviews, additional plan review, and building permits shall be as established by the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and are available for public examination in the offices of planning and development, the city clerk, and are listed in the fee schedule. (Code 1985, § 8-3; Ord. No. 90-112, § 2, 3-13-1990; Ord. No. 93-118, § 1, 3-23-1993; Ord. No. 96-105, § 1, 2-27-1996; Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.1), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-5. - General.     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, erection, installation, alteration, demolition, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of buildings or structures, plumbing, mechanical, gas, and electrical systems within the City of Albany and Dougherty County, Georgia. Any and all requirements of this chapter shall expressly include any and all technical codes as amended by the city pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.2), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-6. - Applicability. (a)  Generally. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all matters affecting or related to buildings, structures, equipment or systems as set forth in section 14-5. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive requirement shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. (b)  Existing installations. Buildings, structures, plumbing, mechanical and electrical systems lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this ordinance shall be permitted to have their use and maintenance continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and no hazard to life, health or property is created by such building, structure or system. (c)  Work to conform to codes. No building, structure, system, appliance or equipment, as hereinafter specified in this division, shall be constructed, erected, installed, altered or repaired, except in conformance with the provisions of this division and this Code. (d)  Public utility services. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the installation, alteration or repair of services up to and including the meters where such work is performed by or is an integral part of a system owned or operated by a public utility service corporation, water department, gas company, railroad company, pipeline company, or other public utility in the exercise of its normal functions or in rendering its duly authorized service as such. (e)  Other laws. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. (f)  Referenced codes and standards. The state codes adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be considered part of the requirements of this division to the prescribed extent of each such adoption. Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. (g)  Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations, or repairs to any building, structure or system shall conform to that required for a new building, structure or system without requiring the existing building, structure or system to comply with all requirements of this chapter. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing building, structure or system to become unsafe, unsanitary or overloaded. (h)  Ordinary repairs. Ordinary repairs shall be permitted in the same manner and arrangement as in the existing system, provided that such repairs or replacements are not hazardous to the public health, safety or welfare. (i)  Change in occupant/occupancy. It shall be unlawful to make any change in the occupant or occupancy of any building or structure that does not meet the requirements of this chapter. Prior to the issuance of any business occupation tax certificate, the director of finance shall advise the building official that an application for a business occupation tax certificate has been submitted to the city for review. Prior to the issuance of the business occupation tax certificate, the building official shall inspect the building to be occupied and certify that such building or structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new occupant or occupancy and that such change of occupant or occupancy does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. (j)  Requirements not covered by Code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure or system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this Code shall be determined by the director of planning and development services. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.3), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-7. - Enforcement. (a)  Enforcement. The planning and development services department is responsible for administration and enforcement of this chapter. (b)  Deputies and authorized representatives. In accordance with prescribed procedures of the city, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, authorized representatives, technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as authorized by law and delegated by the building official. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.4), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-8. - Duties and powers of the building official. (a)  Generally. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the adopted state codes. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this Code and the adopted state codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the force and effect of law and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code or in the adopted state codes. (b)  Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and plans, issue permits for the erection, construction, alteration and demolition of buildings and structures and installation of mechanical, plumbing, gas and electrical systems, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code. (c)  Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. (d)  Inspections. The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved qualified agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. (e)  Identification. The building official, deputy or authorized representative shall carry proper identification when inspecting buildings, structures or premises in the performance of duties under this chapter. (f)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the building, structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the building, structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such building, structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building, structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. (g)  Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained for the period required by state law for retention of public records. (h)  Approved materials, equipment, appliances and devices. Materials, equipment, appliances and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. (i)  Areas prone to flooding. The building official shall not grant modifications to any provisions related to areas prone to flooding as established by the flood insurance rate map, as may hereinafter be amended, without meeting the intent and purpose of the floodplain management chapter or the granting of a variance to such provisions by the floodplain management review board. (j)  Alternative materials, designs, methods of construction, equipment and appliances. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the installation of any materials or to prohibit any designs, methods of construction, equipment or appliances not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided that any such alternatives have been approved by the building official in writing. Alternative materials, designs, methods of construction, equipment or appliances shall be approved in writing where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent and purpose of the provisions of this chapter, and the material, methods of work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. (k)  Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the city. Such tests shall be paid for by the person seeking to rely on such alternative materials or methods. (l)  Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter, the codes or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. (m)  Testing agency. All tests shall be performed by an agency approved by the building official. (n)  Test reports. The building official shall retain reports of tests for the period required for retention of public records. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.5), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-9. - Permits. (a)  Permit required. A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, erection, alteration or repair to a building or structure, mechanical system, gas system, plumbing system, electrical system, and energy conservation system, other than ordinary repairs. Permits shall be obtained before beginning work. Permits or emergency work shall be obtained within 24 hours after work is commenced. (b)  Exception to permit required. Ordinary repairs to a single-family residential building or structure for which the wholesale cost does not exceed $500.00 shall not be required to obtain a permit. (c)  Work commencing before permit issuance. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, any person, contractor or company commencing any work on a building or structure, mechanical, gas, plumbing, or system electrical system before obtaining the required permit shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee. (d)  Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from the permit requirements of this section shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of the City of Albany or Dougherty County, Georgia. Permits shall not be required for the following: (1)  Building. a.  Fences not over eight feet (2,438 millimeters) high. b.  Residential storage buildings and playhouses less than 32 square feet in area without an electrical, mechanical, or plumbing system. c.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 liters) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one. d.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work where there has been no change in occupant or occupancy. e.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. f.  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 millimeters) deep and are installed entirely above ground. g.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family dwellings. h.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall. i.  Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1753 millimeters) in height. (2)  Electrical. a.  Repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. b.  Radio and television transmitting stations. Electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but permits are required for equipment and wiring for power supply, the installation of towers and antennas. c.  Temporary testing systems. The installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. (3)  Gas. a.  Portable heating appliances. b.  Replacement of any minor component of equipment that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. (4)  Mechanical. a.  Portable heating appliances. b.  Portable ventilation equipment. c.  Portable cooling unit. d.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this chapter. e.  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe. f.  Portable evaporative cooler. g.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kilograms) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. (5)  Plumbing. a.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this chapter. b.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipe, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. (e)  Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the planning and development services department for that purpose. Such application shall: (1)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. (2)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by street address, legal description or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or structure or work. (3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. (4)  Be accompanied by construction plans and documents and any other information that the director of planning and development services or designee may require to ascertain whether the proposed building meets the requirements of this chapter. (5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. (6)  Contain the full names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant/contractor and the property owner and shall be signed by the applicant/contractor and/or the property owner. (7)  The building official may require any additional information to be provided so that an understanding of all work to be performed can be ascertained from the permit application. (f)  Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing but no later than 30 calendar days after the filing of a complete application in conformity with this section. If the application or the construction plans or documents do not conform to the requirements of this chapter, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. (g)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless a permit has been issued. The building official is authorized to grant up to three written extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each before such application is declared abandoned. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. (h)  Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any provisions of this chapter, of any local, state or federal law or any provision of this Code. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of this Code shall not be valid and are void. The issuance of a permit based on construction plans and documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction plans and documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a building or structure where there exists any violation of this chapter or of any other provisions of the Code, or where there exists a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public or the occupants of the building or structure. (i)  Expiration of permit. Every permit issued shall become invalid and of no force and effect if the work on the site authorized by such permit is not commenced or if no city inspection has been performed within 180 calendar days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit has been commenced and has been suspended or abandoned or no further city inspection has been performed for a period of 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant one written extension of the permit for a period of not more than 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. (j)  Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter if the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any applicable provision of this Code. (k)  Contractor change, reissuing of permit. (1)  No permit shall be reissued on any work or job site for which a permit already exists except after notification in writing from the owner of the change in contractor and that the new contractor is authorized by the owner to re-permit the work. Re-issuance of a permit shall make the new contractor responsible for the complete job or system and all work or code deficiencies, if any, as built, erected or installed by the previous or former contractor. (2)  The contractor who re-permits the work or job shall pay a re-permit fee equal to the percentage of work remaining based on the original permit fee, provided the scope of work has not changed. Any additional scope of work will not be considered to be included in the original permit fee and will be charged at the set rates for such additional work. (l)  Placement of building permit, inspections card, and construction plans. The building permit or copy, inspections card, and construction plans shall be kept on the site of the work until completion of the work. The inspections card shall be posted within 36 to 48 inches above grade facing the street or in a window of the structure under construction in a manner where it is visible from the street and if outside, in a weatherproof cover. The construction plans shall be kept on the construction site in a manner that they can be produced upon demand by the building official. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.6), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-10. - Construction plans and documents. (a)  Submittal of plans and documents. (1)  Construction plans and documents, special inspection and structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction plans and documents shall be prepared by the applicant or a registered design professional as deemed necessary by the building official or required otherwise by any section of this code. When the building official is unable to make a determination as to the grant or denial of a permit based upon the plans submitted with a permit application, the building official is authorized to require additional construction plans and documents to be prepared by the applicant or a registered design professional. (2)  The building official is authorized to waive in writing the submission of construction plans and documents and other data required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction plans and documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter. In addition, construction plans and documents for single-family residential construction do not have to be prepared by a registered design professional unless required by the building official in writing. (b)  Information on construction plans and documents. Construction plans and documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media construction plans and documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction plans and documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Code and all other applicable laws and regulations. (c)  Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection system shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this chapter and the construction plans and documents and shall be approved by both the building official and fire marshal prior to the start of system installation. (d)  Manufacturer's installation instructions for residential installation. Manufacturer's installation instructions, as required by the international residential codes, shall be available on the residential job site at the time of inspection. (e)  Exterior wall envelope. Construction plans and documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this chapter. The construction plans and documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves, or parapets, means of drainage, water resistive membrane, and details around openings. (f)  Manufacturing installation instructions. The construction plans and documents shall include manufacturing installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction plans and documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system that was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used. (g)  Site plan. The construction plans and documents submitted with the application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a site plan approved by the planning and development services department in accordance with the guidelines set out in the zoning ordinance. For example the site plan shall be shown to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades. Additionally the site plan shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show the construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or lot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify in writing the requirement for a site plan. (h)  Examination of construction plans and documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction plans and documents and shall ascertain by such examination whether the proposed construction indicated and described is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent provisions of the International Building Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007, International Residential Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008, International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2008, International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008, International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008, International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008, National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2006 and International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments 2008. Reference to these Codes include any subsequent and future amendment to these codes. (i)  Approval of construction plans and documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction plans and documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as being in compliance with this chapter. However, the approval of construction plans and documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction plans and documents and other data. One set of construction plans and documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official. (j)  Previous approvals. The enactment of this chapter shall not require changes in the construction plans and documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been issued prior to enactment of this chapter and the construction of which has been pursued and not abandoned within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. (k)  Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction plans and documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that construction plans and documents and adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this chapter. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the approved part of the building construction operation and without any assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted by the building official. (l)  Design professional in responsible charge. (1)  When it is required and requested by the building official that construction plans and documents be prepared by a registered design professional (a professional engineer or architect licensed by the state), the design professional shall be registered in the state and shall affix such seal on all documents. The building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The owner shall notify the building official in writing if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties required by this Code. (2)  The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal plans and documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. (m)  Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period. (1)  Deferral of any submittal items shall require prior approval by the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction plans and documents for review by the building official. (2)  Submittal construction plans and documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and that they have been found to be in general conformance with the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until their design and submittal plans and documents have been approved by the building official in writing. (n)  Amended construction plans and documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the reviewed construction plans and documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction plans and documents shall be resubmitted by the holder of the building permit for approval as an amended set of construction plans and documents. (o)  Retention of construction plans and documents. One set of approved construction plans and documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work or as required by state or local laws. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.7), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-11. - Requirements for construction. (a)  A permit application for a building permit shall include a site plan. The site plan shall delineate the proposed grading for the entire site, the stormwater control measures proposed to protect adjacent properties, erosion control, and water quality measures. (b)  An applicant shall also indicate on the site plan the location of the following construction-related items: (1)  Dumpsters or other onsite disposal equipment; (2)  Portable toilets; (3)  Onsite parking for construction vehicles; (4)  Construction material staging and storage; and (5)  Borrow or stockpile areas. (c)  Dumpsters or any onsite waste disposal equipment may not be located on the street. If adequate traffic controls can be implemented, the director of planning and development services and/or the director of engineering may approve the placement of dumpsters and onsite waste disposal equipment on a street so long as the street has a paved width greater than 24 feet. (d)  Portable toilets shall be located off of the right-of-way and at least 15 feet from any side property line. (e)  Wherever possible, temporary parking shall be provided onsite and not on the street. (f)  The distance between a retaining wall and the property line shall be equal to at least half of the distance between the property line and the required setback line. Newly constructed retaining walls shall not be higher than four feet; however, existing retaining walls may be repaired and replaced so long as the height or the repaired or replaced wall does not increase in height over the original height of the wall. (g)  Existing drainage patterns located along property lines shall not be adversely affected by construction of a building or any associated site work. (h)  The applicant for construction on any lot shall be responsible for ensuring that all existing sewer services and taps from the buildings to the street shall be inspected and verified to be in proper condition prior to connection. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.8), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-12. - Demolition permits. (a)  A demolition site plan shall be submitted as part of the permit application package. The demolition site plan shall depict the trees, structures and impervious surfaces to be removed; location and size of all trees greater than six inches DBH; construction exits; tree save areas and best managements practices for erosion control. (b)  Only dead, diseased, or hazardous trees, as determined by a certified arborist or City of Albany Arborist, may be removed pursuant to a demolition permit. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.9), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-13. - Temporary structures and uses. (a)  Generally. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant one written extension of 90 days. The request for extension shall be in writing and shall specify the justifiable cause. (b)  Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this chapter as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare. (c)  Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion or occupancy has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the National Electrical Code. (d)  Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued for violation of the code or applicable state or federal law. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.10), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-14. - Permit fees; revocation. (a)  Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law and the governing authority have been paid. No amendment to a permit shall be released to the applicant until the additional permit fee, if any, has been paid. (b)  Schedule of permit fees. Permit fees for buildings, structures, mechanical, gas, plumbing and electrical systems shall be determined by the governing authority of the City of Albany, Georgia. The schedule of fees approved by the governing authority of the city shall be maintained by the clerk to the board of commissioners and the director of planning and development services shall also retain a copy available for public inspection. (c)  Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. (d)  Refunds. The governing authority is authorized to adopt a written refund policy that applies to the refund of permit fees authorized by this chapter. (e)  Revocation of certificates. A certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion and/or certificate of change of tenant issued pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall be suspended or revoked by the director of planning and development services or designee and considered void, if: (1)  The application for a certificate of occupancy contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; (2)  Changes or alterations in the type of permitted use or occupancy occur without approval required by this Code; (3)  Changes or violations of the conditions of the certificate occur without approval required by this Code; (4)  Alterations, additions or improvements to the building, structure or systems occur without approval or without obtaining all necessary permits required by this Code; (5)  The premises covered by the certificate are found to be in violation of any applicable provision of this Code, state or federal law or codes; (6)  The establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare. (f)  Denial of certificate. No certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion and/or certificate of change of tenant shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this chapter to any applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this chapter the same applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity requesting a certificate has been denied a certificate or had a certificate revoked for any location based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material facts in any application. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.11), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-15. - Inspections. (a)  Generally. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of other applicable provisions of the code. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or of other provisions of the code shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the city shall be liable for any expense entailed in the removal of any material required to allow inspection. (b)  Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. (c)  Required inspections. The building official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth as follows: (1)  Building. a.  Foundation and slab inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated, forms are erected, and reinforcement is installed but before concrete is put in place. The appropriate silt and erosion control measures must be in place and functional. b.  Damproofing inspection. To be made prior to backfill of crawl space or basement foundation walls. c.  Pre-cladding/frame inspection. To be made after the roof, wall bracing, windows, doors and moisture barrier are installed and prior to placement of exterior cladding. Rough inspections on trades need not be complete for pre-cladding inspection. d.  Frame/insulation inspection. To be made after wiring, piping, chimneys, duct and vents to be concealed are in place and all rough inspections approved, fire blocking is in place and the insulation in walls and inaccessible ceilings is installed. Insulation values must meet documents submitted with permit application. e.  Final inspection. To be made after the building or structure is completed in compliance with this Code prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. (2)  Electrical. a.  Underground and slab inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, conduit or cable are installed, and before any backfill or concrete is put in place. b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking, bracing, and wiring are in place and prior to the installation of insulation and wall and ceiling membranes. c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building or structure is complete, all required electrical outlets, switches and fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the building or structure is ready for occupancy. (3)  Plumbing. a.  Underground and slab inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, piping installed and before any backfill or concrete is put in place. The appropriate silt and erosion control measures must be in place and functional. b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all water, soil, waste and vent piping is complete and prior to the installation of wall and ceiling membranes. c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, and all plumbing fixtures and appliances are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. d.  Testing. Plumbing work and systems shall be tested as required in section 312 of the standard plumbing code. Tests shall be made by the permit holder and observed by the building official. (4)  Mechanical. a.  Underground and slab inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, underground duct and fuel piping is installed and before any backfill and concrete is put in place. b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all duct and fuel piping to be concealed are complete and prior to the installation of wall and ceiling membranes. c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system and appliances are in place and properly connected and the structure is ready for occupancy. (5)  Gas. a.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and before any such piping has been covered and concealed or any fixtures or appliances have been connected. b.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed, after all portions which are to be covered or concealed by wall and ceiling membranes, plastering, stone or brickwork have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. Log lighters shall be permitted separately and inspected. c.  Testing. This inspection shall include a gas pressure test. d.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by the new work or any changes, to insure compliance with the requirements of this chapter and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. (d)  Residential floodplain inspections. For construction permitted in areas prone to flooding as established by table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Building Code, upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the building official shall require submission of a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, prepared by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor, as required in section R327 of the International Residential Building Code. (e)  Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. (f)  Other inspections. In addition to any other inspections, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of the code that are enforced by the planning and development services department. (g)  Residential fire-resistance-rated construction inspections. Where fire-resistance-rated construction is required between dwelling units or due to the location on the property, the building official shall require an inspection of such construction after all lathing and/or wallboard is in place, but before any plaster is applied, or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished. (h)  Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to request and accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements of this division. (i)  Prequalified inspections. Prequalified alternate registered engineer inspections. (1)  When it is evident that the city cannot provide an inspection service of construction covered by this chapter within two business days of receiving a valid written request for an inspection, then, in lieu of an inspection by inspections personnel employed by the city, any person, firm, or corporation engaged in a construction project which requires an inspection, shall have the option of retaining, at their own expense, a pre-qualified alternate registered professional engineer who holds a certificate of registration issued under chapter 15 of title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia and who is not an employee or otherwise affiliated with or financially interested in such person, firm, or corporation, to provide the required inspection. Pre-qualified alternate registered professional engineers shall conduct inspections in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Code and state law, including, but not limited to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, as amended. (2)  The city shall provide for the pre-qualification of alternate registered engineers who may perform inspections pursuant to this section. A pre-qualified alternate registered engineer inspector who personally makes the inspection, shall hold, in addition to the certificate registration required under chapter 15 International Code Council/ICC of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia, a certification that matches his or her area of expertise. Pre-qualified alternate registered engineers may provide inspections in their scope of expertise providing they hold the aforementioned certifications that match their expertise. In lieu of personally holding an international code council certification, a registered engineer may employ technicians who hold the required appropriate international code council certifications to actually make the inspections. These employees shall also be pre-qualified by the city. Inspection reports submitted to the city shall contain both the certified technician's signature and the signature and seal of the pre-qualified alternate registered engineer and their dates of certification. (3)  Prequalified alternate registered engineer inspections and reports shall be accepted only from persons or firms who have been pre-qualified by the board. The requirements, procedures, application forms and report forms shall be as adopted by the board. Applications for approval as a prequalified alternate registered engineer inspector may be obtained from the planning and development services department. (j)  Inspections requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide safe access to and a safe means for inspection of such work for any inspections that are required by this chapter. (k)  Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this Code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. (l)  Re-inspection fee. Re-inspection fees shall be required in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the governing authority when work performed is required to be re-inspected due to the following reasons: (1)  The re-inspection is not approved due to a failure to correct a previously noted code violation on a prior inspection; (2)  The job is not ready for inspection when an inspection is requested and performed; (3)  The building or structure is not accessible and inspection cannot be performed; (4)  Work to be inspected has been covered or concealed and proper inspection cannot be performed; or (5)  Prior issuance of a stop work order requires re-inspection. (m)  Right of entry. Inspections required under the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the building official or designee. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building official or designee may enter the premises between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to perform any duty imposed by this chapter provided that the building official or designee has consent to enter the premises or has obtained and presents an inspection warrant as described in this chapter. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.12), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-16. - Certificates of occupancy, tenancy. (a)  Required. No building or structure or portion thereof shall be occupied or a change made in the type of occupancy or the nature of the use of an existing building or part thereof until after an appropriate certificate as required by this section has been issued. (b)  Certificate of occupancy. (1)  Issuance. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the building official until the building, structure and intended use complies with all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance, all construction is complete and all required final building, plumbing, mechanical, gas, electric, fire, health, vegetation protection and site drainage inspections have been performed and approved. (2)  Scope. The certificate of occupancy certifies that all final inspections have been completed and the structure has been erected, to the best of the city's knowledge, in compliance with applicable Code requirements at the time of the issuance of the certificate. However, issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not excuse the builder, contractor, tenant, or property owner from liability for any violation of the Code or any other applicable laws. Occupancy shall be limited to the area or portion of a building or structure defined by the building permit for which the certificate of occupancy is issued. (c)  Temporary certificate of occupancy. (1)  Scope. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for non-residential buildings or portions thereof for a specified period of time when it has been determined by the building official or designee that no outstanding Code violations or deficiencies exist and the building may be safely occupied for the use and time requested. A request for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be made on such form as prescribed by the building official, which will include specific times and dates for temporary use and shall be signed by the owner/occupant, contractor and or agent. (2)  Issuance. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for stated purposes only when construction has not been fully completed and all final inspections have not been performed. Provided the owner should be aware that in certain circumstances payment and performance bonds may be required as a condition for a temporary certificate of occupancy. (3)  Revocation. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be revoked at the option of the building official for any and/or all of the following reasons: a.  Violation of any building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire safety or site development codes or regulations. b.  Failure to complete any stage of construction and/or site improvements required by the building official in a timely manner. c.  Unauthorized occupancy or use of any part or portion of the building or structure other than the area or portion for which a temporary certificate of occupancy has been granted. d.  Any other conditions that may affect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property. (d)  Certificate of completion. A certificate of completion shall be issued upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, and/or plumbing, mechanical, gas or electrical system, when a certificate of occupancy is not required. The certificate of completion does not grant authority to occupy a building or structure or change the type of occupancy or nature of use prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (e)  Certificate of change of tenant. (1)  Scope. A certificate of change of tenant shall be required whenever there is a change of tenant occupancy in any non-residential building, structure or use and no construction, alterations, improvements or repairs to the building, structure, plumbing, mechanical, gas or electrical systems have been or are to be made. The new tenant or building owner shall be required to submit current as-built floor and fixture plans for review and complete a repair/improvement declaration. (2)  Permits required. If the change of tenant involves any construction, alterations, improvements or repairs to the building, plumbing, mechanical, gas or electrical systems, all necessary permits required by this chapter shall be obtained by licensed qualified contractors and all necessary inspections shall be performed by the building official before a change of tenant, or if required, a new certificate of occupancy is issued. (f)  Contents of certificates. Certificates shall contain the following: (1)  The building permit number (or in the case of a certificate of completion, the appropriate trade permit number). (2)  The address of the structure. (3)  The name and address of the owner. (4)  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. (5)  A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. (6)  The name of the building official and fire marshal. (7)  The edition of the code under which the permit was issued. (8)  If non-residential, the use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3 of the International Building Code. (9)  If non-residential, the type of construction as defined in Chapter 6 of the International Building Code. (10)  If non-residential, the design occupant load. (11)  If an automatic sprinkler is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required. (12)  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. (g)  Revocation of certificates. The building official or designee may revoke certificates of occupancy, certificates of completion, and certificates of change of tenant issued under provisions of this chapter, where it is shown that there have been either one or more of the following: (1)  Changes or alterations in construction, type of permitted use or occupancy without written approval by the building official or designee. (2)  Changes or violations of the conditions of the certificate without written approval by the building official or designee. (3)  Alterations, additions, or improvements to the building, structure, or systems without permits and inspections required by this chapter. (4)  Violation of any zoning, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire safety or site development codes or regulations. (5)  Any condition that may affect the building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the director of planning and development services, renders the building, structure or service system unsafe, dangerous or uninhabitable. (6)  After a certificate has been revoked, a valid certificate shall not be issued until all violations, changes, alterations, additions or improvements meet all requirements of this chapter as determined by the building official. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.13), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-17. - Utility service connections. (a)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this chapter for which a permit is required, until approved by the building official. (b)  Permanent electrical service connection. Permanent electrical service connection and meter shall not be authorized until all required final building, plumbing, mechanical, gas, electrical, drainage, vegetation, fire and health inspections have been performed and approved by the appropriate city or state department or official. (c)  Permanent gas service connection. Permanent gas service connection and meter shall not be authorized until the gas supply house line has been tested, inspected and approved and all appliance and equipment connections have been inspected and approved. (d)  Temporary electrical and gas service connections. Temporary electrical and gas service and meter connections may be authorized for a specified period of time when the system has been inspected and found to be safe for the connections and use authorized. Such temporary service connections shall be authorized only for the following reasons: (1)  Testing of appliances and equipment. (2)  Temporary occupancy of the building or structure only for the training of employees or stocking of merchandise. (3)  Single-tenant occupancy buildings and multi-tenant occupancy buildings for which temporary service connections have been authorized shall not be allowed access by the general public for business activity other than those allowed in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. (e)  Authority to disconnect utility services. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this chapter in case of an emergency, where necessary, to eliminate an immediate danger to life or property. Where possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified of the decision to disconnect utility service prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. (f)  Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make connections from any energy, fuel, power supply or water distribution system or supply energy, fuel or water to any equipment regulated by this chapter that has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building official or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building official until the building official authorizes the reconnection and use of such equipment. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.14), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-18. - Violations, remedies and penalties. (a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure, system or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable provisions of this Code. (b)  Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removing, demolition, or occupancy of a building or structure, system or equipment in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate of occupancy under the provisions of this chapter. Such notice or order shall direct the discontinuance or correction of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. (c)  Penalties. Any person failing to discontinue, correct or abate the violation of this chapter as ordered by the building official in the notice shall be subject to issuance of a court citation to appear in the City of Albany, Georgia Municipal Court to answer a charge of violations of this chapter and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance to section 1-17. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.15), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-19. - Stop work order. (a)  Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this chapter being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. (b)  Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. (c)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to correct a violation or an unsafe condition, shall be subject to issuance of a court citation to appear in the municipal court of the City of Albany, Georgia and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-17. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.16), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-20. - Inspection warrants. (a)  The building official, in addition to other procedures provided by law, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this section. The warrant shall authorize the building official to conduct a search or inspection of property without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this section. (b)  Inspection warrants may be issued by any judge of the recorder's court when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the following conditions are met: (1)  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property, or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property; (2)  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this division and all other applicable law; (3)  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant; (4)  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes a search or inspection; (5)  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the search or inspection is intended to check or reveal; and (6)  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the provisions of the Code or state law sought to be enforced. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.17), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-21. - Unsafe conditions. (a)  Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, uninhabitable, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Structures that are deemed an unsafe condition shall be taken down and removed or rehabilitated pursuant to city Ordinance 06-103. (b)  Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the building official shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the building, structure or system found to be unsafe, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the building official written acceptance or rejection of the terms of the notice. (c)  Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner personally; (b) sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the owner's last known address with the return receipt requested. If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or about the building or structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the building or structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner. (d)  Restoration. The building, structure, system or equipment determined to be unsafe by the building official is permitted to be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations, or additions are made or a change of occupancy occurs during the restoration of the building, structure, system or equipment, such repairs, alterations or additions or change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.18), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-22. - Technical codes adopted. (a)  Generally. As future new editions and/or amendments of the codes listed below are adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, they shall become a part of or replacement for the adopted codes, rules and regulations or standards and shall become enforceable as prescribed without separate adoption by the governing authority. All new construction, installations, repairs or alterations shall be in conformance with the current edition of the following codes and referenced appendixes with Georgia amendments as currently adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: (1)  International Building Code with Georgia Amendments. (2)  International Residential Code with Georgia Amendments. (3)  International Plumbing Code with Georgia Amendments. (4)  International Mechanical Code with Georgia Amendments. (5)  International Fuel Gas Code with Georgia Amendments. (6)  National Electrical Code with Georgia Amendments. (7)  International Energy Conservation Code with Georgia Amendments. (8)  International Fire Code with Georgia Amendments. (9)  International Property Maintenance Code with Georgia Amendments. (b)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the above-stated codes shall be considered an integral part of the code without separate adoption. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by a code test, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be govern. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. (c)  Appendices. The appendices included in any code adopted pursuant to this chapter are not intended for enforcement unless specifically referenced in this chapter or specifically included in this Code. (d)  Referenced codes and standards. The adopted state codes adopted pursuant to this division shall be considered part of the requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of each such adoption. Where differences occur between the provisions of this chapter and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Local supplemental ordinance requirements to the state adopted International Residential Code. (1)  A set of plans that include building, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical plans and the site plan as required in section 14-10(a) shall be maintained on the construction site at all times. (2)  A site plan or staking survey prepared and sealed by a registered engineer or land surveyor shall be submitted at the time of the residential footing or slab inspection and prior to the pouring of same. Survey shall show the setbacks from all property lines. Setbacks shall comply with all minimum zoning ordinance requirements and/or legally acquired variances. (Ord. No. 09-101, § 4(8-3.19), 1-12-2009; Ord. No. 09-109, § 3, 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 14-23. - The state energy code adopted.     The Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code, is hereby adopted, as supplemented and amended by the state department of community affairs, and enforcement of said code is directed in accordance with state law. (Code 1985, § 8-4; Ord. No. 91-113, § 1, 2-12-1991) 
Sec. 14-24. - Self inspection.     O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the city. (Code 1985, § 8-5; Ord. No. 96-270, § 1, 6-25-1996) 
Sec. 14-25. - Performance and payment bond for projects over $100,000.00.     A performance and payment bond in the amount of the total amount payable by the terms of the contract is required for any housing rehabilitation or new housing construction project when the contract exceeds $100.000.00. (Code 1985, § 8-6; Ord. No. 98-136, § 1, 7-14-1998) 
Sec. 14-26. - Amendments.     The following shall be considered amendments, additions to, changes in or exceptions to section 14-1(9): (1)  Replace all references of the ICC Electrical Code to the National Electrical Code (NEC). (2)  Replace all references to the International Zoning Code to the Zoning Ordinance of the city and Dougherty County, Georgia. (3)  Delete sections 103.1, 103.2, 103.3, 103.5, 108.2, 109.6, 111, 302.4, 302.8, 302.9, 304.3, 307.2 through 307.3.2. (4)  Section 101.1. City of Albany, Georgia. (5)  Section 104.1. Whenever the term "code official" appears in the International property Maintenance Code it shall be construed to mean the code enforcement department director or the code enforcement department director's designee. (6)  Section 107.2(5) is modified to state "inform the property owner that failure to abate the violation shall result in a summons issued to appear in municipal court. (7)  Section 304.14. Insert: 1st day of January to the 31st day of December. (8)  Add Exception to section 308.3: Extermination of wood destroying organisms shall, in all cases, be the responsibility of the building owner. (9)  Sections 602.3 and 602.4. Insert: 1st day of September to the 31st day of May. (Ord. No. 08-118, § 3(8-40), 6-25-2008) 
Chapter 16 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 16-1. - Exemption from license fee and occupation tax.     The following persons, firms, companies, or corporations engaged in any trade, business, profession or occupation in the city are exempt from the requirement of paying an occupation tax: (1)  Each person operating a business in the city under a veteran's certificate of exemption issued by the state, department of veteran's service. (2)  Any nonprofit organization conducting business activities directly related to its nonprofit status within the city. A nonprofit organization is defined as an organization which is classified as nonprofit by the Internal Revenue Service and exempt from federal tax under Internal Revenue Service regulations. A nonprofit organization doing business that is not directly related to their nonprofit status will be required to obtain an occupation tax certificate and pay an occupation tax for every business activity conducted that is not directly related to their nonprofit status. (3)  Businesses subject to a franchise fee. Any person, firm, company, or corporation engaged in any trade, business, profession or occupation in the city which is subject to payment of a franchise fee under state law or city ordinance shall not be subject to pay an occupation tax. All exempt organizations are required to file an application and obtain an occupation tax certificate under the applicable regulations as promulgated by the finance director or the finance director's designee. All exempt organizations will be subject to the same requirements of businesses obtaining occupation tax certificates, although exempt organizations will not be subject to occupation taxes. (Code 1985, § 26-30; Ord. No. 95-152, § 5, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 01-147, § 2(1), 8-28-2001) 
Sec. 16-2. - Finance director or designee; power and authority.     The finance director or the finance director's designee shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article, or other ordinances, of the city and laws of the state or the Constitution of this state or of the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the occupation taxes. (Code 1985, § 26-35.6; Ord. No. 95-152, § 16, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 01-147, § 2(1), 8-28-2001) 
Sec. 16-3. - Reciprocity policy concerning vendors and suppliers. (1)  A vendor or supplier who is resident within the municipal limits of the city or the unincorporated area of the county and which holds a current occupation tax certificate issued by the city or the county shall be granted the same preference over vendors resident in another city or county or state in the same manner, on the same basis and to the same extent that preference is granted in awarding bids for the same goods or services by such other city, county or state to vendors resident therein over vendors resident in the city or the county, if such preference is made known prior to the award of a bid. (2)  This section requires that a local vendor or supplier seeking to invoke the benefits of the city's reciprocity policy match the price of the foreign vendor or supplier. (Ord. No. 09-116, § 1, 3-24-2009; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 1, 2, 8-23-2011) 
Sec. 16-4. - Local procurement preference. (a)  Application of local procurement preference. The local preference shall be available only to a supplier or vendor who, at the date of the purchase or bid for supplies acquired under this policy, and for a period of at least 90 days prior thereto, maintains and has maintained an office and place of business physically located within Dougherty County, Georgia, who has at least two full time employees working at or out of said office and business location, and who holds a current City of Albany or Dougherty County Occupational Tax Certificate. Post office boxes shall not be used for the purpose of establishing said physical address. No preference will be available where the supplier/vendor fails to make such a written request. (b)  Local procurement preference. There is hereby established the following local procurement preference in purchasing. In any case where purchases made pursuant to this policy are made under the provisions permitting purchase without obtaining bids or competitive quotations, such purchases shall be made from a Dougherty County supplier, where available. Where purchases are made by obtaining competitive quotations, or by a bidding process, whenever a supplier who meets the qualifications in subsection (a) above submits a quotation or a bid that is responsive and is within five percent of the lowest responsive bid or quote, such supplier shall be afforded the opportunity to match the bid or quote. Should such supplier agree to match the lowest responsible bid or quote, then the purchase shall be made from such supplier, provided such supplier is otherwise qualified. (c)  Exceptions. The preference contained in this section shall not apply to the following purchases: (1)  Good or services provided under a cooperative purchasing agreement or interlocal agreement; (2)  Contracts for professional services procurement of which is subject to any competitive consultant selection policy or procedure adopted or utilized by the city commission; (3)  Purchases or contracts which are funded, in whole or in part, by a governmental entity and the laws, regulations, or policies governing such funding prohibit application of that preference; (4)  Purchases made or contracts let under emergency situations. (d)  In order to take advantage of the local preference, a supplier's/vendor's ad valorem taxes on real and personal property in Albany/Dougherty County cannot be delinquent. (e)  The mayor and board of commissioners understand that city staff will monitor the effectiveness of the preference and prepare at least an annual report, beginning May 28, 2014, and each anniversary thereafter. (Ord. No. 13-115, §§ 1—3, 5-28-2013; Ord. No. 15-102, § 1, 1-27-2015) Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 13-115, states, "Unless an ordinance is enacted within three (3) years of this date that extends this Ordinance, this Ordinance shall terminate in three (3) years." 
Secs. 16-5—16-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS 
Sec. 16-23. - Occupation tax certificate. (a)  It is unlawful and punishable for any person, firm, company or corporation to engage in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the City of Albany, Georgia, without obtaining an occupation tax certificate, unless exempted. (b)  Each incident of doing business without such occupation tax certificate shall be an offense punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1985, § 17-8; Ord. No. 94-150, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-1994) 
Sec. 16-24. - Duty to obtain; exception.     In addition to registering with the city finance director and paying the tax as required, it shall be the duty of every person before engaging or offering to engage in any business, trade, profession within the city, for which an occupation tax or fee is charged or assessed, to first apply to and obtain from the city finance director an occupation tax certificate. (Code 1975, § 14-2; Code 1985, § 26-17) 
Sec. 16-25. - Occupations, professions, business exempt from licensing.     Those occupations, professions and businesses as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16 shall be exempt from the regulations of this article. (Code 1975, § 27-62; Code 1985, § 26-18) State Law reference— Occupations, businesses and practitioners exempt from occupation tax, regulatory fees, and registration fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16. 
Sec. 16-26. - Issuance of special permits.     Where this Code or the ordinances of the city require a special permit from the board of city commissioners to engage in any business, it shall be the duty of the city finance director to see that such permit has been granted before any license is issued. (Code 1975, § 14-3; Code 1985, § 26-19) 
Sec. 16-27. - Form.     All licenses issued by authority of the city shall be in such form as the board of city commissioners may from time to time prescribe. (Code 1975, § 14-4; Code 1985, § 26-20) 
Sec. 16-28. - Posting.     It shall be the duty of every person to post and keep posted, in a conspicuous place, at or in their place of business, their occupational license. (Code 1975, § 14-5; Code 1985, § 26-21) 
Sec. 16-29. - Assignment or transfer.     No license issued by the city shall be transferable or assignable, but shall be personal to the person to whom issued; provided, however, that all licenses, except those for which a special permit is required, when issued to a person shall, upon such person selling out in toto to another person, intending to continue such business, remain of full force and effect for the full term for which issued, but relative to the business excepted in this article, the license for same, either on selling out or upon any change in business, either by taking on new owners or members with the person or firm, or on taking on new stockholders of a corporation, shall be forfeited immediately upon such change. (Code 1975, § 14-6; Code 1985, § 26-22) 
Sec. 16-30. - Records.     The city finance director shall keep a detailed record of all licenses issued by him or her, showing the date and to whom issued and such other data as the finance director deems proper for an identification of the original. (Code 1975, § 14-7; Code 1985, § 26-23) 
Sec. 16-31. - Forfeiture; proceedings; causes; etc.     Where there is no provision made, the violation of which operates to forfeit a license and the board of city commissioners or any citizen desires, for any reason, to have any particular license forfeited, the board of city commissioners, on written complaint of any member or of any citizen, setting forth the cause of complaint fully, shall order the licensee to show cause why his or her license should not be forfeited. Such order shall be signed by the city finance director and bear test in the name of the mayor and be served on the defendant at least two days prior to the date set for hearing and have attached thereto a copy of the complaint. (Code 1975, § 14-8; Code 1985, § 26-24) 
Sec. 16-32. - Suspension and revocation of bowling alley license.     The board of commissioners may, after notice to the license holder and an opportunity to be heard, suspend or revoke any license for a bowling alley issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter or an ordinance of the city where, after such notice and an opportunity to be heard the board of commissioners finds and determines that: (1)  Illegal sales of controlled substances take place on the premises with such frequency that, in the judgment of the board of commissioners, the owner or operator or manager in charge of the business knew, or in the exercise of ordinary care should have known, that such sales were taking place and such owner or operator or manager in charge has failed to take effective action to stop such sales; or (2)  Persons have been permitted to loiter on the premises without legitimate business reasons who are known to the owner or operator or manager in charge of such business, or in the exercise of ordinary care should be known to them, or who are reputed to be, illegal sellers or purveyors of controlled substances. (Code 1985, § 26-25; Ord. No. 87-205, § 4, 11-24-1987) 
Sec. 16-33. - Occupation tax certificate and fee. (a)  Each person, firm, company or corporation engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city shall register with the finance director or the finance director's designee, obtain an occupation tax certificate and pay a fee each year, unless exempted. The amount of the license fee shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the offices of the city clerk and finance director. (b)  All applicants for a new license or a renewal license shall be required to pay the license fee in order to defray administrative and inspection costs related to the regulation and issuance of occupation tax certificates. Fees are due at the time an application is submitted and fees are not refundable in any portion even if a license is not issued. Forms are available from the finance director or the finance director's designee. (c)  All licenses are renewable on an annual basis and fees are due on or before March 15 of each calendar year. (d)  Any owner or agent failing to timely renew its license is required to pay interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month; and if said failure exists for more than 90 days, then there is hereby imposed a penalty of ten percent of the amount of said fee, all as authorized in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. (e)  In addition to the above remedies, the city finance director is authorized to and shall issue executions against the delinquent taxpayer(s) for the amount of taxes or fees due plus applicable interest. Additionally, the city municipal court is authorized to impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax or regulatory fee, said fine not to exceed $500.00 and the city municipal court is further authorized to enforce same by its contempt of powers. (Code 1985, § 26-26; Ord. No. 95-152, § 1, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 01-147, § 2(1), 8-28-2001; Ord. No. 04-136, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2004; Ord. No. 09-137, §§ 1, 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 16-34. - Occupation tax certificate required for each business location.     Each person or entity transacting, or offering to transact, business within the city, whether in connection with any other business or not, shall obtain a occupation tax certificate, pay a fee and occupation tax for each separate location in which the person or entity transacts, or offers to transact, business. (Code 1985, § 26-32; Ord. No. 95-152, § 7, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 16-35. - Duration of occupation tax certificate.     Each license issued under this article shall be for the calendar year, or the remaining portion thereof, and shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance, except as may be specifically provided otherwise. (Code 1985, § 26-33; Ord. No. 95-152, § 8, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 16-36. - Change of address.     Any person moving their business from one location to another shall notify the finance director or the finance director's designee in writing no later than the day of moving. The same occupation tax certificate will be valid at the new location provided the new location conforms to all applicable rules and regulations, proper notification of transfer has been made, and a transfer fee has been paid. The amount of the transfer fee shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the offices of the city clerk and finance director. (Code 1985, § 26-34; Ord. No. 95-152, § 9, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 01-147, § 2(1), 8-28-2001) 
Sec. 16-37. - Renewal of license; estimated and actual occupation tax. (a)  The owner or agent of a business, trade, profession, or occupation within the city on January 1, who had been licensed in the previous year, is required to file an annual return for gross receipts on or before January 31 of each year. The return application shall be signed by the appropriate person set forth in this subsection and shall include the name, address, and dominant business activity, as well as the number of employees and amount of gross receipts of the business, trade, profession or occupation for the preceding year, and other information as may be required by the finance director or the finance director's designee, for the purpose of determining the occupation tax. (b)  For each calendar year, the occupation tax will be determined from the actual results from the proceeding year, and shall constitute as the occupation tax for the respective calendar year in which the return is required to be filed. (c)  The occupational tax will be based on a calculation of gross receipts times the percentages as described in section 16-65 of this chapter for each class of business for all in-state revenues. The amount of tax paid will have a floor rate of $125.00, and a ceiling rate of $9,000.00. (Code 1985, § 26-35; Ord. No. 95-152, § 10, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 01-147, § 2(1), (2), 8-28-2001; Ord. No. 07-125, § 2(26-35), 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 12-120, §§ 2, 3, 11-27-2012) 
Secs. 16-38—16-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAXES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq.; municipal business license tax on depository financial institutions authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Sec. 16-64. - Basis for occupation tax; definitions.     Each person, firm, company or corporation engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city shall pay an occupation tax, based on gross receipts under each classification set forth in section 16-65(d), except those businesses, occupations or professions enumerated in section 16-66, which shall be taxed at a rate specified in this article. (1)  The term "gross receipts" means the gross income of a business, trade, profession or occupation from whatever source derived before deductions or expenditures for any purpose except for sales and excise taxes and items specifically exempted by this article. (2)  Any part of the gross receipts arising out of the conduct of a business, trade, profession, or occupation outside the city or the county shall be included. No occupation tax is intended to be levied upon or on account of interstate commerce; and, in any case where a person or firm is engaged in both interstate and intrastate commerce, the tax here levied is intended to be levied upon and on account of the intrastate commerce only. The tax is not levied upon gross receipts of any part of the business where such levy is prohibited by the laws of the state or of the United States. (3)  Where the occupation tax is levied on persons, firms, or businesses designated as a building contractor or building trades subcontractor, and their place of business is located in the city, the tax is based only on the gross receipts of contracts and work performed within the city or the county. (4)  Where business is solicited, the sale made, the merchandise or property delivered and the entire transaction completed in a city or county other than the City of Albany or Dougherty County and occupation tax certificate fees and occupational taxes are required to be paid to such other city or county for the privilege of doing such business and are so paid, then the amount of such sale shall be deducted from the total gross receipts. (5)  Real estate brokers transacting business within the boundaries of Dougherty County shall pay an occupation tax based upon gross receipts. Payment of occupational tax by the real estate broker covers the associates/sales agents in the office. It is prohibited for brokers to deduct commission to associates/sales agents. (Code 1985, § 26-27; Ord. No. 95-152, § 2, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 98-115, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 07-125, § 2(26-27), 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 16-65. - Occupation tax. (a)  For the purpose of this article, every person, firm, company or corporation engaged in a trade, business, profession, or occupation requiring licenses are classified in accordance to their main line of business as defined in the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS), and profitability classes are assigned in accordance with Statistics of Income, Business Income Tax Returns, U.S. Treasury department, Internal Revenue Service. In the case where a person, firm, company or corporation is engaged in more than one line of business, taxes will be levied on the basis of the dominant business activity of the license. (b)  The separate classifications of classes 1 through 6 of the NAICS, are provided for the determination of the occupation tax to be levied as measured by gross receipts in connection with profitability ratios as measured by nationwide standards. All separate businesses, engaged in more than one business activity, shall be classified on the basis of their dominant business activity, except that person whose dominant business activity is legally exempted or otherwise limited by city or county ordinances or by state law from the tax shall be classified according to its principal subsidiary business, if any, which is subject to the levy and assessment of an occupation tax. (c)  The occupation tax levied and assessed shall be determined in accordance with the following: (1)  Determine whether business, trade, profession or occupation is listed in section 16-66; if so, occupation tax is amount specified; (2)  All other businesses may determine their profitability class via the NAICS Profitability Class listing attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived. The tax rate for each profitability class will be on file in the offices of the city clerk and city finance department. Tax due shall be determined by multiplying the tax rate by the gross receipts. (Code 1985, § 26-28; Ord. No. 95-152, § 3, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 07-125, § 2(26-28), 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 12-120, § 4, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 16-66. - Specific occupation, privilege, and industrial taxes.     The following trades, businesses, professions and occupations are hereby declared not subject to the gross receipts schedule of taxation as defined in section 16-64, and are hereby taxed annually in accordance with the following schedule: (1)  Professionals. Each individual practitioner of medicine, osteopathy, chiropractics, podiatry, dentistry, optometry, veterinary medicine, landscape architecture, land surveying, massage and physiotherapy, public accounting, embalming, funeral directing, civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineering or architecture who maintains their principal office in the city shall pay by calculating the occupation tax due based on a calculation of occupation tax as outlined in section 16-65(d), or by paying the sum of $400.00 per professional per year. No such levy shall be assessed upon or collected from any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or any instrumentality thereof. (2)  Levy of occupation tax on attorneys. As of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, an occupation tax is hereby imposed on the professional classification known as attorneys engaged in the practice of law. a.  Attorneys not required to register. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, an attorney shall not be required to register with the treasurer division. Information reported with any occupation tax payment may be retained by the treasurer division and used for those purposes allowed by applicable law. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, an attorney shall not be required to obtain, display or maintain any city issued certificate showing that any payment or information has been submitted to the treasurer division. For the purposes of enforcement of the zoning ordinance, attorneys may be asked by the planning and development services department to submit notarized affidavits or other written information concerning the business or profession carried on at a location and the dates of operation when applying for a certificate of occupancy for new construction or renovation. Such affidavits or documents shall be used for the purposes of determining compliance with the zoning ordinance and shall not prevent the practice of the profession of law at any other location which has a valid certificate of occupancy. A refusal to submit a notarized affidavit or other written information stating whether a person engages in the practice of law at a particular location or stating the dates of operation at a location shall not be a violation of this article and shall not prevent an attorney from practicing law in the city. The chief financial officer shall document this refusal for use in any later proceeding. Where an attorney fails or refuses to provide information as to the location where they may be served with notices or citations issued in support of the enforcement of this article, the city shall direct the notices or citations to the address listed with the state bar and shall consider the failure or refusal of the attorney to provide current address information to be consent to this method of service. b.  Calculation of amount of tax. An attorney who practices law in the jurisdiction of the city shall at their option have their tax rate determined, but not the time of payment, in the manner set forth in subsection (2)(a) of this section. c.  Date when taxes are due; date when taxes become delinquent; amount of interest and penalties. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, an attorney shall not be required to pay the occupation tax on the income generated from the practice of law in any calendar year until April 1 of the year following. The tax may be paid in person at the treasurer division or by mailing the tax to the treasurer division. Any tax payment made by mail shall include the name and address of the person or law firm paying the tax and the name of each attorney whose tax is being paid, so that the treasurer division may process the payment. An attorney who pays the occupation tax on their own behalf shall include the name of the law firm with which they practice, if any. Any tax paid pursuant to the option of subsection (1) of this section shall include a written submission containing sufficient information to enable the chief financial officer to determine the accuracy of the taxpayer's calculation. Taxes due from attorneys shall not be considered delinquent until June 1. An attorney who does not pay the tax prior to June 1 shall incur a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. Any taxes not paid by the due date shall accrue interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month. d.  Option of the chief financial officer to send bills. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, the chief financial officer may choose to send bills to attorneys who list their address with the State Bar of Georgia as being located in the city, including those attorneys who list only post office boxes as their addresses. An attorney who prepares and signs a notarized affidavit that they did not practice law within the jurisdiction of the city during some part of the tax year for which the tax bill was generated may have their bill adjusted for the time period stated in the affidavit when such attorney did not maintain an office within the jurisdiction of the city and/or states such other reasons why the occupation tax should be adjusted. Such adjustment shall not be made for those attorneys who elect to pay the $400.00 per practitioner fee as set forth in subsection (1) of this section unless the affidavit states that the attorney did not practice law in the jurisdiction of the city at any time during the year for which the tax bill was generated. The chief financial officer is authorized to inquire whether such affidavit matches the information maintained by the State Bar of Georgia in connection with the directives of state bar rule 1-207 and/or to take such other steps as deemed necessary to determine the accuracy of the affidavit. The submission of an affidavit requesting adjustment shall not act to prevent the imposition of penalties and interest should the chief financial officer deny the request for adjustment. The option of the chief financial officer to send bills shall not relieve attorneys from the obligation to pay any tax due for any calendar year including 2006 by April 1 of the following year. The chief financial officer may include in any bills, the unpaid tax balance from other years, including all fees and penalties and the amount of interest, which has accrued on any unpaid tax liability. The failure of the chief financial officer to list any unpaid balance on any bill shall not operate to relieve the taxpayer from liability for any balance due. It shall be a violation of this section for any attorney to willfully and intentionally misrepresent a material fact in an affidavit to avoid the payment of the occupation tax imposed by this division. The sole enforcement mechanisms for enforcement of the occupation tax levy against attorneys is limited to the following: 1.  When the chief financial officer has reason to believe that an attorney has willfully and intentionally misrepresented a material fact in any affidavit submitted to treasurer division for the purposes of avoiding full payment of the occupation tax, the chief financial officer shall consult with the city attorney to determine whether such conduct should be referred to the State Bar of Georgia for investigation as to whether a violation of the Georgia Rules of Professional Conduct has occurred. 2.  An attorney required to pay the occupation tax and who fails to do so in the manner provided by this article, shall be liable to have the tax and any penalties and interest collected by the issuance of execution pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. Further proceedings concerning the execution procedure employed in the enforcement of this section shall be as provided by state law. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary in other sections of this article, the use of tax executions and the reporting of any alleged misrepresentations as set forth in subsection (2)(d)1. of this section shall be the sole mechanism for enforcement of the occupation tax levy against attorneys. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the provisions of section 16-70 shall not apply to attorneys. e.  Payment of city funds. Payment of city funds to attorneys or law firms employing attorneys not in compliance with the requirements of this division is not authorized; occupation tax payments to be considered in employment of attorneys by the city. 1.  No individual attorney, or law firm employing such attorney, who is delinquent in the payment of the occupation tax authorized by this article, shall be paid for any legal work in which they have represented the city in any capacity, until any outstanding occupation tax liability, including all penalties and interest, has been paid in full. If the chief financial officer believes that an individual attorney, or any attorneys employed by a law firm, seeking compensation for legal services performed for the city, is/are not in full compliance with this division, the chief financial officer shall notify the individual attorney, or law firm and present a bill for the amount due. After payment of any outstanding occupation tax liability, the individual attorney, or law firm may be paid for the legal work in which they have represented the city. 2.  The chief financial officer and/or the city attorney are authorized to verify that any individual attorney, or the attorneys employed by any law firm, seeking to represent the city, including without limitation, limitation, acting as bond counsel, is/are current in their occupation tax payments prior to their employment. Because of the legal and/or fiduciary relationships, which such representation of the city may create, the chief financial officer and/or the city attorney are authorized to consider compliance with the occupation tax ordinance by the individual attorneys and/or the attorneys employed by the law firm, prior to any employment by the city. f.  Appeals and refund claims. Appeals of decisions of the chief financial officer and/or refund claims under this division shall be as provided under state law. (3)  State and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, an occupation tax is levied upon each state and national banking association, federal savings and loan association, state banking and loan association and other depository banking institution doing business from one or more locations within the city or the county. The rate of occupation tax on any depository financial institution subject to this article shall be 0.25 percent of gross receipts of said institution during the calendar year immediately preceding the year for which the tax shall be due; provided, however, that the minimum amount of occupation tax due from any depository financial institution shall be $1,000.00 gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city treasurer's office on or March 15 the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of revenue and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be March 15 of each tax year, provided the occupational tax for attorneys shall be due March 15 of the following year. (Code 1985, § 26-29; Ord. No. 95-152, § 4, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 03-135, § 7, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 06-109, § 1, 3-28-2006; Ord. No. 07-125, § 2(26-29), 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 16-67. - Payment of estimated occupation tax.     All occupation taxes fixed in accordance with this article shall be due on or before March 15 of each calendar year or within 30 days following the date the business commences operations. (Code 1985, § 26-31; Ord. No. 95-152, § 6, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 16-68. - Information required on return form.     Every person, firm, company or corporation subject to the occupation tax under section 16-64, shall, at the end of the preceding calendar year and on or before March 15 of the current year, file a return in writing to the finance director or the finance director's designee, on a form supplied by the finance director, setting forth under oath the following information: (1)  Name of the person, firm, company or corporation; (2)  Location at which the trade, business or profession is conducted; (3)  Exact nature of the trade, business or profession; (4)  Number of employees of trade, business or profession: The annual number of employees shall be determined by counting the number of employees reported to the Employment Security Agency, State of Georgia, in the employer's quarterly wage summary, as being employed in the pay period of each month. New businesses shall estimate the average annual number of employees for the first year. (5)  The report of gross receipts shall include all business done within the state; (6)  All the information required by this section shall be given under oath by the owner, a member of the firm, an officer of a corporation, or by an authorized employee having knowledge of actual business done. (Code 1985, § 26-35.1; Ord. No. 95-152, § 11, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 01-147, § 2(1), 8-28-2001; Ord. No. 07-125, § 2(26-35.1), 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 16-69. - Determination if no return made. (a)  If any person, firm, company or corporation fails to make a return, the finance director or the finance director's designee shall make an estimate of the amount of the number of employees and gross receipts of the business. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person or business failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the finance director or the finance director's designee. (b)  The finance director or the finance director's designee shall give the owner or agent notice of his or her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the owner or agent at the owner's or agent's address as it appears in the records of the finance director or the finance director's designee. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. (Code 1985, § 26-35.2; Ord. No. 95-152, § 12, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 01-147, § 2(1), 8-28-2001) 
Sec. 16-70. - Failure to file a return.     Any owner or agent failing to comply with the provisions of sections 16-68 and 16-69 as it pertains to filing a return on or before March 15 shall be guilty of an offense as defined by and as punishable by sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1985, § 26-35.3; Ord. No. 95-152, § 13, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 16-71. - Finance director or designee authorized to examine records, confidentiality of returns; penalty for making false return. (a)  The finance director or the finance director's designee, or his or her designee, is authorized to examine the books and records of any owner or agent subject to the occupation tax and to secure any information as to the correct amount of gross receipts and number of employees. The finance director or the finance director's designee, or his or her designee, shall give the owner or agent written notice of his or her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the owner or agent at the owner's or agent's address as it appears in the records of the finance director or the finance director's designee. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. Thereafter, the finance director or the finance director's designee may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect any deficiency together with interest, court costs, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city, or any other person, to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipt, number of employees, or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return required by this article. All contents of the return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerk of the city using such return for the purpose of this article. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees and subject to the same standards of confidentiality. (c)  Any owner or agent knowingly filing a false return shall be guilty of an offense as defined by and punishable by sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1985, § 26-35.5; Ord. No. 95-152, § 15, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 01-147, § 2(1), 8-28-2001) 
Secs. 16-72—16-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND VENDORS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 
Sec. 16-103. - Definition.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Peddler. (1)  The term "peddler" means any individual, whether a resident of this city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, for the sale of, as well as the selling, offering for sale or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he or she is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided, however, that such definition shall include any person, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop or any other place within this city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The term "peddler" shall include the terms "canvasser," "solicitor," or "transient or itinerant photographer." (2)  The term "peddler" shall also include, "transient merchant," "itinerant merchant" or "itinerant vendor" and are defined as any person whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car, or boat, public room in hotels, lodginghouses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley, or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. (3)  "Solicitor" includes going door-to-door (house to house) in residential areas of the city and engaging in any type of selling, seeking donations, or any other business, occupation or vocation which involves any attempt to obtain money, orders, donations, subscriptions or the like, whether such activity is done on a permanent or part-time basis or whether such activity is done for a non-profit or not-for-profit organization or enterprise. (Code 1975, § 18-1; Code 1985, § 19-16; Ord. No. 03-135, § 4, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 11-110, §§ 1, 2, 6-28-2011) 
Sec. 16-104. - Exceptions to article. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: (1)  Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual course of business; (2)  Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling goods, wares and merchandise according to law; (3)  Education or religious organizations. (Code 1975, § 18-2; Code 1985, § 19-17; Ord. No. 03-135, § 5, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 11-110, §§ 5, 6, 6-28-2011) 
Sec. 16-105. - Hours of operation. (a)  Uninvited solicitation prohibited. No person may go upon residential premises, not having been requested or invited, for the purpose of making contact with the occupant(s) for the purposes outlined in section 16-103 of this article where "no solicitation" or "no trespassing" sign is located at or near the residence's entrance(s). This prohibition shall also apply where a "no solicitation" or "no trespassing" sign is located at the entrance(s) to any apartment complex, condominium development or residential subdivision. Appropriate signage is available from the city manager's office, or his/her designee. (b)  No call list to be established by the city manager's office. The city manager's office, or his/her designee, shall maintain a "no-call" list which shall comprise the names and addresses of occupier(s) of residential premises in the city, who do not wish to have their residence visited by peddlers, canvassers, solicitors of funds or persons selling goods or services. No peddler, canvasser, solicitor of funds or person selling goods or services on behalf of a local nonprofit organization shall call on any resident or owner or occupier of a residential premises whose name and address appear on the "no-call" list. Every peddler or canvasser who or which obtains a certificate of registration pursuant to this article, and every peddler or canvasser, solicitor of funds or person selling goods or services is charged with the responsibility of obtaining a copy of the "no-call" list established pursuant to this section before beginning any peddling effort, canvassing effort or solicitation effort. Any person engaged in any peddling effort, canvassing effort, solicitation effort, sale of goods or services who or which calls on a residence or place of business which appears on the "no-call" list established pursuant to this section shall be subject to penalty under the provisions of sections 1-17 and 1-18 of this Code. (c)  Refusal to leave. Any peddler who enters upon residential premises occupied by another must immediately leave such premises after having been requested to do so by the occupant. (d)  Background check. The city manager's office, or his/her designee, shall perform a background check on the applicant for the purpose of ascertaining whether the applicant has pled guilty or no contest to or has been convicted of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude. Where the background check fails to disclose any such plea or conviction, the city manager's office, or his/her designee, will issue a solicitation badge to such individual. The badge must be worn whenever the individual is engaged in solicitation/peddling and expires at the end of the calendar year of issuance. (e)  Limitation of hours. No activity permitted in this article may occur prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. (f)  Violations. Any violation of any provision of this [article] is punishable under sections 1-17 and 1-18 of this Code. (Code 1975, § 18-6; Code 1985, § 19-18; Ord. No. 11-110, §§ 3, 4, 6-28-2011) 
Sec. 16-106. - Selling ice cream, peanuts, candy, fruit, soft drinks, sandwiches or other merchandise. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale on any street, sidewalk or other public property in the city any ice cream, peanuts, candy, fruit, soft drinks, sandwiches or other merchandise, within 560 feet of any public or private school property, or to take any stand on any street or sidewalk for the purpose of selling any such merchandise within 560 feet of any public or private school property, without first obtaining permission from the principal of such public or private school. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale on any street, sidewalk or other public property in the city any ice cream, peanuts, candy, fruit, soft drinks, sandwiches or other merchandise, within 560 feet of any city ball park while organized activity is taking place therein with a permitted concession stand in place selling similar items. (Code 1975, § 18-8; Code 1985, § 19-19) 
Sec. 16-107. - Selling, soliciting, or delivering goods, etc., to persons in vehicles on city streets.     It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18 for any person to sell, offer to sell, solicit, give, lend, or deliver any goods, merchandise, literature, products, or other matter to persons who are in vehicles upon the traveled portion of the public streets of the city. This section shall not apply to police officers issuing summons or warnings in the performance of their official duties. (Code 1985, § 19-20; Ord. No. 86-242, § 1, 10-28-1986) 
Secs. 16-108—16-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OUTDOOR FLEA MARKETS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 16-130. - Title.     This article may also be known and cited as "The Outdoor Flea Market Ordinance of Albany, Georgia." (Code 1985, § 19-102; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. I), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-131. - Purpose.     This article is adopted in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city by regulating outdoor flea markets. (Code 1985, § 19-103; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. I), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-132. - Function.     This article establishes minimum standards for outdoor flea markets. (Code 1985, § 19-104; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. I), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-133. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Accessory structure means a subordinate building or structure on the same lot, or part of the main building, occupied by or devoted to an accessory use.     Booth means a structure constructed for the purpose of displaying and selling merchandise.     Building means a structure having a roof, supported by columns or by walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any person, animal or chattel.     Building inspector means the building inspector of the city, or the building inspector's authorized representative.     Common area means any area or space designed for the joint use of tenants occupying flea markets.     Enclosed structure means a building enclosed on all sides with permanent walls and having a permanent roof.     Enforcing agencies means the inspections and code enforcement department, the license inspector, and the fire department of the city; and the county health department; charged by law with the duty to enforce the provisions of this article.     Flea market stand means that part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of flea market booths, appurtenant structures or additions.     Flea markets means outdoor flea markets as defined herein.     Gross sales area means the sum of all areas of the flea market not devoted to parking, roadways, yard setback requirements, or open space. For the purpose of determining gross sales area, open space is defined as a continuous unit of land of at least one acre in area that is not used for any function of the flea market. Gross sales area includes all parts of all buildings in the flea market.     Market management means the person who owns, or has charge, care or control of the flea market.     Outdoor flea market means a principal commercial activity that occurs at a fixed location, where a proprietor, partnership, or corporation leases to vendors a booth or commercial stall from which the vendor markets his or her goods. Part or all of the flea market is conducted outside of an enclosed structure; sidewalk sales are not included under this definition. Each vending location shall have access via an internal walkway, courtyard, path, or common area.     Prepared food sales means the sale of any food item subjected to a special process or treatment (ex: heating, frying, mixing, slicing, etc.) before being sold to the consumer, and generally intended for consumption on the flea market premises.     Public street means a public way which affords principal means of access to abutting properties.     Retail food sales means the sale of nonprepared, fresh food items (i.e., produce, farm products, seafood, and meat) not generally intended for consumption on the flea market premises.     Right-of-way means an area, either public or private, over which the legal right of passage exists.     Service buildings means a structure housing sanitary, operational, office, recreational, maintenance and other facilities built to conform to required standards.     Structure includes "arranged," "designed," "constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased," or "intended to be used." (Code 1985, § 19-105; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. II, §§ 2.00, 2.01), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-134. - Inspections.     The inspections and code enforcement department can make inspections as necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this article as authorized by the city building code. (Code 1985, § 19-107; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. VI, § 6.02), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-135. - Revocation of permits.     As authorized by the city building code, building permits for any flea market may be revoked by the inspections and code enforcement department when a flea market is found to be in violation of this article. (Code 1985, § 19-108; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. VI, § 6.03), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-136. - Revocation of licenses. (a)  Any permit or license issued pursuant to this article for the operation of a flea market may be revoked by the board of city commissioners, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: (1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit or license; (2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permittee in connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise; (3)  Any violation by the permittee of this article; (4)  The conviction of the permittee of any felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; (5)  The conducting of the business permitted under this article by the permittee in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. (b)  Notice of hearing for revocation of a permit issued under this article shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be served on the permittee by handing the same personally to the person in charge of the permitted business, or by mailing the same, postage prepaid, to the permittee at the permittee's last known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. (c)  The giving of such notice shall suspend the permit pending the outcome of the hearing, and business operations under the permit shall cease. (Code 1985, § 19-109; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. VI, § 6.04), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-137. - Emergencies. (a)  Whenever the director of the inspections and code enforcement department finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, including violations of any of the applicable rules and regulations of the county health department or the state department of public health, the director of the inspections and code enforcement department may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency, and requiring that such action be taken as he or she may deem necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the board of zoning appeals, such person shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. (b)  The provisions of section 16-138 shall be applicable to the hearing and the order issued thereafter. (Code 1985, § 19-110; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. VI, § 6.05), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-138. - Appeals. (a)  An appeal may be taken to the board of zoning appeals of any person, firm, or corporation, or by any officer, department, board or bureau affected by a decision of the building inspector. Such appeals shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the board of zoning appeals by general rule by filing with the planning commission a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. (b)  The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and the suspension, except in the case of an order issued under section 16-137. (Code 1985, § 19-111; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. VI, § 6.06), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-139. - Enforcement.     Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished according to the general penalties described in sections 1-17 and 1-18. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1985, § 19-113; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. VI, § 6.08), 5-26-1992) 
Secs. 16-140—16-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 16-167. - Permits and licenses required. (a)  Building permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate a flea market or to construct, alter or extend any flea market within the limits of the city unless such person holds a valid building permit issued by the inspections and code enforcement department. The right to construct, alter or extend any flea market shall expire 180 days after the issuance of a permit. (b)  Certificate of occupancy. It shall be unlawful and prohibited to use or permit the use of any flea market land, building or structure for which a building permit is required, and to use or permit to be used any flea market building or structure hereafter altered, extended, erected, repaired, or moved, until the building inspector shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that the provisions of these regulations have been complied with. (c)  Business license. The flea market management must be licensed by the city for the operation of an outdoor flea market. This license shall be a license of privilege that may be revoked by the city commission according to section 16-136. (1)  All vendors shall be licensed for business specifically at the flea market location by the city; (2)  All vendors not licensed for business specifically at the flea market location by the city shall file a certificate of registration with the flea market management, and shall pay the registration fee, required for daily flea market retail sales without a business license for each day that merchandise is displayed for sale. This fee is assessed by the city and collected for the city by the market management; (3)  Vendors selling used merchandise obtained in the county shall comply with section 48-111, when applicable, regulating secondhand dealers, requiring disclosure to city police of all secondhand good sources, and other requirements; (4)  Any vendor operating any business in the city outside of the flea market, and selling the same or similar merchandise at the flea market location, shall obtain a business license from the city for the flea market location, and shall pay a license fee based on the items available for sale by the merchant; (5)  A city business license or valid certificate of registration shall be continuously displayed in a conspicuous location on the front of each flea market booth. A certificate of registration is valid only if it is labeled by the market management to indicate payment of the registration fee, required for daily flea market retail sales without a business license. (Code 1985, § 19-121; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. III, § 3.01), 5-26-1992) 
Secs. 16-168—16-187. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Sec. 16-188. - Flea market locations; zoning district requirements. (a)  Flea market location. No flea market structure or facility shall be located within 300 feet of any residential zoning district boundary. (b)  Zoning district requirements. Flea markets shall comply with all zoning ordinance area, height, setback, lot coverage, and signage requirements of the zoning district within which the market is located. If the standards of the zoning ordinance conflict with standards of this article, the more restrictive shall apply. (Code 1985, § 19-131; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. IV, § 4.00), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-189. - Site improvement requirements. (a)  Condition of site not to create hazard, etc. The condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse influences. (b)  Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every flea market shall be paved, or covered with stone screenings, or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust and/or mud. (c)  Site drainage requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every flea market shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner in order to eliminate water pockets, low areas or bogs. (Code 1985, § 19-132; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. IV, § 4.01), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-190. - Setbacks, buffer strips and screening. (a)  All flea market structures and parking facilities shall be located at least 20 feet from any public street right-of-way or highway right-of-way, and at least 20 feet from the property boundary lines. (b)  All flea markets shall be provided with screening of a well-maintained opaque fence separating the market and adjacent zoning and uses, except along public road frontage used for primary access to the flea market. Said screening shall be a minimum of six feet in height. (c)  Flea market sites shall be screened from view along street right-of-way frontage used for primary access to the flea market in C-3 and CR districts in accordance with section 4.30g(2) (Protective screening and fencing), of the zoning ordinance. (Code 1985, § 19-133; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. IV, § 4.02), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-191. - Street system and walks. (a)  Streets and roads. All flea markets shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets, or roads, or highways. Access shall not be permitted from residential streets. Access to flea markets shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the market with a public street or road shall comply with the requirements of section 6.02a.(7) of the city zoning ordinance. (b)  Walks. All pedestrian access to every flea market shall be paved, and shall be of adequate width for the intended use. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided. (Code 1985, § 19-134; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. IV, § 4.03), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-192. - Off-street parking. (a)  Quantity. Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all flea markets. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of 5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross sales area. (b)  Area required. The area required for a parking space for one vehicle shall consist of 300 square feet of lot area, including the parking stall and access aisle. (c)  Space dimensions. A parking space, exclusive of the area required for access to the space, shall be of an area not less than nine feet wide by 20 feet long for each motor vehicle, such space being fully accessible for the storage or parking of permitted vehicles. (Code 1985, § 19-135; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. IV, § 4.04), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-193. - Buildings, structures and signs. (a)  Structural requirements. All structures, to include booths, shall comply with the city building code. (b)  Booths. Flea market booths shall be of a standard design approved by the building inspection department, and shall be provided to all vendors by the flea market management. (c)  Stands. The flea market stand shall be constructed of materials that will provide an adequate foundation for the placement of flea market booths, thereby securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning. The flea market stands shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the flea market booth due to inadequate drainage, vibration, or other forces acting on the superstructure. (d)  Identification. Each booth shall be numbered. Each number shall be easily identified from the nearest street, driveway, or walkway. (e)  Signs. Flea market signs are subject to the provisions of the zoning district within which the flea market is located, and subject to the requirements of the comprehensive sign article (article III of chapter 4, advertising). (Code 1985, § 19-136; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. IV, § 4.05), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-194. - Infrastructure requirements. (a)  Water supply. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each flea market. Where a public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall be made thereto and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public water supply is not available, a private water supply system may be developed and used as approved by the state department of public health and the state department of natural resources in accordance with Rules and Regulations for Water Supply Quality Control and other applicable rules and regulations. The water supply system of the flea market shall be constructed and connected in accordance with the plumbing code in force in the city. (b)  Transient hookup facilities. Transient water, sewer and electrical hookup facilities shall be provided for weekend (Friday through Sunday only) overnight campers, motor homes, travel trailers and recreational vehicles (including self-contained), not to exceed 72 hours in any one week. All vehicle hookups shall comply with the requirements of the plumbing code in force in the city. The number of such vehicles on site overnight shall not exceed the number of operating overnight hookups provided. At no time shall any overnight camper, motor home, travel trailer, or recreational vehicle utilize any electrical, sewer, or water connection provided for a flea market booth. (c)  Restrooms and sewage disposal. There shall be a minimum of one permanent central restroom facility located on the premises. Within that central restroom there shall be separate facilities for men and women. (1)  Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory and sink; cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. (2)  Liquid soap, contained in dispensing units, paper towels, and toilet paper shall be provided in every restroom. (3)  Restrooms shall contain at least the minimum of fixtures required by the plumbing code in force in the city. (4)  All flea markets shall be connected to the city sewer system in accordance with chapter 27. (d)  Electrical distribution system. Every flea market shall contain electrical wiring systems for each flea market stand requiring electricity. Electrical distribution systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable electric codes of the city. (e)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed as required by Albany Fire Department and approved by the Water, Gas and Light commission. (Code 1985, § 19-137; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. IV, § 4.06), 5-26-1992) 
Secs. 16-195—16-211. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATION 
Sec. 16-212. - Objectionable or other adverse influences prohibited.     The flea market site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences. (Code 1985, § 19-141; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. V, § 5.00), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-213. - Fire protection.     Flea markets shall be subject to all fire prevention ordinances of the city. (1)  Litter. Flea markets shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. (2)  Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention bureau shall be kept in service buildings and at all other locations designated by the fire prevention bureau, and shall be maintained in good operating condition. (3)  Cooking. a.  Fires shall be made only in stoves, incinerators and other equipment intended for cooking. b.  Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces, grills, and woodburning stoves shall be so located, constructed, maintained, and used as to avoid fire hazards and smoke nuisance, both on the property on which used, and on neighboring property. c.  No fuel shall be used, and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. d.  No refuse shall be burned on the premises of the flea markets at any time. (Code 1985, § 19-142; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. V, § 5.01), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-214. - Food service. (a)  All vendors intending to engage in the sale of prepared food items at the flea market shall first obtain a permit from the county health department for the flea market location before applying for a business license. (b)  All vendors intending to engage in retail food sales operations at the flea market location shall first obtain a license from the state department of agriculture. All retail food sales licenses shall be continuously displayed in a conspicuous location on the front of the booth where said activity has been licensed to occur. (c)  All food shall meet health department regulations. (d)  Any vendor requiring a food service permit or retail food sales license shall at all times conspicuously display said permit on the front of the vending booth where said activity has been licensed to occur at all times. (Code 1985, § 19-143; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. V, § 5.02), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-215. - Refuse.     The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the flea market shall be conducted so as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident, fire hazards, or air pollution. No building permit shall be issued until the solid waste director approves the proposed plans for the storage and collection of solid waste. (1)  Refuse storage. All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers provided by the flea market management. Such containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. The containers may be placed at curbside for collection only on days of scheduled collection. At other times, containers shall be located in a protected manner and restricted from general view. (2)  Refuse collection stands. Where refuse collection stands are provided for common or joint use, such stands shall be located not more than 100 feet from a using flea market stand, and shall be so designed as to: prevent containers from being tipped; minimize spillage and container deterioration; and facilitate cleaning around them. Refuse collection containers shall be located throughout the flea market for the convenient use of patrons. (3)  Bulk waste containers. Where bulk waste containers of at least three cubic yards are utilized, a suitable concrete pad shall be provided for parking the container. Such pads shall be supplied with a drain connected to sewage disposal facilities, and available water connections convenient for washing the container. (4)  Refuse collection. All refuse shall be collected at least weekly; up to six times per week if the amount of refuse generated requires more frequent pickup. Where suitable collection service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the flea market management shall provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers to the disposal site designated by the city. (Code 1985, § 19-144; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. V, § 5.03), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-216. - Insect and rodent control.     Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the county health department. (1)  Debris. Flea markets shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. (2)  Storage areas. Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage; lumber, pipe and other building materials shall be stored at least one foot above the ground. (3)  Structural gaps. Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings, in or beneath any structure, shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials. (4)  Weeds. The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled so as to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Flea markets shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth. (Code 1985, § 19-145; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. V, § 5.04), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-217. - Fuel supply and storage.     Natural gas, liquefied petroleum, fuel oil, and any other fuel supply or fuel storage piping systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable gas codes in force in the city. (Code 1985, § 19-146; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. V, § 5.05), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-218. - Prohibited.     The sale of animals is prohibited in any flea market, including, but not limited to reptiles, birds, felines, and canines. (Code 1985, § 19-147; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. V, § 5.06), 5-26-1992) 
Sec. 16-219. - Responsibilities of the flea market management.     The person to whom a license for flea market operation is issued (the flea market managers) shall operate a flea market in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances, and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, landscaping, fences, and its facilities and equipment in good repair, and in a clean and sanitary condition. The flea market management shall be available to any city department, official, or agency during all hours of flea market operation, for the purpose of enforcing compliance with the requirements of this article. (1)  The flea market management shall notify market tenants of all applicable provisions of this article, and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this article and regulations issued hereunder. (2)  The flea market management shall supervise the placement of each flea market booth on its stand which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections. (3)  The flea market management shall immediately notify the county health department of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the flea market. (4)  The flea market management shall notify the inspections and code enforcement department of any overnight campers, motor homes, travel trailers and recreational vehicles remaining on the flea market site in violation of section 16-194(b). (5)  The flea market management shall not rent, lease, nor otherwise provide space to any vendor not in possession of a city business license, unless a certificate of registration has been issued, and daily retail sales fee has been collected in accordance with section 16-167(c). All such registration receipts and sales fees shall be delivered to the license inspector at the end of every business week. (6)  The flea market management shall not allow any vendor to sell foodstuffs unless that vendor displays a valid retail food sales license, and/or a food service permit, as required in section 16-214. (Code 1985, § 19-148; Ord. No. 92-128, (art. V, § 5.07), 5-26-1992) 
Chapter 18 - CEMETERIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— the state Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; city as trustee of cemetery funds, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 18-1. - Interment in city cemeteries. (a)  It shall be unlawful to inter any dead body in any other place within the city or its police jurisdiction than in a cemetery. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the superintendent of parks and cemeteries, to inter any dead body in any part of the city cemeteries. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to inter other than human remains in any part of the city cemeteries. (Code 1975, §§ 6-1—6-3; Code 1985, § 9-1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Hebrew section.     That portion of either cemetery now or hereafter designated in the plan of the cemeteries in the office of the city engineer as the "Hebrew Section" is hereby set apart for the special use of persons of the Jewish faith in the city for cemetery purposes. They shall have power to enclose the same at their own charge and in any manner assented to by the city manager. The superintendent of parks and cemeteries shall dig all graves and keep a record of all interments made therein, in the manner and on the same terms as in other portions of the city cemetery. All ordinances applicable to the city cemetery shall apply to this portion thus set off. (Code 1975, § 6-4; Code 1985, § 9-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Public section.     That portion of either cemetery now or hereafter designated in the plan of the cemeteries as the "Public Section" shall be used for the interment of the remains of nonresidents, persons buried at the public expense and persons not owning lots or who are unable to buy the same. (Code 1975, § 6-5; Code 1985, § 9-3) 
Sec. 18-4. - Lot and grave service fees.     The price of cemetery lots and grave services in any city cemetery shall be as determined by the board of city commissioners from time to time and on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1975, § 6-6; Code 1985, § 9-4) 
Sec. 18-5. - Sale of lots—Payment of purchase money.     Purchasers of cemetery lots shall, on payment of the purchase money to the city treasurer, receive titles for the same. No deed shall be made or delivered until the purchase price shall have been paid. (Code 1975, § 6-7; Code 1985, § 9-5) 
Sec. 18-6. - Same—Form of deed; conditions.     All deeds shall be made and signed by the mayor and city manager and have affixed thereto the seal of the city. All deeds shall contain a condition that the lot conveyed shall not be used for any other than burial of human remains and cemetery purposes and shall be reconveyed in whole or in part only upon notice to and approval by the public administration and finance committee or committee of the whole of the board of city commissioners and shall also have inserted therein a clause declaring that the board of city commissioners or its proper authority shall always have the right and authority to regulate the manner of interments on the lots. (Code 1975, § 6-8; Code 1985, § 9-6) 
Sec. 18-7. - Recordation of deeds.     It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep a well-bound book in which the city clerk shall record the city title to the city cemeteries and all titles granted pursuant to this chapter. Such titles shall be recorded within 30 days after they shall have been issued and the book shall have a numerical index as to lot numbers as well as a name index as to purchasers. (Code 1975, § 6-9; Code 1985, § 9-7) 
Sec. 18-8. - Depositing offensive matter prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any part of any cemetery or any land adjoining it any garbage, trash, rubbish or any putrid or offensive matter whatsoever. (Code 1975, § 6-11; Code 1985, § 9-8) 
Sec. 18-9. - Hours. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any cemetery belonging to, owned or controlled by the city or walk upon or across any such cemetery between sunset and sunrise without the written consent of the superintendent of parks and cemeteries. (b)  All persons shall be allowed access to the grounds of Riverside Cemetery between sunrise and sunset. (Code 1975, §§ 6-12, 6-33; Code 1985, § 9-9) 
Secs. 18-10—18-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OAKVIEW CEMETERY 
Sec. 18-37. - Old plan adopted.     The plan of the cemetery heretofore known, and hereafter to be known as Oakview Cemetery, in the office of the city clerk is hereby adopted as the true plan thereof, subject to such changes as may be made necessary therein by the sale of lots not heretofore entered thereon, and all the ways, passages, avenues and corners thereon delineated shall forever be kept free and unobstructed for use of those who are now or may at any time hereafter become owners of lots in the cemetery and for the public; subject, however, at all times to such rules and regulations as may be made by the board of city commissioners for the government of the same. (Code 1975, § 6-21; Code 1985, § 9-16) 
Sec. 18-38. - New and revised plan.     The city engineer shall make a revision of the original plan of Oakview Cemetery, conforming as nearly as possible to the original plan, with respect to showing numbers of lots and subdivisions of the same. The city engineer shall also plot and lay off, under the direction of the superintendent of parks and cemeteries, the addition to the cemetery purchased from the Albany Brick Manufacturing company and make a plan or map thereof, with departments or subdivisions corresponding to those named in Oakview and after completion of the revised plan and the new plan and after they have been approved in writing thereon by the board of city commissioners, both shall be filed with the city clerk and by the city clerk safely kept at the city hall and shall be the official cemetery plans and from which all the titles shall be made. (Code 1975, § 6-22; Code 1985, § 9-17) 
Sec. 18-39. - Lots undisposed of.     All those lots in Oakview Cemetery which have been used for burial purposes and which have not been conveyed away by the board of city commissioners shall be considered public lots and used as such unless the friends of such persons as have been interred on any of such lots shall come forward and pay the regular valuation price for the same, after advertising in the city paper for a space of 60 days. (Code 1975, § 6-23; Code 1985, § 9-18) 
Secs. 18-40—18-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RIVERSIDE CEMETERY 
Sec. 18-67. - Application.     The provisions of this article shall govern the control and use of the Riverside Cemetery and the Hebrew Section. (Code 1975, § 6-31; Code 1985, § 9-26) 
Sec. 18-68. - Sale, transfer by owner.     Owners of lots shall not be permitted to sell or transfer lots without the written consent and approval of the city, and no interment upon the lot of an owner shall be permitted for a consideration. (Code 1975, § 6-32; Code 1985, § 9-27) 
Sec. 18-69. - Interment permit required.     No interments shall be made in Riverside Cemetery until a permit shall have been secured from the proper authority of the city. (Code 1975, § 6-34; Code 1985, § 9-28) 
Sec. 18-70. - Vaults required.     All interments shall be in approved metal or concrete vaults except those in Babyland or public sections. Upon approval of the superintendent of parks and cemeteries, vaults may be installed at ground level at no expense to the city. When interment is made, the usual grave opening fee shall apply. (Code 1975, § 6-35; Code 1985, § 9-29; Ord. No. 81-149, § 1, 4-28-1981) 
Sec. 18-71. - Disinterments.     All disinterments shall be made by authorities of the city and after all proper and requisite permits have been secured. (Code 1975, § 6-36; Code 1985, § 9-30) 
Sec. 18-72. - Enclosures, marks, etc.     No enclosure of lots shall be permitted, and all corner stones or other marks shall be set flush with the ground. (Code 1975, § 6-37; Code 1985, § 9-31) 
Sec. 18-73. - Erection of stones, monuments, etc.     Owners shall have the right to erect proper stones, monuments or sepulchral structures thereon, except that no slab shall be set other than in a horizontal position and flush with the ground. Headstones shall not exceed two feet in height above the ground and 18 inches in width and shall be set in a solid concrete foundation. Monuments of cut stone or marble shall not exceed ten feet in height and the erection of same must be authorized and supervised by the authorized officers of the city. Aboveground vaults or mausoleums shall be constructed only after due authorization of the city. All lots shall be sodded with grass and all markers, monuments, stones and slabs shall be set so as to interfere as little as possible with the mowing of the grass by the city. (Code 1975, § 6-38; Code 1985, § 9-32) 
Sec. 18-74. - Permits for improvements.     The erection of all monuments and the planting of flowers, shrubs or any other effort to improve or beautify any lot within the cemetery shall be done only after the plans for such work shall have been submitted to the proper city authority, approved thereby and a permit issued therefor. (Code 1975, § 6-39; Code 1985, § 9-33) 
Sec. 18-75. - Monument and masonry work.     All monumental work and masonry shall at all times be of the most permanent character. Defective workmanship will not be allowed. (Code 1975, § 6-40; Code 1985, § 9-34) 
Sec. 18-76. - Workmen.     All workmen engaged in any work being done in the cemetery shall at all times be subject to the direction and control of the authorities of the city in charge of the cemetery. No work shall be done without express written authority from the city. Where a permit has been secured for such work the same must be carried on under the direction and supervision of the authorities of the city in charge of the cemetery. (Code 1975, § 6-41; Code 1985, § 9-35) 
Sec. 18-77. - Park lot.     The plot just east of Jackson Street in the northwest corner of the Riverside Cemetery shall forever be maintained as a park. (Code 1975, § 6-42; Code 1985, § 9-36) 
Sec. 18-78. - Advertisements, signs, etc.     No advertisement, sign, erection of fences, trellises, planting of hedges or trees, or the solicitation of work by gardeners or others within the cemetery shall be permitted. (Code 1975, § 6-43; Code 1985, § 9-37) 