THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA ____________ Published by Order of the Board of City Commissioners 2009 ____________ > OFFICIALS of the CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Willie Adams, Jr., M.D. Mayor ____________ Jon Howard Dorothy Hubbard Morris Gurr Roger Marietta Bob Langstaff, Jr. Tommie Postell City Commissioners ____________ Alfred D. Lott City Manager ____________ C. Nathan Davis City Attorney ____________ Sonja Tolbert City Clerk PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented through Ord. No. 07-111, adopted April 24, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of city commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Shelly Hayes, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Alfred D. Lott and city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. © Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. 2009. AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED 09-141 AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Albany, Georgia and it is hereby ordained by authority of same:     Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 64, each inclusive, is adopted.     Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 22, 2009 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.     Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.     Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of City Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.     Section 5. Ordinances adopted after September 22, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.     Section 6. The last sentence of Section 38-69(d) of the Code is changed to read "within five business days."     Section 7. The reference at lines 2 and 3 of Section 52-33 of the Code "but not less than semiannually" is deleted.     Section 8. There is added in alphabetical order to Section 60-127 of the Code "PTP means Pilot Testing Program."     Section 9. To the list of priority pollutants at Section 60-196(c) of the Code, there is added "Bis (2-chloroisopropyl) ether" and "1, 12-Benzofluoranthene" is deleted and in its place is "11, 12-Benzofluoranthene."     Section 10. The penultimate sentence of Section 60-131 (f) of the Code is changed to read "If no building permit is required, the appropriate charge shall be paid to the city at the time the water meter is installed or the size changed."     Section 11. The last sentence of Section 60-949(1) of the Code is changed to read "For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utility facilities is defined as a strip of land at least four (4) feet wide, but not wider than the width of the utility facility plus two (2) feet on either side thereof."     Section 12. This ordinance in no way changes any provisions of the City Charter and shall become effective upon its adoption. /s/         Dorothy B. Hubbard       Mayor Pro Tem   ATTEST: /s/         Sonja Tolbert       City Clerk   Adopted: December 15, 2009 Introduced by Commissioner:  Postell                       Date(s) read:  Dec. 15, 2009       
Chapter 60 - UTILITIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Home rule powers of municipality to regulate sewage collection and disposal systems and water treatment systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6), (7); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; municipalities authorized to acquire, construct, operate and maintain water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 60-1. - Public utilities—Construction for private purposes; reversion to city.     Whenever any public utility shall have been constructed or installed for any person, upon the completion thereof, such utility shall thereupon become a part of the city's public utility system, available for the use of the city for the service of others, in the same manner and to the same extent as all other public utilities otherwise established for the city. (Code 1975, § 2-5; Code 1985, § 27-1) 
Sec. 60-2. - Same—Perpetual easement in favor of city required.     No type of public utility shall be established across or upon any private property until after a perpetual easement therefor is executed in favor of the city. (Code 1975, § 2-6; Code 1985, § 27-2) 
Sec. 60-3. - Tampering prohibited. (a)  The following acts are declared to be unlawful: (1)  Tampering with or altering any utility or any line, wire, pipe or other devices or other instrumentality used in connection with the operation of the utility system of the board of water, gas and light commissioners; (2)  Tampering with, resetting or otherwise interfering with any metering device used in the operation of the utility system of the water, gas and light commission whether such device is owned by the board of water, gas and light commissioners, the customer or otherwise, so as to cause it to run backward or to fail to operate or to register incorrectly; (3)  Performing any act or using any means, method, device or contrivance which bypasses a metering device, metering instrument or other instrument used to measure consumption of utilities, or which otherwise prevents such device from accurately recording the consumption of the utility, regardless of whether such device is owned by the board of water, gas and light commissioners, the customer or otherwise; (4)  Placing upon the lines, conductors, pipes or other instrumentalities conveying utilities, regardless of whether same are owned by the board of water, gas and light commissioners, the customer or otherwise, any device or instrument by means of which the utility is made available without being measured or recorded; (5)  Any unauthorized use of a metering device or a conducting facility so as to obtain utilities without paying therefor. (b)  Any person who performs any of the acts enumerated in this section, or who conspires to do or procures or causes to be done any of such acts, or who uses or consumes any utility furnished by the board of water, gas and light commissioners with knowledge that any of the acts have been done and that such use is not being properly and accurately recorded, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-17. (Code 1975, § 21-4; Code 1985, § 27-3) 
Sec. 60-4. - Franchise required to provide electric utility services. (a)  No entity or person may sell or provide electric utility services to any customer within the corporate limits of the City of Albany, Georgia, as those corporate limits may be extended from time to time, without first obtaining a franchise from the city. Such franchise will permit the person or entity to sell or provide said electric utility services within designated geographical areas of the city's corporate limits and to designated service locations. If granted, the franchise agreement shall contain, at a minimum and at the discretion of the city, the term of the agreement, the franchise fee or other valuable consideration that is to be paid to the city, the specific electric utility services to be provided within the city limits, the geographical areas and service locations to be served, appropriate terms and conditions of service including provisions and conditions for the utilization of the city's streets and rights-of-way, and appropriate health and safety regulations. However, the terms of the franchise agreement shall not be construed to limit the city's ability to require permits for the construction or maintenance of said electric utility facilities. Any fees required by city for such permits will be in addition to the franchise fee. (b)  Existing electric utility facilities and infrastructure situated within the corporate limits of the city may not be extended or modified without the approval of the city and not until such time as the owner or operator of any such electric utility facilities or infrastructure enters into a franchise agreement with the city. (c)  Occupation of the city's streets and right-of-ways by providers of electric utility services may be subject to the payment of rent in addition to any payments required pursuant to a franchise agreement. The rental fee for occupying the city's streets and rights-of-way will be determined by the city commission on a case-by-case basis. (d)  The existing franchise agreement dated May 12, 1987, by and between the Georgia Power Company and the city during its term, shall not be affected by this section, except that such preexisting franchise agreement may not be assigned, set-over or sold to any other entity without the prior written approval of the city. The rights granted under such franchise agreement to the Georgia Power Company shall not be used by any third party or entity without the prior written approval of the city. This shall not restrict, or in any way limit, the rights granted to the Georgia Power Company with regard to any successor in interest, corporate reorganization or bona fide sale of its facilities. (e)  The city attorney shall cause to be prepared a uniform franchise agreement to be used by this commission, if requests are made under this section. While each franchise agreement so submitted will be on a case-by-case basis, it shall conform to the general provisions of this section. (Code 1985, § 27-4; Ord. No. 97-134, §§ 1—5, 8-12-1997) 
Sec. 60-5. - Investigation, entry, access and inspection. (a)  The city, through its employees may enter at reasonable times on any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating the condition, construction, maintenance, or operation of any utility service (electricity, natural gas, water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer). (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such inspection. Examples of such prohibited acts include, but are not limit to, hindering access to an electric meter, natural gas meter, water meter, storm or sanitary sewer infrastructure by use of building materials, fences, animals, constructional add-ons, vehicles, rubbish or other means whereby access to such structures is obstructed. (c)  A violation of this code section shall be punished as provided in section 1-17 and 1-18 of the City Charter. (Ord. No. 13-132, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Secs. 60-6—60-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IDENITY THEFT AND ADDRESS DISCREPANCY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 60-27—60-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
Sec. 60-56. - Short title.     This division may also be known as the "Identity Theft Prevention Program." (Code 1985, § 17-151; Ord. No. 08-143, § 1(1), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-57. - Purpose.     The purpose of this division is to comply with FTC "Red Flag Rules" in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. (Code 1985, § 17-152; Ord. No. 08-143, § 1(2), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-58. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     City means the City of Albany.     Covered amount means: (1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks.     Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor.     Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies.     Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor.     Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority.     Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association.     Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth.     Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft.     Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city or WGL.     WGL means the City of Albany's Water, Gas and Light Commission. (Code 1985, § 17-153; Ord. No. 08-143, § 1(3), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-59. - Findings. (a)  The city and its WGL maintain covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. (b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include electricity, natural gas, water, municipal solid waste, and sewer services. (c)  The city and WGL limit access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the WGL computer system, and is not otherwise recorded. (Code 1985, § 17-154; Ord. No. 08-143, § 1(4), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-60. - Process of establishing a covered account. (a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide WGL with personal identifying information of the customer. This information may be in the form of a driver's license; or other acceptable picture identification. Such information shall be entered directly into the WGL computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. (b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and which shall be unique to that account. The city and WGL may utilize computer software to encrypt Social Security numbers and dates of birth. (Code 1985, § 17-155; Ord. No. 08-143, § 1(5), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-61. - Access to covered account information. (a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city and WGL personnel. (b)  Such password shall be changed by the WGL director on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. (c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the WGL director and the password changed immediately. (d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager, the city attorney and WGL investigation department. (Code 1985, § 17-156; Ord. No. 08-143, § 1(6), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-62. - Credit card payments. (a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third party service provide such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. (b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer database. (c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. (Code 1985, § 17-157; Ord. No. 08-143, § 1(7), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-63. - Sources and types of red flags.     All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: (1)  Alerts. Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service: providers. Examples of alerts include but, are not limited to: a.  A fraud or active duty alert mat is included with a consumer report; b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 1.  A recent and significant increase in fee volume of inquiries; 2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 3.  A material change in the use of credit especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. (2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant's customer; c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. (3)  Suspicious personal identification. Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: The address does not match any address in the consumer report. b.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third party sources used by me financial institution or creditor. c.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. d.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or consumers. e.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. f.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. g.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creator. h.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. (4)  Unusual use or suspicious activity. Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city or WGL receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time and it comes to WGL's attention that mere is service activity. e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. f.  City or WGL is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. g.  City or WGL is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. h.  City or WGL is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that someone has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. (5)  Notice from customers. Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. (Code 1985, § 17-158; Ord. No. 08-143, § 1(8), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-64. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. (a)  In the event that any city or WGL employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the WGL assistant general manager/administration. If in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to the WGL assistant general manager/administration, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If, the WGL assistant general manager/administration in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, city or WGL employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the WGL assistant general manager/administration. (1)  Contact the customer; (2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices may permit access to an account; or b.  Close the account; (3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; (4)  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identifying theft relating to such account; (5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or (6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (b)  In the event that any city or WGL employee responsible for or involved in operating a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the WGL assistant general manager/administration, who may in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the WGL assistant general manager/administration: (1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; (2)  Deny the application for a new account; (3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or (4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (Code 1985, § 17-159; Ord. No. 08-143, § 1(9), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-65. - Updating the program.     Both the city commission and WGL commission shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the commissions, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the commissions shall consider the factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program as outlined in 16 CFR 681, appendix A. (Code 1985, § 17-160; Ord. No. 08-143, § 1(10), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-66. - Program administration     The WGL assistant general manager/administration is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. The commission shall submit any recommended material changes to the program to the city commission for consideration. (1)  As required by 16 CFR 683, appendix A ("appendix to part 681"). The WGL assistant general manager/administration will report to the city manager and WGL general manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues as identified in appendix to 16 CFR 681. (2)  The WGL IT director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The WGL assistant general manager/administration shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. (Code 1985, § 17-161; Ord. No. 08-143, § 1(11), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-67. - Outside service providers.     In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered amounts, the WGL general manager shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of such general manager's ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (Code 1985, § 17-162; Ord. No. 08-143, § 1(12), 10-28-2008) 
Secs. 60-68—60-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 
Sec. 60-93. - Short title; purpose. (a)  Treatment of address. (b)  Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. (Code 1985, §§ 17-181, 17-182; Ord. No. 08-143, § 2(1), (2), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-94. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     City means the City of Albany.     Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 USC 1681(c)(h)(0. that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the addresses) in the agency's file for the consumer. (Code 1985, § 17-183; Ord. No. 08-143, § 2(3), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-95. - Policy.     In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: (1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information Program rules implementing 31 USC 5318(1); b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer; account records or tax records; or c.  Information the city obtains from third party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or (2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. (Code 1985, § 17-184; Ord. No. 08-143, § 2(4), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-96. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. (a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate; the city is required to provide such address to the consumer-reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: (1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report. The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and (2)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. (b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. (Code 1985, § 17-185; Ord. No. 08-143, § 2(5), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 60-97. - Method of confirming consumer addresses.     The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: (1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; (2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; (3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or (4)  Using other reasonable processes. (Code 1985, § 17-186; Ord. No. 08-143, § 2(6), 10-28-2008) 
Secs. 60-98—60-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 60-123. - Purpose and policy. (a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403) and the Regulation of Commercial Waste Originators, Pumpers, Transporters, Processors, and Disposal Facilities (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R. 391-3-6-.24). (b)  This article shall apply to all users of the POTW. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. (Code 1985, § 14-60; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-124. - Objectives.     The objectives are as follows: (1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with its operation; (2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; (3)  To protect the city's personnel, who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment, and the general public; (4)  To promote the rescue and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the POTW; (5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of the operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW; and (6)  To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject. (Code 1985, § 14-61; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-125. - Administration.     Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of public works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of the article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the director of public works may be delegated by the director of public works to other city personnel. (Code 1985, § 14-62; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-126. - Abbreviations.     The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: ACO Administrative Compliance Order BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand CAP Corrective Action Plan CERCLA Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act CFR Code of Federal Regulations COD Chemical Oxygen Demand EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency EPD The State Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division gpd Gallons per day IU Industrial user mg/l milligrams per liter NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System NOV Notice of Violation POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act SARA Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1987 SIC Standard Industrial Classification TSS Total Suspended Solids USC United States Code  (Code 1985, § 14-63; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-127. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.     Approval authority means the designated state approval authority which is the state department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, Municipal Permitting Program.     Authorized representative of the user means: (1)  If the user is a corporation: a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. (2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. (3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or other designee. (4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.     Backup conditions means the rising or reverse flow of sewage in a sewer caused by partial blockages of the sewer or by sufficient flow to exceed the normal capacity of the sewer.     Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).     Building drain means a device used to collect water and provide drainage from a building.     Building sewer or house sewer means the extension from a building drain to the sewer tap or right-of-way.     Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Water Pollution Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR ch. I, subch. N, §§ 405—471.     Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and wastewater.     Commercial wastes means: (1)  Non-toxic, non-hazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities; (2)  Grease interceptor contents generated by a commercial food operation or institutional food preparation facility, including without limitation, fats, grease and food scraps; or (3)  Any oil waste residue produced from vehicle maintenance or washing that discharge to an oil-water separator or sand trap.     Commercial waste manifest means a three-part form identifying information about the originator, transporter and the receiver of commercial waste which must be signed by each entity in order to be complete.     Commission means the city commission or the commission's duly authorized deputy or representative.     Composite means the makeup of a number of individual samples, so taken as to represent the nature of sewage or industrial wastes.     Constituents means the combination of particles or conditions which exist in the industrial wastes.     Director of public works means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or a duly authorized representative.     Effluent means the discharge flow of a treatment facility.     Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.     Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.).     Flammable shall be defined by existing fire regulations.     FOG. The abbreviation "FOG" stands for fats, oils and grease.     Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.     Grease interceptor or grease trap means a structure or device designed primarily to collect and retain oils, grease and fatty substances usually found in kitchen or food preparation waste.     Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Federal Water Pollution Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.).     Industrial/commercial user or IU means all users not embraced within the definition of a residential or domestic user as herein defined are declared to be industrial or commercial users.     Influent means the wastewaters arriving at the sewage treatment plant for treatment and those structures associated with its initial treatment.     Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample, collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.     Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: sections 405 of the Federal Water Pollution Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.); the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.), including title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.); the Clean Air Act (42 USCA § 7401 et seq.); the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 USC 2601 et seq.), and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act (33 USC 1401 et seq.).     Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.     Metered water means the amount of water consumed by the sewer customer as measured by the city water meter or other approved metering device.     Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.     New source means: (1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. (2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. (3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has: a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction, commenced: 1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.     Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.     Originator means the owner or operator of the grease interceptor/trap, grit trap, oil-water separator, or sand trap from which commercial wastes are removed.     Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.     Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.     pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.     Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).     Polluted water means that waste water leaving the using premises to which contaminates have been added so as to render the water nonpotable.     Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.     Pretreatment coordinator means the day-to-day manager of the industrial pretreatment program for the city.     Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.     Pretreatment standards or standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.     Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means the absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 60-194.     PTP means pilot testing program.     Public sewer means a sewer which is owned and/or controlled by the city.     Public works director means the head of the public works department or the head of the public works department's designee.     Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means a "treatment works," as defined by section 212 of the Federal Water Pollution Act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any appurtenances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.     Receiving waters means those waters into which wastes are discharged.     Registered commercial waste transporter means a business/owner registered by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and whose tank trucks are permitted by the local governing authority.     Residential or domestic user. The terms "residential or domestic user," "residential user," and "domestic user," of publicly owned treatment works means a premises occupied solely and exclusively as a dwelling place or place of residence, or a person occupying a premises solely or exclusively for such purpose. The terms shall not include hotels or motels, which are declared to be commercial users. A premises which is occupied in part as a dwelling place or place of residence, and in part for other purposes, does not qualify as a residential or domestic user, and is declared to be an industrial or commercial user.     Restaurant waste surcharge means the additional service charge assessed against users whose oil and grease waste characteristics exceed the base concentration.     Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries wastewaters and from which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are excluded.     Septic tank means an underground tank that receives wastewater directly from residences, commercial or industrial sources. The effluent flows out of the tank into the ground through drains. The sludge or septic tank waste is pumped out of the tanks, usually by commercial firms, at regular intervals.     Septic tank waste means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.     Sewage means a combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present.     Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewaters.     Sewer service charge means the charge assessed against sewer customers who are connected to or discharge into the city sewage system.     SIC. The term "SIC" is an acronym for Standard Industrial Classification.     Significant industrial user means: (1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or (2)  A user that: a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. (3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.     Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 60-194.     Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.     Storm line means the pipe line that carries stormwater, surface water, and drainage, but excludes sanitary and or polluted industrial wastewaters.     Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.     Stormwater maintenance means a basic purpose of stormwater maintenance is removal of debris not only from holding ponds and ditches but also street sweeping so as to remove debris from street gutters/catchbasins. The flat topography of city strongly favors regular street sweeping. The city's effort to meet this challenge includes a fleet of jet vacs, street sweepers, heavy equipment and personnel. Further, the city must operate and maintain a large number of pumping stations.     Stop up means the malfunctioning of a sewer, tap, or building sewer to such an extent that the normal flow is materially impeded or stopped completely.     Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.     Tap means the connection between the sewer and the building sewer which is on public property.     Total suspended solids (TSS) means all solids contained in sewage except colloidal and dissolved solids.     Toxic means constituents of wastes which adversely affect the organisms involved in sewage treatment.     Transporter means any person or firm, which owns or operates one or more waste tank trucks that receive or dispose of commercial waste in the state.     User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge.     Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.     Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.     Water meter means those devices approved by the general manager of the utilities department of city, for the purpose of establishing the quantity of water consumed by a premises or a person.     Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently.     Work order means a typed directive from the city manager or the director of public works providing for the accomplishment of certain work. (Code 1985, §§ 14-64, 27-21; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-1), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005; Ord. No. 09-141, § 8, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 60-128. - Cease and desist orders.     When the IU has violated or continues to violate this article or permit or other administrative enforcement actions, the director of public works can issue this type of order to the responsible party. The cease and desist order, directs the violator to comply with specific requirements and schedules set by the director of public works and to take appropriate remedial or preventive actions, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. (Code 1985, § 14-112; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-129. - Administrative fines.     When the IU has violated or continues to violate this article or permit or other administrative enforcement actions, the director of public works can issue an administrative fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. Each day on which the noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Administrative fine notifications will be delivered personally to the principal executive, general partner, or corporate officer of higher ranking that is in charge of operations at the local IU facility. If an IU desires to dispute such fines, a written request must be filed to the director of public works to reconsider the fine within ten days of receiving the notification of the fine. If the director of public works believes that a request has merit, the director of public works will convene a hearing within 15 days from receiving the request from the IU. (Code 1985, § 14-113; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-130. - Treatment bypasses. (a)  A bypass of the treatment or pretreatment systems is prohibited unless all of the following conditions are met: (1)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; (2)  There was no feasible alternative to the bypass, including the use of auxiliary treatment or retention of the wastewater; (3)  The industrial user properly notified the director of public works as described in subsection (b) of this section. (b)  Industrial users must provide immediate notice to the director of public works upon discovery of an unanticipated bypass. If necessary, the department of public works may require the industrial user to submit a written report explaining the cause, nature, and duration of the bypass, and the steps being taken to prevent its recurrence. (c)  An industrial user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system. Industrial users anticipating a bypass must submit notice to the director of public works at least ten days in advance. The director of public works may only approve the anticipated bypass if the circumstances satisfy those set forth in subsection (a) of this section. (d)  An industrial user which complies with the notification provisions of this section in a timely manner shall have an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the director of public works for any noncompliance with this article, or an order or permit issued hereunder by the user, which arises out of violations attributable to and alleged to have occurred during the period of the documented and verified bypass. The affirmative defense shall be in accordance with the specifications presented in 40 CFR 403.17. (Code 1985, § 14-126; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-131. - Sewer construction—Generally. (a)  No sewers shall be constructed until all permits have been secured. (b)  All sewers constructed in any public street, alley, or right-of-way and which connect to the city sewerage system become the property of the city. Sewers located in privately owned streets or alleys are required to be built to city standards, to be inspected and to have an easement accepted by the city in order for the sewer to be owned and maintained by the city. (c)  All sewers constructed will be in strict accord with city standard specifications. (d)  Sewer extensions shall be made by the city or by properly authorized contractors. Sewer extensions by city forces shall be made by ordinance or by force account. When made by ordinance, the entire cost of the sewer will be assessed against the abutting property up to the current maximum assessment rate. When extensions are made by force account, the person desiring the extension will prepay to the city the amount computed for the extension using the standard construction costs. Cost records of the work will be kept and used to adjust the standard construction costs periodically. (e)  Land to be developed as a subdivision or otherwise shall include sanitary sewer service lines even though private sewage disposal systems are to be used initially. All such sewers shall be constructed in accordance with city specifications. When private sewage disposal systems are used initially and thereafter public sewers are available (within 200 feet from the property line), the normal tap and connection must be made after notice to do so by the city director of public works. (f)  A sanitary sewer development charge, will be assessed on all applicants for sanitary sewer service, and on all persons or entities changing the size of an existing water meter. This development charge is an addition to the fees imposed for actual hookup or tapping into a sewer system. Said system development charge shall be collected by the inspection department at the time of and as a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit. If no building permit is required, the appropriate charge shall be paid to the city at the time the water meter is installed or the size is changed. The amount to be paid shall in every case be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the public works department. (g)  Wherever the city has constructed in the past or does construct in the future any sanitary sewer line, the cost of which has not been assessed against the adjoining property owners, the director of public works shall determine and fix a sewer connection fee, with respect to each adjoining property owner which shall be equal to the amount which would have been assessed against said property had the sewer line been assessed, and any property owner tapping onto said sanitary sewer line shall first pay for the sewer connection fee, and other standard fees, so fixed and assessed. (Code 1985, §§ 27-29, 27-33, 14-133; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-9), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 96-110, §§ 1, 2, 3-26-1996; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005; Ord. No. 09-141, § 10, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 60-132. - Sewer permits required. (a)  Sewers constructed by city forces. No new sewers will be constructed by city forces unless a work order from the director of public works has been deemed necessary and issued providing for such work. Such ordinance or work order shall constitute the permit. (b)  Sewers constructed by others. The following shall be the permit requirements for sewers constructed by others: (1)  Contractors performing work for the City of Albany, Georgia. The notice to proceed shall constitute the permit authorizing construction. (2)  All others. No work shall be performed on any sewer or in any existing or future city street, alley or right-of-way unless and until plans have been submitted to and approved in writing by the director of engineering or the director of engineering's designee. Upon approval of the plans, the director of engineering shall then issue a written permit authorizing construction of the sewers and transmit a set of the approved plans to the director of public works or sewer superintendent. (3)  Conformity. Sewer construction shall conform to all pertinent OSHA standards. (4)  Marked. All sewer construction shall be marked with magnetic location tape per the Utility Protection Center Regulations (O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq.). (c)  Taps. The following shall be the permit requirements for taps: (1)  Cleanout construction and location of existing taps. a.  Cleanouts constructed in accordance with city standards will be installed at the end of each tap whether laid by the city or duly authorized contractor. b.  Location of existing taps. 1.  The city will locate unused existing sewer taps at no charge for location service. 2.  When buildings are razed, the person responsible for the demolition shall locate the existing building sewer at the property line and call the city public works department to reference the tap. No charge is made for this service. When the building sewer is not located at the property line and the city public works department has to make additional trips to reference the tap, the additional cost will be billed to the person responsible for demolition. c.  Reuse of existing taps. Taps will be reused by the next occupant provided the tap is in good condition and sufficient in size, as determined by the superintendent of the sewer systems division. The tap reuse fee as established by ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners from time to time, and made available for public examination in the offices of the public works department and the city clerk, will be assessed. d.  Locations subject to backup conditions. At locations where backups are known or are expected to occur, the director of engineering will recommend in writing the installation of a manhole containing a plug valve and a check valve for backflow prevention. Where backups are known to occur, the city will provide all equipment and labor to make the installation if the property owner will furnish all materials. At undeveloped locations where the director of engineering has reason to believe back-up conditions may occur, the director of engineering will recommend in writing that the owner make the installation of the manhole and valves at the owner's expense. Subsequent flooding damages will not be the responsibility of the city if the owner does not make the installation. If the owner later experiences backup conditions, the owner will pay the total cost, if he or she desires to have the backflow prevention installed. (2)  Construction by city forces. a.  All taps connecting to any sewer maintained, owned or controlled by the city will be installed by city forces or an authorized contractor. The work order shall constitute the permit. b.  On new work, wyes will be installed during construction. c.  On existing sewers, where possible, a boring or drilling machine shall be used to make the connection to the existing pipe. (3)  Construction by duly authorized contractors. a.  Taps utilizing wyes will be installed by contractors where the sewer is in a street, alley or easement which is to be paved as part of a subdivision development or under contract to the city. b.  Taps utilizing wyes will be installed in all other areas during construction by contractors to serve the abutting property where sewers being installed are deeper than ten feet. c.  A record drawing showing the location of all taps will be required. (4)  Fees for taps. a.  Tap fees vary in cost according to location and conditions. Taps are classified under the following headings: Dirt alley. Paved alley. Dirt street. Paved street. Existing tap reuse. The appropriate fees shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners, from time to time and made available for public examination in the office of the public works department. b.  Where the cost of the sewer was either not assessed against the abutting property or was held in abeyance, the sewer tap fee shall be the actual assessment plus the appropriate tap fee as established by ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the public works department. If the actual assessment is unknown, the tap fee shall be the current maximum sanitary sewer assessment rate applied to the abutting footage plus the appropriate tap fee. c.  Where the sewer is located outside the city limits, the sewer tap fee shall be equal to the actual assessment (if it could have been made) plus the appropriate tap fee as established by ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the public works department. If the value of the actual assessment is unknown, then the tap fee shall be the current maximum sanitary sewer assessment rate applied to the abutting footage plus the appropriate tap fee. d.  For sewer extensions or new sewer systems being made by private developers, the developers will pay the entire costs of such extensions or developments. No "rebate" or charges for sewer taps will be made or collected by the city and rebated or refunded to the developers over any period of time, for, or under any circumstances. e.  Whenever the city has constructed in the past or does construct in the future any sanitary sewer line, the cost of which has not been assessed against the adjoining property owners, the director of public works shall determine and fix a sewer connection fee, in addition to the standard sewer tapping fee and sewer development fee, with respect to each property owner which shall be equal to the amount which would have been assessed against the property had the sewer line been constructed and assessed during the calendar year in which construction was completed, adjusted for inflation as measured by the consumer price index maintained by the United States government; provided, however, that the adjusted cost shall not be less than the actual original cost, nor more than twice the actual original cost. Any property owner tapping into the sanitary sewer line shall first pay the sewer connection fee, and other standard fees, so fixed and assessed. (d)  Construction. After all requirements for permits and fees have been met, all building sewers shall be constructed in strict accord with the city plumbing code. Building sewers outside the city limits, but which will connect to the city sewer, shall also conform to all city regulations. (Code 1985, § 14-134; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-133. - Inspection. (a)  Sewers. All sewers laid by other than city forces shall be inspected by the city engineering department as provided in the city standard specifications. (b)  Taps. All taps and cleanouts installed by other than city forces shall be inspected by the city engineering department as provided in the city standard specifications. Record drawings showing the correct location of all taps in sewer extensions or subdivision development shall be provided to the director of engineering before the sewer system will be approved and accepted by the city. (c)  Construction. All building sewers shall be inspected and approved by the city plumbing inspector before being covered with earth or other material. All materials shall conform to those currently approved under the city plumbing code. Building sewers six inches and larger in diameter shall conform in all respects to city standard specifications for sewer construction and will be inspected during construction by the city engineering department. (d)  Single services. A building sewer shall serve only one premises or building. Where there are two or more buildings presently connected to a single building sewer and the ownership of the buildings becomes divided, then each building or premises must be separately connected to a city tap. (Code 1985, §§ 14-135, 27-24; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-4), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-134. - Assessment. (a)  Assessment roll. The following shall be the requirements for the assessment roll: (1)  Required information. After the completion of any sanitary sewer project that has been constructed under an ordinance, either by contract or city forces, and any part is to be assessed against the abutting property owners, an assessment roll shall be prepared which includes the following information: a.  Ordinance number authorizing improvement; b.  The name and portion of street, alley, or easement where sewer was constructed; c.  The names and addresses of the owners of the property abutting on the improvement and the number of linear or front feet owned by each; d.  The date work commenced and the date of completion of the project; e.  An itemized statement or the material, labor, insurance, equipment rental and percent of supervision and contingencies; f.  The number of linear feet of sewer constructed; g.  The total cost of the improvement; h.  The city's part, if any, of the cost; i.  The abutting owner's proportionate part of the cost; j.  The abutting owner's cost per foot of the improvement; and k.  If the abutting owner's cost per foot of improvements is greater than the maximum cost per foot, then the maximum cost per foot in effect at the passage of the ordinance will be shown and used for assessment purposes. (2)  Filing. The assessment roll shall be filed with the city finance department. (b)  Duties of city finance department. As soon as the assessment roll shall be filed with the city finance department, a statement shall be sent to each abutting property owner showing the amount due and will include the following: (1)  The number of front feet chargeable to the abutting owner; (2)  The number of linear or front feet improved; (3)  The total cost thereof; (4)  The amount chargeable to the city; (5)  The amount chargeable to the abutting owners; (6)  The cost per front foot to the abutting owners; (7)  The amount due from the person notified; and (8)  Assessment payment date. If the face amount of assessment is not paid within 30 days from billing date, percent of interest on unpaid amount will be shown. (c)  Methods of computations. The following shall be the methods of computation: (1)  Abutting footage. a.  Regular lots. The abutting dimension of either rectangular or parallelogram shaped lots shall be used as the assessable footage. b.  Irregularly shaped lots. The average dimension of the abutting side and the side opposite shall be used as the assessable footage. c.  Extremely odd-shaped lots. The assessable footage shall be equal to the total area of the lot divided by the average depth or width of the more regular shaped lots in the immediate vicinity. (2)  Size of sewer to be assessed. When the sewer laid is larger than eight inches in diameter, the amount to be assessed shall be the total cost less 120 percent of the difference in the cost of the pipe actually laid and that of eight-inch pipe, multiplied by the number of feet of sewer. (Code 1985, §§ 27-25, 14-136; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-5), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-135. - Maintenance and use of sewers. (a)  Building sewers. The following shall be the maintenance requirements for building sewers: (1)  Responsibility. Building sewers are the responsibility of the property owner. The city does not maintain them. (2)  Exceptions. When authorized by the city manager, the sewer systems division of public works will clear stop ups of building sewers. The person requesting aid will be billed for 200 percent of the actual cost involved including labor and equipment rental. (b)  Taps. The following shall be the maintenance requirements for taps: (1)  Responsibility. Maintenance of taps is the responsibility of the city. No charge shall be made by the city for cleaning stop up of taps. (2)  Stopped taps. Taps stopped up by the introduction of prohibited materials into the building sewer will be cleared by the sewer systems division. The person causing the stop up shall be billed 200 percent of the actual cost involved in clearing the stoppage. Repeat violations may be fined as provided in sections 60-162 through 60-165. (3)  Penality. Persons claiming stop ups in the tap shall be billed 200 percent of the actual costs involved if investigation reveals the stop up is in the building sewer rather than in the tap. (c)  Sewers. There are no private sewers in city streets, alleys, or rights-of-way and none will be permitted. Sewer maintenance is the responsibility of the city. (1)  Sewer stopped up by prohibited materials. These sewers shall be cleared by the city, and the person causing the obstruction shall be billed 200 percent of the actual cost involved in the cleaning of the stoppage. Repeat violations may be fined as provided in sections 60-162 through 60-165. a.  In the event a property owner has a stopped up sewer and there is no cleanout at the property line, an agreement can be signed by the property owner that authorizes city personnel to install a cleanout at the property line. b.  If the stop-up or problem was in the building or house sewer line, the property owner will be billed for the cost of installation of the cleanout, which is equal to the amount as established by ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners from time to time and made available for public examination in the offices of the city clerk and public works department. c.  If the stop-up or problem was in the city tap, the property owner will not be billed for the cleanout installation. (2)  New sewer laid by contractors. It is the responsibility of the contractor to clean the sewer line prior to the final video inspection. In the event the contractor fails to do the cleaning, the contractor shall be billed 200 percent of the actual cost involved in cleaning the sewer. (3)  Responsibility. Backup prevention devices are the responsibility of the property owner. The city does not maintain them and will not do so unless authorized by the city manager. The owner requesting such maintenance shall be billed 200 percent of the actual cost involved. (4)  Claim for damages. Claims for damages caused by malfunctioning of a city sewer shall be submitted in writing to the city risk manager. The sewer systems division shall be notified by either the city risk manager or the owner during the actual occurrence so that a written report can be made for the city. (Code 1985, §§ 14-137, 27-25, 27-26; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-5), (28-6), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-136. - Sewer extension policy. (a)  Existing development within 200 feet of city sewer, where capacity is available, is required to connect to city sewer if an existing septic tank or private sewer fails. The appropriate fees would be paid to the city for providing this service including tap fees, sewer development charge, and the cost of extending the sewer main to the property if required. The developer may be required by the director of engineering to hire a contractor to install the sewer main and tap. The work shall be inspected by the city and the developer would then pay the city a sewer development charge. (b)  New development within 200 feet of city sewer, where capacity is available, is required to connect to city sewer. The appropriate fees would be paid to the city for providing this service including tap fees, sewer development charges, and the cost of extending the sewer main to the property if required. The developer may be required by the director of engineering to hire a contractor to install the sewer main and tap. The work would be inspected by the city and the developer would then pay the city a sewer development charge. (c)  Areas not served by city sewer can obtain city sewer service in one of the following ways: (1)  Provided capacity is available and sewer service is within 1,000 feet of unserved property, property owners within the city limits may petition the city for sewer service. All property owners to be affected by the sewer extension would be notified of the petition by certified mail and would have 30 days to vote for or against the project. If 51 percent or more of the property owners to be affected are in favor of the project, the city commission by a majority vote could pass an ordinance to do the work and assess all property owners to be served by the extension. (2)  Provided capacity is available and sewer service is within 1,000 feet of unserved property located within the city limits, the city commission can pass an ordinance after a public hearing, for public health, safety, and welfare reasons, with a majority vote to extend sewer service to this area and assess all property owners to be served by the extension. (3)  Provided capacity is available and sewer service is located more than 1,000 feet from unserved property located within the city limits, but based on the existing development patterns and/or the existing land use map, the development density in the service area of the sewer extension is or could be 3.25 units per acre, the city commission may pass an ordinance, after a public hearing, for public health, safety, and welfare reasons, to extend sewer service to this area and assess all property owners to be served by the extension. (4)  A developer of property, inside the city limits, can submit plans to the director of engineering for approval to extend sewer service to a new development such as a subdivision. Sewer shall be extended to the limits of the property to allow future developments access to sewer. Upon approval of plans, the developer can hire a contractor, provided capacity is available to extend the sewer. Developer would pay for all costs with installing sewer within a new subdivision. Taps would be installed to the lots by the contractor. All development charges would be paid as building permits are issued. The city will pay for increased capacity, extra depth or increased pipe size if the director of engineering determines it necessary. (5)  Provided capacity is available, the county can request the city to provide sewer service to an unserved area located in the unincorporated part of the county. The county would pay the city for all costs of construction and all other associated costs. A sewer development charge would also be due as building permits are issued. 
Secs. 60-137—60-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
Sec. 60-156. - Notification of violation.     A notice of violation (NOV) will be issued by the pretreatment coordinator whenever an IU has violated the article, wastewater discharge permit, or other written orders. The IU must respond in writing to the pretreatment coordinator and present an explanation of the cause of the violation, within five business days from such occurrence. In addition, the IU must present, within 30 days of the day when the violation occurred, a plan for correction and prevention of such violations in the future. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the IU for any liability for any violations occurring before and after receipt of the NOV. (Code 1985, § 14-108; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-157. - Consent orders.     A consent order is a written agreement between the city and the IU for implementing a voluntary remedial action of violations by the IU. This written agreement will include specific actions to be taken by the IU to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified in the document. (Code 1985, § 14-109; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-158. - Show cause hearing.     The pretreatment coordinator may order an IU which causes or contributes to a violation of the article, wastewater discharge permit, or other written orders, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice will be delivered to the principal executive, general partner, or corporate officer of higher ranking that is in charge of operations at the local IU facility. The notice will include the day and time of the hearing and will be served personally or by certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. (Code 1985, § 14-110; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-159. - Administrative compliance order.     When the IU has violated or continues to violate the article or permit or other administrative enforcement actions, the director of public works can issue an administrative compliance order (ACO) to the responsible party. The ACO specifies a time period when sewer service will be discontinued unless the appropriate corrective actions are taken by the IU. The ACO may require that the IU prepare a corrective action plan (CAP). This CAP will outline the specific actions and compliance schedule of the remedial project. The specific CAP content form will be available for public examination or distribution in the offices of the public works department. (Code 1985, § 14-111; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-160. - Emergency suspensions. (a)  The director of public works may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit of an industrial user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW, or the environment. (b)  Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director of public works shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director of public works shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in section 60-161 are initiated against the user. An industrial user who is the subject of a suspension order under this subsection shall have the right to appeal to the director of public works from such suspension, but such suspension shall remain in full force and effect pending such hearing and the decision of the director of public works pursuant thereto. (c)  An industrial user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement to the director of public works describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence prior to the date of the hearing described in section 60-158. (Code 1985, §§ 14-114, 27-30; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-10), 4-23-1991) 
Sec. 60-161. - Termination of permit. (a)  Significant industrial users proposing to discharge into the POTW, must first obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the department of public works. Any user who violates the following conditions of this article or a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any applicable or state and federal law, is subject to permit termination: (1)  Violation of permit conditions; (2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; (3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; or (4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling. (b)  Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 60-158 why the proposed action should not be taken. (Code 1985, §§ 14-115, 27-30; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-10), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-162. - Judicial enforcement remedies.     If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, the director of public works, through the city attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the municipal court. (Code 1985, §§ 14-116, 27-30, 27-31; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-10), (28-11), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-163. - Injunctive relief.     Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article or permit or order issued hereunder, the director of public works, through counsel may petition the court for its issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the industrial user. The director of public works shall have such remedies to collect these fees as it has to collect other sewer service charges. The director of public works may also initiate nuisance abatement proceedings in the municipal court of the city, as an alternate remedy. (Code 1985, §§ 14-117, 27-30—27-32; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-10)—(28-12), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-164. - Civil penalties. (a)  Any industrial user who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, shall be liable for a civil penalty of up to at least $1,000.00 plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per violation per day for as long as the violation continues. In addition to the above described penalty and damages, the director of public works may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses. (b)  The director of public works shall petition the municipal court of the city or any state court having jurisdiction to impose, assess, and recover such sums. In determining amount of liability, the municipal court of the city or any state court having jurisdiction shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the industrial user's violation, corrective actions by the industrial user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. ((Code 1985, §§ 14-118, 27-30—27-32; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-10)—(28-12), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-165. - Criminal prosecution. (a)  Any industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six months or both. (b)  Any industrial user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six months or both. (Code 1985, §§ 14-119, 27-30, 27-31; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-10), (28-11), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-166. - Performance bonds.     The director of public works may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or any order or previous permit issued hereunder unless such user first files with it a satisfactory bond, payable to the POTW, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director of public works to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. (Code 1985, § 14-120; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-167. - Liability insurance.     The director of public works may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or any order or previous permit issued hereunder, unless the industrial user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage caused by its discharge. (Code 1985, § 14-121; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-168. - Water supply severance.     Whenever an industrial user has been found after hearing to be in violation of the provisions of this article or an order issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Code 1985, § 14-122; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-169. - Public nuisances.     Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent limitations of this article or permit or order issued hereunder is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director of public works or the director of public works' designee. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the citation established by the city Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. (Code 1985, § 14-123; Ord. No. 05-111, 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-170. - Informant rewards.     The director of public works has the option to pay up to $500.00 for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by an industrial user. In the event that the information provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty levied against the user, the director of public works is authorized to disperse up to ten percent of the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed $10,000.00. (Code 1985, § 14-124; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 60-171—60-193. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - USE REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 60-194. - Prohibited discharge standards. (a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. (b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: (1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; (2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; (3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference (but in no case solids greater than 2.5 inches in any dimension); (4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; (5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 113 degrees Fahrenheit (45 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); (6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; (7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; (8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director of public works in accordance with section 60-223; (9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; (10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit; (11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; (12)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the director of public works; (13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; (14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director of public works in a wastewater discharge permit; (15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; (16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; (17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l, or other substances that will solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 35 degrees Fahrenheit (1.7 degrees Celsius) and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65.6 degrees Celsius); or (18)  Wastewater causing repeat readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. (Code 1985, §§ 14-65, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-195. - National categorical pretreatment standards.     The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR ch. 1, subch. N, §§ 403—471 are hereby incorporated. (1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director of public works may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). (2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director of public works shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). (3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. a.  Industrial user must develop a pilot testing program at the POTW. This program will include a pilot unit or a prototype treatment plant, of reasonable scale, to conduct treatment of actual influent wastewater, spiked with proportional synthetic mass quantities of expected concentration of the concerned contaminant. b.  User will present to the city a pilot testing program (PTP) plan with the following requirements: 1.  A detailed description of the objectives of the PTP plan. Those objectives must be identified early in the planning process for the city's review. 2.  Plan should also include: (i)  Extent of user's process problem related to permit's constituent limits. (ii)  Objectives of proposed process change or constituent level variance. (iii)  Design and operation plan of PTP plan. (iv)  Implementation schedule. (4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. (Code 1985, § 14-66; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-196. - Local limits. (a)  The City of Albany Water Pollution Control Plant (WPCP) is designed to handle conventional organic pollutants derived from domestic discharges. The plant can also handle non-toxic organic loads to a certain degree. The city allows non-domestic users to discharge conventional pollutants such as five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5 ), total suspended solids (TSS) and chemical oxygen demand (COD) in levels that do not offset the WPCP operation. Non-domestic users that discharge these pollutants are required to pay an additional user fee to the city on the basis of mass quantities (i.e., for every pound of BOD 5 and TSS) discharged to the sewer system. Therefore, the non-domestic users have the option to decide if it is more economical for them to install a pre-treatment system to reduce the BOD 5 and TSS loads or to pay the city the user fees to treat the wastewater loads at the WPCP. However, if any non-domestic user discharges conventional pollutants that may cause pass through and interference, then specific limits will be set by the city on a case-by-case basis. Non-domestic users that have a valid written discharge permit from the city will have specific requirements for conventional pollutants in their permits. Non-domestic dischargers without a permit must comply with the following maximum limits of conventional pollutants: Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5 ) Equals 2,500 mg/l Chemical oxygen demand (COD) Equals 4,250 mg/l Total dissolved solids (TDS) Equals 1,000 mg/l Total suspended solids (TSS) Equals 2,000 mg/l Oil and grease (O&G) Equals 100 mg/l  (b)  In addition, this article limits the discharge of the following pollutants for all users. These limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following (instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits, parts per billion, μ/l): Organic Compounds Parameter Limit μg/l Acrylonitrile 94 Aldrin 0.022 Benzene 20 Benzidine 15 Benzo(a)Anthracene 4 Benzo(k)Fluoranthene 4 Benzo(a)Pyrene 4 a- BHC-alpha- 2 b- BHC-beta 7 Bis(2-Chloroethyl)Ether 202 Carbon Tetrachloride 17 Chlorobenzene 6 Chlordane 0.1 Chloroform (Trichloromethane) 5 Chrysene 4 Dibenzo(a,h)Anthracene 4 Dichlorobromomethane 3,000 1,2- Dichloroethane 100 1,1 Dichloroethylene 140 1,2-Dichlorobenzene 1 1,2-Dibromoethane(EDB) 1 1,4 Dichlorobenzene 8 3,3'-Dichlorobenzidine 11 1,2 Dichloropropane 100 4,4'-DDD 0.1 4-4'-DDE 0.1 4,4'-DDT 0.1 Dieldrin 0.04 Endosulfan I 1 Endosulfan II 1 Endrin 0.04 Endrin Aldehyde 115 Endosulfan Sulfate 300 Ethylbenzene 700 Heptachlor 0.03 Heptachlor Epoxide 0.01 Hexachlorobenzene 2.6 Hexachlorocyclopentadiene 1,000 Indeno(1,2,3-cd)Pyrene 4 Lindane[Hexachlorocyclohexane (g-BHC-Gamma)] 1.6 alpha-Chlordane 0.1 gamma-Chlordane 0.1 Methoxychlor 1 Methylene Chloride 180 PCB (all isomers) 0.5 Pentachlorophenol 1.6 Phenol 2,000 1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane 100 Tetrachloroethylene 100 Toluene 2,000 Toxaphene 0.34 2,3,7,8-TCDD (dioxin) 0.00017 2,4,5-TP (silvex) 1 1,2-Trans-Dichloroethylene 2,000 1,1,2-Trichloroethane 100 Trichloroethylene 6 1,1,1-Trichloroethane 670 1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene 1,400 2,4,6-Trichlorophenol 100 Total Xylenes 10,000 Vinyl Chloride 40  Inorganic Compounds Parameter Limit μg/l Unless noted Ammonia 9,000 Antimony 2 Arsenic 10 Asbestos (fibers/L>10 μm) 7 million Barium 1,200 Beryllium 20 Bromate 200 Cadmium 70 Chlorite 20,000 Chromium - Hexavalent 200 Chromium - total 800 Copper 230 Cyanide 24 Lead 170 Mercury 0.6 Nickel 50 Nitrate (as N) 200,000 Nitrite (as N) 20,000 Selenium 200 Silver 80 Thallium 40 Zinc 120  (c)  The following priority pollutants are prohibited, unless allowed by a written permit issued by the director of public works: Acenaphthene Acenaphthylene Acrolein Hexachloroethane 1,1-Dichloroethane Chloroethane Bis(chloromethyl)ether Bis(2-chloroisopropyl)ether 2-Chloronaphthalene 2-Chlorophenol 1,3-Dichlorobenzene 1,2-Trans-dichloroethylene 2,4-Dichlorophenol 1,2-Dichloropropane 2,4-Dimethylphenol 2,4-Dinitrotoluene 2,6-Dinitrotoluene 1,2-Diphenylhydrazine Fluoranthene 4-Chlorophenyl phenyl ether 4-Bromophenyl phenyl ether Bis(2-chloroethoxy) methane Methyl Chloride Methyl Bromide (Bromomethane) Bromoform Trichlorofluoromethane Dichlorodifluoromethane Chlorodibromomethane Hexachlorobutadiene Isophorone Naphthalene Nitrobenzene 2-Nitrophenol 4-Nitrophenol 2,4-Dinitrophenol 4,6-Dinitro-o-creosol N-nitrosodiethylamine N-nitrosodiphenylamine N-nitrosodi-n-propylamine Bis(2-Ethylhexyl)Phthalate Butyl Benzyl Phthalate Di-n-Butyl Phthalate Di-n-Octyl Phthalate Diethyl Phthalate Dimethyl Phthalate 1,2-Benzanthrancene 3,4-Benzofluoranthene 11, 12-Benzofluoranthene 1,12-Benzoperylene Fluorene Phenanthrene 1,2,5,6-Dibenzanthrancene Pyrene Alpha-endosulfan Beta-endosulfan Endrin Endrin aldehyde Alpha-BHC Beta-BHC Delta-BHC 1,3-Dichloropropylene (Cis) 1,3-Dichloropropylene (Trans) 1,3-Methyl-4,6-Dinitrophenol 3-Methyl-4,-Chlorophenol 2, 4, 6-Trichlorophenol 2,4-Dinitrotoluene (d)  The limits in subsection (c) of this section apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The director of public works may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. (Code 1985, §§ 14-68, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005; Ord. No. 09-141, § 9, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 60-197. - City's right of revision.     The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. (Code 1985, § 14-69; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-198. - Dilution.     No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director of public works may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Code 1985, § 14-70; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 60-199—60-219. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRETREAMENT OF WASTEWATER 
Sec. 60-220. - Pretreatment facilities.     Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 60-194 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the director of public works, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director of public works for review, and shall be acceptable to the director of public works before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. (Code 1985, §§ 14-71, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-221. - Additional pretreatment measures. (a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the director of public works may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow period, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. (b)  The director of public works may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. (c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director of public works, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the director of public works and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the users, at their expense. (d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. (Code 1985, § 14-72; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-222. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans.     At least every two years, the director of public works shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director of public works may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: (1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; (2)  Description of stored chemicals; (3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of public works of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 60-194; and (4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant size runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants including solvents and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (Code 1985, §§ 14-73, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-223. - Hauled wastewater. (a)  Only domestic septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW and only at locations and times designated by the director of public works. Such waste shall not violate sections 60-194 through 60-198 or any other requirement established by the city. The director of public works may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. (b)  The director of public works shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director of public works may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director of public works also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. (c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the director of public works. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the director of public works. The director of public works may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director of public works may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. (d)  Hauling industrial waste is prohibited unless authorized by a permit from the city. Authorized industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA (Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq.) hazardous wastes. (e)  Contents from oil/grease separators cannot be disposed of at the POTW. (f)  Commercial waste transporters shall comply with the regulations set forth in the state department of natural resources, Environmental Protection Division Regulation of Commercial Waste Originators, Pumpers, Transporters, Processors and Disposal Facilities § 391-3-6-.24 (Georgia Administrative Code Rule 391-3-6-.24). A commercial waste manifest shall be used by all facilities with grease interceptors connected to the city's sewer. A commercial waste manifest shall be submitted to the pretreatment coordinator within ten days of receipt of the completed form from the transporter, and a copy retained on file by the originator for a period of three years. (Code 1985, § 14-74; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 60-224—60-254. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION 
Sec. 60-255. - Wastewater analysis.     When requested by the director of public works, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The director of public works is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. The director of public works may also collect wastewater samples from the user's discharge and analyze the samples for any parameters or group of parameters. (Code 1985, §§ 14-75, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-256. - Permit requirements. (a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the director of public works, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 60-257 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. (b)  The director of public works may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. (c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 60-156 through 60-170 (division 2 of this article). Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligations to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. (d)  Any person or industry discharging waters or waste into the public sewers shall be considered a class 1 discharger if the discharge to the public sewer has any of the following characteristics: (1)  The system user discharges over 25,000 gpd of process water (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters) to the POTW; (2)  The user is considered to be one of the 34 categorical industries; (3)  The user is identified in the literature as a potential discharger of priority pollutants; (4)  Priority pollutant discharges are known to be present in the user's discharge; (5)  The user has been documented in the city's program for industrial pretreatment as a potential discharger of problem pollutants or prohibited discharges; (6)  Prohibited pollutant discharges are known to be present; or (7)  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant. (e)  Class 1 dischargers are required to obtain a discharge permit from the city. The discharge permit will specify the standards of concentrations and volumes that certain discharge substances to the public sewer must meet. (Code 1985, §§ 14-76, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-257. - Permitting—Existing conditions.     Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 30 days after said date, apply to the director of public works for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 60-259 and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 60 days of the effective date of this ordinance from which this article is derived except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the director of public works. (Code 1985, §§ 14-77, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-258. - Same—New connections.     Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 60-259, must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. (Code 1985, §§ 14-78, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-259. - Permit application contents. (a)  All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The director of public works may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: (1)  All information required by subsection 60-324(b); (2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facilities which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; (3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; (4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; (5)  Type and amount of raw materials processes (average and maximum per day); (6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; (7)  Time and duration of discharges; (8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director of public works to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. (b)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. (Code 1985, §§ 14-79, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-260. - Application signatories and certification.     All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:     "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." (Code 1985, §§ 14-80, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-261. - Permit decisions.     The director of public works will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director of public works will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director of public works may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. (Code 1985, §§ 14-81, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-262. - Discharge of groundwater from contaminated sites.     The discharge of any groundwater from contaminated sites is prohibited unless authorized by the director of public works by a written temporary class 1 permit. (1)  The party making the temporary permit request should clearly state: a.  The factors contributing to the decision to remove the contaminated groundwater (social, political, economic, or legal issues); b.  The origin of the groundwater; c.  Why the groundwater should be discharged to the POTW. (2)  The permit application shall include the following information: a.  Description of the specific activities including remedial investigations, feasibility studies or other pertinent data from the site; b.  List of responsible parties for the contamination, or list of potential responsible parties for the contamination; c.  Type of enforcement of remedial action (CERCLA, RCRA, or other); d.  Discharge period; e.  Flow rate including peak hourly, daily maximum, and daily average flows; f.  Description of the treatment process; g.  Monitoring methods and frequency; h.  Parameters to be measured and detection limits to be used in the analyses; i.  Expected wastewater characteristics and air emissions; and j.  Health and safety plans. (3)  Each temporary permit application shall be accompanied by a fee that covers costs for permit processing and review. The amount of the permit fee shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the public works department. The director of public works may require additional compensation to cover costs incurred by the city for monitoring and analyses, compliance inspections, consulting engineer's fees, legal fees, and other related expenses. (Code 1985, §§ 14-82, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 60-263—60-287. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS 
Sec. 60-288. - Duration.     A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the director of public works. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. (Code 1985, §§ 14-83, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-289. - Contents. (a)  A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director of public works to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. (b)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: (1)  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; (2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 60-292, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; (3)  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law. The director of pubic works may require self monitoring of a specific discharge; (4)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law; (5)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permitee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; h.  Centralized waste treatment facilities, or facilities performing similar operations, are required to immediately notify the EPD if sewer service is terminated or the industry stops discharging. Notification shall be made to the following: Water Protection Branch 4220 International Parkway, Suite 101 Atlanta, GA 30354 Telephone: (404) 362-2680 Fax: (404) 362-2691 i.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director of public works to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. (Code 1985, §§ 14-84, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-290. - Appeals.     The director of public works shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the director of public works to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 calendar days of notice of its issuance. (1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. (2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. (3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. (4)  If the director of public works fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. (5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the county court. (Code 1985, §§ 14-85, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-291. - Modification.     The director of public works may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: (1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; (2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the wastewater discharge permit issuance; (3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; (4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; (5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; (6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; (7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; (8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or (9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. (Code 1985, §§ 14-86, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-292. - Transfer. (a)  Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permitee gives at least 60 calendar days' advance notice to the director of public works and the director of public works approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the director of public works must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: (1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; (2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and (3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. (b)  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. (Code 1985, §§ 14-87, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-293. - Revocation. (a)  The director of public works may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following reasons: (1)  Failure to notify the director of public works of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; (2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of public works of changed conditions pursuant to section 60-328; (3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; (4)  Falsifying any information or report; (5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; (6)  Refusing to allow the director of public works or city inspection personnel timely access to the facility premises and records, to include failure to allow immediate access to sampling manholes during routine or unscheduled visits to the permittee's site; (7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; (8)  Failure to pay fines; (9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; (10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; (11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; (12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of permitted facility; or (13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. (b)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be voided upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. (Code 1985, §§ 14-88, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-294. - Reissuance.     A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 60-259, a minimum of 60 calendar days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. (Code 1985, §§ 14-89, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-295. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. (a)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the director of public works shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. (b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (a) of this section, the director of public works shall request the contributing municipality to complete a permit application. (Code 1985, §§ 14-90, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 60-296—60-323. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 60-324. - Baseline monitoring reports. (a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director of public works a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director of public works a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. (b)  Users described in subsection (a) of this section shall submit the following information: (1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. (2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. (3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. (4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). (5)  Measurement of pollutants. a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and, or mass, where required by the standard or by the director of public works, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and longterm average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 60-333. c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 60-334. (6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. (7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 60-325. (8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 60-260. (Code 1985, §§ 14-91, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-325. - Compliance schedule progress reports.     The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 60-324(b)(7): (1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); (2)  No increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine months; (3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the director of public works no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and (4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director of public works. (Code 1985, §§ 14-92, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-326. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.     Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director of public works a report containing the information described in section 60-324(b)(4) through (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's longterm production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 60-260. (Code 1985, §§ 14-93, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-327. - Special compliance reports. (a)  The city samples and analyzes all periodic user discharges. However, the director of public works may require special compliance reports. Under such special conditions, the industrial users shall submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 60-260. (b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. (c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director of public works, using the procedures prescribed in section 60-334, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. (Code 1985, §§ 14-94, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-328. - Reports of changed conditions.     Each user must notify the director of public works of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change. (1)  The director of public works may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 60-259. (2)  The director of public works may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 60-261 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 60-291 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. (3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of a previously unreported pollutants. (Code 1985, §§ 14-95, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-329. - Reports of potential problems. (a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of public works and the POTW of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. (b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director of public works, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. (c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. (Code 1985, §§ 14-96, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-330. - Reports from unpermitted users.     All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the director of public works as the director of public works may require. (Code 1985, §§ 14-97, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-331. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.     If special sampling is performed by a user as indicated in section 60-327, and the results indicate a violation, the user must notify the POTW and the pretreatment coordinator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the pretreatment coordinator within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the director of public works monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the pretreatment coordinator samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. (Code 1985, §§ 14-98, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-332. - Discharge of hazardous waste. (a)  Any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste is prohibited, unless authorized in writing by the director of public works and in compliance with 40 CFR 403.12(p). The following shall apply to such discharges: (1)  The industrial user shall notify, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division director and state of the state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). (2)  If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous constituents in the waste stream discharged during the calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. (3)  All notifications must take place within 180 days of the effective date of this rule. Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of this rule shall provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristics hazardous waste. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. (b)  Discharges from hazardous waste sites that are under remediation must obtain a permit to discharge any amount of treated groundwater as indicated in section 60-262. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. (Code 1985, §§ 14-99, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-333. - Analytical requirements.     All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. (Code 1985, §§ 14-100, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-334. - Sample collection. (a)  This section applies only to special conditions when the industrial user is required to collect samples. (b)  Except as indicated in subsection (c) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the director of public works may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. (c)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. (Code 1985, §§ 14-101, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-335. - Timing. (a)  Any written report to the city will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. (b)  All reports shall be addressed to the pretreatment coordinator. (Code 1985, §§ 14-102, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-336. - Recordkeeping. (a)  Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information outlined pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user, dependent of such requirements. (b)  Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director of public works. (Code 1985, §§ 14-103, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 60-337—60-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 
Sec. 60-361. - Right of entry: inspection and sampling.     The director of public works, the pretreatment coordinator, or city technicians shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether or not the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director of public works, the pretreatment coordinator, or city technicians ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. (1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director of public works, the pretreatment coordinator, or city technicians will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. (2)  The director of public works, the pretreatment coordinator, or city technicians shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. (3)  The director of public works, the pretreatment coordinator, or city technicians may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated as required to ensure their accuracy. (4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the pretreatment coordinator and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. (5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the pretreatment coordinator or city technicians easy access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. (Code 1985, §§ 14-104, 27-28, 27-30; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), (28-10), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-362. - Search warrants.     If the pretreatment coordinator or city technicians are not allowed access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and are able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the director of public works and/or the pretreatment coordinator may seek issuance of a search warrant from the proper authorities. (Code 1985, §§ 14-105, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-363. - Confidential information.     Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the pretreatment coordinator's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and isable to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the pretreatment coordinator, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. (Code 1985, §§ 14-106, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-364. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance.     The director of public works shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean: (1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; (2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); (3)  Any other discharge violation that the director of public works believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; (4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director of public works' exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; (5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; (6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, special self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; (7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or (8)  Any other violations which the director of public works determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Code 1985, §§ 14-107, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 60-365—60-386. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
Sec. 60-387. - Treatment upsets. (a)  Any industrial user which experiences an upset in operation that places it in a temporary state of noncompliance, which is not the result of operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation, shall inform the director of public works thereof immediately upon becoming aware of the upset. Where such information is given orally, a written report thereof shall be filed by the user within five days. The report shall contain: (1)  A description of the upset, its cause and impact on the discharger's compliance status; (2)  The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance is continuing, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to be restored; (3)  All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of such an upset. (b)  An industrial user which complies with the notification provisions of this section in a timely manner shall have an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the director of public works for any noncompliance with this article, or an order or permit issued hereunder by the user, which arises out of violations attributable to and alleged to have occurred during the period of the documented and verified upset. (c)  The affirmative defense shall be in accordance with the specifications presented in 40 CFR 403.16. An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: (1)  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause of the upset: (2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; (3)  The industrial user has submitted the information described in subsection (a) of this section to the director of public works within the time limits specified therein. (d)  In any enforcement proceeding the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. (e)  In the usual exercise of prosecutorial discretion, city enforcement personnel should review any claims that noncompliance was caused by an upset. No determinations made in the course of the review constitute final city action subject to judicial review. Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. (f)  The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. (Code 1985, §§ 14-125, 27-28; Ord. No. 91-132, § 1(28-8), 4-23-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 60-388—60-417. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - CHARGES AND FEES 
Sec. 60-418. - Sewer usage and treatment charges. (a)  Established. It is hereby determined necessary for the protection of public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city to fix and collect charges upon all premises or facilities served by sewerage connection with the city's sewer. (b)  Use of proceeds. The revenue received from the collection of such charges as hereinafter authorized, together with all other revenue derived from the operation of the sewer system shall be deposited with the municipal revenue collector and credited to the sanitary sewer enterprise fund and shall be used for the operation and maintenance of the POTW and incidental expenses connected therewith, to pay debt requirements on revenue bonds issued, to provide funds for the construction, improvement, repair and extension of the sewage system and POTW infrastructure, to acquire necessary easements or to purchase land and to provide funds for the necessary debt reserves and improvements but shall not be used for the construction of storm sewers. (c)  Determination of amounts. There is hereby charged and assessed to each premises or facility served by the connection with the sewer system, or otherwise discharging sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or indirectly into the sewer system, a sewer service charge and assessment payable as hereafter provided, and in the amount determinable as follows: (1)  The said sewer service charge shall be based upon the quantity of water used by the said premises or facility therein or thereon as the same is measured by a water meter or meters there in use, or as otherwise currently established. (2)  The monthly sewer service charge for industrial/commercial usage shall consist of the base monthly charge plus a charge per total pounds of BOD plus a charge per total pounds of TSS as determined by sampling and a charge per 1,000 gallons of water, including adjustments thereto, consumed within the county whether within or without the corporate limits of the city. The amount of these charges shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the public works department. (3)  The monthly sewer service charge for the industrial/commercial usage with no sampling history shall consist of the base monthly charge plus a combined charge per 1,000 gallons consumed based on consumption of BOD and TSS. The amount of these charges shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the public works department. (4)  The monthly sewer service charge for residential usage shall consist of the base monthly charge plus a combined charge per 1,000 gallons consumed based on consumption of BOD and TSS. The average consumption billed during the months of January, February, and March will be used for computing the sewer service charge for the next 12 months. For new residential billings with no consumption history, billing will be based on a consumption of 6,000 gallons per month. The amount of these charges shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the public works department. (5)  Water used from private sources shall be metered as required in the independent water supply subsection (d) of this section and the city sewer service charge shall be the applicable charge for industrial/commercial or residential usage. (d)  Independent water supply; installation of meter. In the event a lot, parcel of land, premises or facility discharging sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids, either directly or indirectly into the city's sewer system, or which ultimately enters the sewer system, is supplied either whole or in part, with water from wells, or any source other than the Albany Water, Gas, and Light Commission, then such wells or other source of supply shall be registered with the Albany Water, Gas and Light Commission and, if the water from said wells or other supply is not measured by a water meter, the owner or occupant shall, at his or her own cost, install and maintain a meter or meters on said supplies in such a location and in such a manner as is satisfactory to the Albany Water, Gas and Light Commission. These meters shall serve as a control for the establishment of the sewer service charge and shall be read monthly or bimonthly by members of the Albany Water, Gas and Light Commission. In selected cases, certain industries may read and report these readings to Albany Water, Gas and Light Commission. (e)  Additional meters. Where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the director of public works that a significant portion of the water as measured by the water meter or meters does not enter the sewer system, then the director of public works may require or permit the installation of additional meters or other devices as may be deemed necessary to establish that portion that does enter the sewer system, and the corrected meter flow will be used for billing of the sewer service charge. All such additional facilities will be provided by the owner of the premises concerned or other interested parties at no expense to the city. (f)  More than one residential unit served by a single meter. When more than one residential unit is served by single meter, the sewer service charge shall consist of the base monthly charge for each unit plus a combined charge per 1,000 gallons consumed based on consumption, BOD, and TSS. The average consumption billed during the months of January, February, and March shall be used for computing the sewer service charge for the next 12 months. (g)  Establishment of categories of industries and means of setting fees. Industries discharging less than 100,000 gallons per month may be grouped in categories according to SIC classification for the purpose of sampling and billing. A representative sample will be made of selected establishments within the category and an average sewage strength determined for that category. All establishments will then be billed for the amount of their discharge at the strengths determined for that category. (Code 1985, § 14-127; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 60-419. - Fees.     The schedule of fees under this article shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the offices of the city clerk and the public works department. (Code 1985, § 14-138; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 60-420—60-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 60-461. - Private wells.     No private wells shall be constructed upon any premises whether industrial or residential within the city until after a permit for the installation thereof shall have been obtained from the plumbing inspector and the project has had the approval of the city-county health department and the board of water, gas and light commissioners. (Code 1975, § 33-1; Code 1985, § 27-71) 
Sec. 60-462. - Private water supplies to be metered before introduction into city sewerage system.     Any private water supply, regardless of whether its source originates within or without the city, shall be metered in accordance with existing city standards or otherwise evaluated as determined by the applicable sewer use rate schedule before being introduced into the public sewerage system of the city. The provisions of this section shall apply to existing installations as well as future installations. (Code 1975, § 33-2; Code 1985, § 27-72) 
Sec. 60-463. - Sewer service charges to apply to water from all sources.     The existing charge as now established or which may hereafter be established for sewerage disposal shall apply to all water, from whatever source obtained, which may hereafter be introduced into the public sewerage system. (Code 1975, § 33-3; Code 1985, § 27-73) 
Sec. 60-464. - Illegal use of water.     It shall be unlawful for any person, not a regular consumer of water from the city waterworks system or acting under direction or permission of a regular consumer or the board of water, gas and light commissioners, to obtain or use for any purpose whatever, except for the extinguishment of fire, water from the faucets, pipes or fixtures placed in or on any lot or building for the use of a regular consumer. (Code 1975, § 33-6; Code 1985, § 27-76) 
Sec. 60-465. - Mandatory water use restrictions. (a)  Residential, commercial and industrial outside water use. Residential, commercial and industrial outside water use shall be restricted as set forth in the Board of Natural Resources, Rules for Outdoor Water Use, chapter 391-3-30 et seq., the same being expressly incorporated herein by reference. The EPD regulations regarding nondrought periods are contained at chapter 391-3-30-.03; for drought conditions at chapter 391-3-30-.04 (Rules of the state Department of Natural Resources, Outdoor Water Use, chapter 391-3-30 et seq.). Copies of each of the foregoing are attached hereto and expressly incorporated herein by reference. (b)  Penalties. Violations of this section shall be as follows: (1)  Any person or entity found to be violating the provisions of this section for the first time shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and shall be issued a warning ticket for the violation. (2)  Upon a second violation by any person or entity, water service shall be terminated and a fine of $200.00 shall be imposed. (3)  Upon a third violation and all subsequent violations, water service shall be terminated and a current water tapping fee as published by the water, gas and light commission for each violation shall be imposed. (4)  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, all specifications and requirements of the water, gas and light commission shall apply to any reconnection. (c)  Restriction on outdoor irrigation of landscapes. Outdoor irrigating for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: (1)  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; (2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local resolutions and state guidelines; (3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable board of health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; (4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; (5)  Irrigation of personal food gardens; (6)  Irrigating new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; (7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; (8)  Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; (9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; (10)  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; (11)  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; (12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or (13)  Hydroseeding. (d)  Enforcement and penalties. No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor irrigation use contained in this section. Any violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable as set forth in section 1-17 of this Code. (Ord. No. 06-124, §§ 1, 2, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 10-141, § 1, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 60-466. - Meter required. (a)  All water services shall be metered. (b)  Any water service line that is purposely installed to provide water for domestic or non-domestic use shall be metered. 
Secs. 60-467—60-485. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTROL OF BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTION 
Sec. 60-486. - Purpose. (a)  The purpose of this division is to protect the public potable water distribution system supplied by the water, gas and light commission (WGL) from the possibility of pollution or contamination by containing within its customers' internal or private water systems such pollutants or contaminants which could backflow into the public potable water system. (b)  This division also provides for the maintenance of a continuing program for backflow prevention and cross-connection control, which will systematically and effectively prevent potential contamination or pollution of the public potable water distribution system and to provide penalties for the violation or noncompliance of the provisions of this division. (c)  As drinking water quality standards are increasing in the state, a greater focus is now being given to the prevention of contamination of water distribution systems. Federal and state agencies have regulated cross-connection control and back-flow prevention for a long period of time. These regulations require the water purveyor to take measures to ensure compliance and assist in the protection of the water supply and public health. 
Sec. 60-487. - Definitions.     The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the vessel. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the overflow rim of the receiving vessel and in no case less than one inch.     Approved means accepted by the WGL as meeting an applicable specification stated or citied in this division, or as suitable for the purposed use.     Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply. These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor has no sanitary control.     Backflow means the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either backpressure or backsiphonage.     Backflow assembly, backflow device, or backflow preventer means an approved device designed to prevent backflow. Approved devices shall be as follows: (1)  Double check valve assembly means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each end of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and field evaluation program resulting in an approval of a recognized and approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies (e.g., The University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research). To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance. (2)  Double check valve detector check assembly shall have the same requirements as a double check valve assembly, but shall be provided with a metered bypass to detect the flow of water through the assembly. (3)  Reduced pressure principle assembly means an assembly of two independently acting approved check valves, together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and field evaluation program resulting in an approval of a recognized and approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies (e.g., The University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research). The assembly shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at an acceptable level less than the pressure on the public water supply of the device. At cessation of normal flow the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In case of leakage of either of the check valves, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged. (4)  Reduced pressure principal detector check assembly shall have the same requirements as a reduced pressure principal assembly, but, shall be provided with a metered bypass to detect the flow of water through the assembly.     Backpressure means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than the intended source.     Backsiphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any other source other than its intended source caused by sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system.     Certified tester means a person who has met the requirements set forth by the state environmental protection division to test backflow prevention assemblies.     Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.     Consumer, user, means anyone that uses the water provided and delivered by the WGL water distribution system.     Cross-connection means any actual or potential connection, link, or structural arrangement between the public potable water supply distribution system and any other source or system through which it would be possible to introduce into any part of the public potable water supply system any used water, liquids, mixtures or substances.     Cross-connection controlled means a connection between the public potable water distribution system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection required.     Cross-connection controlled by containment means the installation of one approved backflow prevention assembly immediately downstream of the water meter, service connection or at the point where WGL loses sanitary control.     Customer, user, means anyone who purchases the water provided and delivered by the WGL water distribution system.     Fire line means a water service that provides water from the public water system for the purpose of supplying water for fire protection equipment (e.g., fire hydrants or fire sprinkler systems).     General manager means the general manager of the board of water, gas and light commissioners of the city, who is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this division.     Hazard, degree of, shall be derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the public potable water distribution system: (1)  Hazard, health, means any condition, device or practice in the water supply system and it's operation which could create, or in the judgment of the WGL, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. (2)  Hazard, pollution, means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the portability of the public or the consumer's potable water system which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but, would not be dangerous to the health or well-being of the consumer.     Hotbox means a box or other similar device built specifically for the purpose of protecting a backflow prevention assembly from freezing and from environmental elements.     Industrial fluids means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system pollution or plumbing hazard if introduced into the public potable water distribution system.     Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance, organic, inorganic or biological, in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters domestic use.     Water meter means any device placed into service by WGL to determine the amount of water being used through the water service connection to a premises.     Water, nonpotable, means water which is not safe for human consumption or is no longer under the sanitary of WGL.     Water, potable, means any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption and is under the sanitary control of WGL.     Water purveyor means a supplier of water, i.e., WGL.     Water service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water distribution system, i.e., where the WGL loses jurisdiction and/or sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected take-offs between the water meter and backflow prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency service connections from the public potable water distribution system.     Water system means that system which is made up of two parts, the board of water, gas and light commissioners system and the customer's system, as follows: (1)  The board of water, gas and light commissioners water system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the water system under complete control of the water, gas and light commission, up to the point where the customer's system begins. (2)  The source shall include all components of the facilities used in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of the water to the distribution system. (3)  The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. (4)  The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the WGL distribution system which are used in conveying WGL delivered domestic water to its point of use.     Water, used, means any water supplied by WGL through the public potable water distribution system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of WGL.     WGL means the water, gas and light commission.     WGL representative means an employee of the water, gas and light commission of the city, that the general manager has delegated the authority and responsibility of implementing an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of provisions of this division. 
Sec. 60-488. - Responsibility.     The water, gas and light commission (WGL) shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the public potable water service connection. If the WGL requires, now or in the future, an approved backflow prevention assembly to protect its water distribution system, the WGL shall give notice, in writing, to the customer to install an approved backflow prevention assembly at each service connection to such customer's premises. The customer must take necessary arrangements to install or to have installed at his or her own expense, an approved backflow assembly immediately downstream of the water meter or water service connection. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain such assembly shall constitute a grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. 
Sec. 60-489. - Requirements. (a)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by federal and state laws and regulations and WGL's control of backflow and cross-connections ordinance. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention assembly required by this division is not installed, tested and maintained, at the customer's expense, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or by-passed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected satisfactorily. (b)  The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of WGL to determine whether cross-connections or other sanitary hazards including violations of this ordinance exist. When such a condition becomes known, the WGL shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the conditions in compliance with federal, state and city statutes and regulations relating to plumbing and water supplies. (c)  An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed, at the customer's expense, on each service line to the customer's water system immediately downstream of the water meter, service connection or at the point at which the WGL loses sanitary control. (d)  It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premise where backflow prevention devices are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the WGL deems the hazard to be great enough, more frequent inspection intervals may be required. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by a certified tester. It shall be the duty of the WGL to see that theses tests are done in a timely manner. The customer-user shall notify the WGL in advance when the tests are undertaken so that WGL representatives may witness the tests if so desired. These devices shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever such devices are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs or replacements shall be kept and made available to the WGL. (e)  It shall be the duty of the customer-user/property owner at any premise where backflow prevention assemblies are required to be installed above ground, to provide adequate freeze protection and protection from environmental elements, i.e., a hotbox. (f)  Only those persons that possess a valid state plumbing license or utility contractors license or the property owner, may install a backflow prevention assembly. (g)  Only those persons that possess a valid certification from a tester certification program recognized by the state environmental protection division and are approved by WGL shall test any backflow prevention assembly. (h)  Only those persons that possess a valid state plumbers license or a valid backflow preventer repair certification and are approved by WGL, may repair any backflow prevention assembly. (i)  Each backflow prevention assembly shall be tested immediately after installation, repair or relocation. (j)  Gauges used in testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested annually in accordance with the University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection or American Water Works Association Manual 14. Testers shall be required to include test gauge serial numbers and the due date for the next calibration when submitting backflow test reports. (k)  The type of protective device required to be installed at the expense of the customer under subsection (c) of this section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: (1)  At premises where there is an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of a safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the WGL, or any premises where there may be water, substance or materials that could be hazardous to health or where there is an uncontrollable cross-connection, whether actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by the installation of an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly. (2)  At premises where there may be water, substances or materials that may be objectionable but not considered a hazard to public health if introduced into the public water supply, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly. (3)  At premises that have a fire line installed for fire protection, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve detector assembly. If the fire line is fully metered, a double check valve assembly shall be installed. (4)  At premises that have a fire line where antifreeze or any other chemicals are added to a fire sprinkler system, or where it is possible for the fire line to be connected to an auxiliary water source, the public water system shall be protected by a reduced pressure principal detector assembly. If the fire line is fully metered, a reduced pressure principal assembly shall be installed. (l)  Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be a model and size approved by the WGL. The term "approved backflow prevention assembly or device," for the purpose of this section, means an assembly or device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled: (1)  AWWA C510-97, or latest revision (AWWA standard for double check valve backflow prevention assembly). (2)  AWWA C511-97, or latest revision (AWWA standard for reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly). (m)  All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this division but were approved devices for the purposes described at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirements of this division so long as the WGL is assured that the device will satisfactorily protect the distribution system. Whenever the device is moved from its present location or requires more than the minimum maintenance, the device shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this division. 
Sec. 60-490. - General notification.     The WGL shall provide general notification of the public through media advertising, bill inserts or similar means, and direct notification of this division's existence and purpose. 
Sec. 60-491. - Violations; penalties.     It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any requirement of this division or to violate any provision hereof. In addition to the general penalties mentioned in section 1-17, service shall be terminated if the violation or noncompliance is not promptly remedied. 
Secs. 60-492—60-877. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POLES AND WIRES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Municipal authority to reasonably exercise police power over the erection and maintenance of poles, wires and other facilities of electric suppliers, O.C.G.A. § 46-3-14. 
Sec. 60-878. - Under control of superintendent of light and power department.     All poles, posts, cross-arms, wires and all electrical or other fixtures thereto appertaining, now placed, erected, owned or used, or which may hereafter be placed, erected, owned or used, under proper franchise or permission of the city, in or on any street, alley or public place in the city by any telegraph, telephone, electric light or power or street railway company, or any electrical construction or repair company, or any person, shall be under the control, direction and supervision of the superintendent of the light and power department. (Code 1975, § 21-1; Code 1985, § 27-111) 
Sec. 60-879. - Permit required for placing of poles, stringing of wires, etc.     Before exercising any right or privilege under any franchise heretofore granted or that may be hereafter granted to any of the persons named in section 60-878 relative to the placing of poles or stringing wires or changing the location of poles, cross-arms, wires or other fixtures thereto appertaining, or before any repair is done to the same, such persons shall first obtain written permission from the superintendent of the light and power department to do the same, which written permission shall specify exactly what is to be done and shall be signed by the superintendent of the light and power department and approved by the general manager of the water, gas and light commission. (Code 1975, § 21-2; Code 1985, § 27-112) 
Sec. 60-880. - Record of permits; report.     The superintendent of the light and power department shall keep a full and complete record of all permits issued under this article and when required, shall make a report thereof to the water, gas and light commission. (Code 1975, § 21-3; Code 1985, § 27-113) 
Secs. 60-881—60-908. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXCAVATIONS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— The Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 60-909. - Permit—Required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation or opening in any street, alley or public highway of the city without first having obtained a permit from the director of engineering to do so. The city engineer shall coordinate with the water, gas and light commission prior to granting such permit. (Code 1975, § 29-101; Code 1985, § 24-101) 
Sec. 60-910. - Same—Application.     Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall make application therefor, such application to contain the following information: (1)  Lot number, block number, addition or subdivision of the town and street number, if any, if none, then such data as will designate the exact location where the excavation is to be made; (2)  Dimensions of the proposed excavation; (3)  Purpose for which excavation will be used; (4)  What precautions will be used to protect children and adults from falling into it (i.e. barricade open excavations and post warning lights for safety of persons; operate warning lights as necessary depending on light conditions, but as a minimum from dusk to dawn each day); (5)  Indicate on the permit drawings precautions that will be implemented to prevent the excavation from becoming flooded with water as well as to protect structures, utilities, sidewalks, pavements and other facilities immediately adjacent to excavations from damage caused by settlement, lateral movement, undermining, washout and other hazards; (6)  In case of underground storage, the kind of substance to be stored, and the capacity of the storage that will be installed; (7)  Indicate the date that the work will start. Applicant shall submit drawings for review a minimum of 14 days prior to commencing the work. Work shall not commence until applicant has received an approved permit. The permit shall be posted at the site; (8)  Name and address of the owner; (9)  Distance from, direction from and generally its location with reference to all nearby streets, alleys and public places and grounds (show location of proposed excavation in relationship to street or alley right-of-way or easement); (10)  In the case of underground storage for gasoline, a volatile of any kind or an explosive of any kind, the application shall obligate the applicant to sink the storage container to such depth that the top of it will be at least three feet below the ground surface level, and that the space above the top of the container will be filled with three feet of firm dirt, gravel or other compact filler material and well tamped up to ground surface level. Applicant must obtain permitting from any other governing authorities having jurisdiction regarding underground storage tanks and comply with applicable requirements where such requirements exceed those specified in this section; (11)  Applicant shall indicate on drawings any and all traffic control measures necessary which will minimize inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. When flaggers are utilized, individuals must meet local and state requirements. Contractor shall provide documentation that flaggers are certified. When trenching activities cross a roadway, applicant shall provide plans indicating all traffic control measures to be implemented to maintain traffic on all roads and streets which must be crossed by the trenching activities and must make two separate cuts so that at least one traffic lane is open at all times. All traffic controls must conform to pt. VI of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, ANSI D6.1.e; (12)  Indicate on plans the limits of side slopes of excavation to comply with subpt. P of pt. 1926 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) as amended. If space restrictions or material stability issues exist, indicate on the plans provided any shoring or bracing to be used; (13)  Exceptions. In case of emergency, a utility company or the utility companies contractor may proceed with the work in accordance with applicable requirements of all governing agencies. The utility company or the utility's contractor will obtain a permit not later than one working day after the work has begun. (Code 1975, § 29-102; Code 1985, § 24-102) 
Sec. 60-911. - Same—Fee.     Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall pay a fee in an amount as has been established by the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 29-103; Code 1985, § 24-103) 
Sec. 60-912. - Bond required.     The director of engineering shall estimate the probable cost of replacing the soil which may be removed from such public street or highway; and shall require the applicant to file a written bond in an amount sufficient to cover such cost, with two or more sufficient sureties, conditioned that the street shall be restored in as good condition as it was before the excavation or opening therein was made. Such bond shall be received and approved by the director of engineering. If the applicant elects to do so, the applicant may make a cash deposit in lieu of the written bond. The amount of the bond or cash deposit shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1975, § 29-104; Code 1985, § 24-104) 
Sec. 60-913. - Issuance of permit. (a)  When the bond or deposit required in this article shall have been accepted by the director of engineering, the director of engineering shall then issue a permit for the excavation or opening named in the application, and the applicant may then proceed with the work in the exact location named in such applicant's application, and in no other place. (b)  A permit issued pursuant to law authorizing excavation operations shall not be deemed to relieve a person from responsibility for complying with the provisions of sections 54-53 through 60-955 and the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq.). (Code 1975, § 29-105; Code 1985, § 24-105; Ord. No. 87-210, § 3, 12-8-1987) 
Sec. 60-914. - Records of applications for permits.     The director of engineering shall keep an accurate record of all applications for permits under this article and the disposition made thereof. (Code 1975, § 29-106; Code 1985, § 24-106) 
Sec. 60-915. - Expiration of permits.     All permits issued under this article will expire at the end of 60 days from issuance if the work shall not have been started by then. (Code 1975, § 29-107; Code 1985, § 24-107) 
Sec. 60-916. - Authority of director of engineering.     The director of engineering shall have the authority to prescribe working rules and regulations governing work performed under the provisions of this article in order to insure traffic flow. (Code 1975, § 29-109; Code 1985, § 24-109) 
Sec. 60-917. - Protection of public.     It shall be the duty of any person making any excavation in the streets of the city to adequately and sufficiently protect all such excavations by barricades or other obstructions, including not less than one red light on each side of such excavation during the nighttime, so as to prevent accidents or injury to persons or property until such time as the excavation is resurfaced and approved by the director of engineering. (Code 1975, § 29-110; Code 1985, § 24-110) 
Sec. 60-918. - Supervision of work.     All the work of excavating or making any character of opening in any of the streets, alleys or highways of the city shall at all times be under the supervision of the director of engineering; and the person doing such work shall do the same in the manner directed by the director of engineering to the end that the streets and highways of the city shall not be unduly disturbed and traffic thereon obstructed. (Code 1975, § 29-111; Code 1985, § 24-111) 
Sec. 60-919. - Duties upon completion of work.     After the excavation or opening shall have been made, the person so making it shall backfill the excavation with such materials and in such manner as the director of engineering may require, and leave the street or highway in at least the same condition as it was before the opening therein was made. (Code 1975, § 29-112; Code 1985, § 24-112) 
Sec. 60-920. - Acceptance, inspection of completed work.     The conditions of the bond required by this article shall not be considered to have been complied with until the director of engineering shall have accepted the street or highway as being in good condition. In the event that the person making the opening shall fail to leave the highway in a good state of repair, satisfactory to the director of engineering, then the director of engineering shall call upon the bondsmen to pay for the cost of repairing such highway; provided, however, that if a cash deposit was given instead of a bond, the director of engineering may proceed to have the street or other highway put in good condition, paying for the same out of the deposit made with the director of engineering, and if there is any remainder of the deposit after paying for such work, such remainder shall be refunded to the person making the deposit. (Code 1975, § 29-113; Code 1985, § 24-113) 
Secs. 60-921—60-945. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AVOIDANCE OF UNDERGROUND UTILITY FACILITIES 
Sec. 60-946. - Statement of purpose. (a)  Excavation or demolition operations that are performed without knowledge of the presence or location of underground utility facilities, or without reasonable precaution when such presence of location is known, has and continues to be a cause of damage to such facilities which can result in loss of life, health and property. (b)  The purpose of this division is, among other things, to provide procedures designed to insure that persons performing excavation or demolition operations know, prior to commencing such operations, of the presence and location of underground utility facilities in the excavation or demolition area. (c)  This division also provides that certain precautions shall be taken to avoid damage to underground utility facilities during excavation and demolition operations, for notices to affected parties when underground utility facilities are damaged, and for penalties for violations of the division. (Code 1985, § 24-121; Ord. No. 87-210, § 1, 12-8-1987) 
Sec. 60-947. - Definitions. (a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Underground utility facility includes all electrical, water, fiber optic, and/or gas lines owned by water, gas and light commission of the city, as well as sanitary and storm sewers owned by the city; whether located within or without the corporate limits of the city.     WGL means water, gas and light commission of the city. (b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-3, shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-3, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-3. (Code 1985, § 24-122; Ord. No. 87-210, § 2, 12-8-1987) 
Sec. 60-948. - Participation in utilities protection center.     The water, gas and light commission and the city will at all times maintain its membership and participation in the Utilities Protection Center, which is a "one-call notification center" organized under and pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq., as amended, and shall otherwise comply with the requirements of said chapter 9, as amended from time to time. (Code 1985, § 24-123; Ord. No. 87-210, § 4, 12-8-1987) 
Sec. 60-949. - Response to notice of intent to excavate.     Where notified in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq., the WGL and the city shall, in addition to the duties imposed upon it by said chapter 9, furnish the following information and assistance to the person responsible for the excavation: (1)  Furnish, in addition to the information required by O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq., any other information which would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utility facilities in locations where permanent markers do not exist. For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utility facilities is defined as a strip of land at least four feet wide, but not wider than the width of the utility facility plus two feet on either side thereof. (2)  Whenever the city and/or the WGL determines that the work may be done only in the presence of city personnel and WGL personnel, the city and WGL shall so notify the excavator, and it shall be unlawful for the excavator receiving such notification to perform any work unless city personnel and WGL personnel are present. (3)  No excavation operation shall be commenced or continued until the provisions of this section and of this division have been complied with. (Code 1985, § 24-124; Ord. No. 87-210, § 5, 12-8-1987; Ord. No. 09-141, § 11, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 60-950. - Precautions to avoid damages.     Each person responsible for any excavation activity shall: (1)  Plan the excavation to avoid damage to and minimize interference with underground utility facilities in and near the construction area. (2)  Maintain such a clearance between an underground utility facility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment that, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such facility. (3)  Provide such support for underground utility facilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such facilities. (4)  Prior to construction of underground facilities, proposed locations shall be marked with white flags and white paint before all other existing underground utilities have been marked in the work area covered by the proposed construction. (Code 1985, § 24-125; Ord. No. 87-210, § 6, 12-8-1987) 
Sec. 60-951. - Excavation damage. (a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, each person responsible for any excavation activity that results in any damage to an underground utility facility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the city and WGL of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the city and WGL reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation in the immediate area of such utility. (b)  Each person responsible for any excavation activity that results in damage to an underground utility facility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the city and/or WGL and take any other action that may be reasonably necessary to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until arrival of the city personnel and/or WGL personnel or police and fire departments. (Code 1985, § 24-126; Ord. No. 87-210, § 7, 12-8-1987) 
Sec. 60-952. - List of excavators.     The city and WGL shall prepare and maintain, on a current basis, a list of persons who normally engage in excavation activities in the area in which underground utility facilities are located. (Code 1985, § 24-127; Ord. No. 87-210, § 8, 12-8-1987) 
Sec. 60-953. - General notification.     The city and WGL shall provide general notification to the public through media advertising, bill inserts, or similar means, and direct notification to the list of excavators identified in section 60-952 of the program's existence and purpose, and how to learn the location of underground utility facilities before the excavation activities begin. (Code 1985, § 24-128; Ord. No. 87-210, § 9, 12-8-1987) 
Sec. 60-954. - Inspections.     The city and WGL shall conduct regular inspections during and after the activities as frequently as may be necessary to verify the integrity of the utility facility. In the case of blasting, such inspections shall include leakage surveys. (Code 1985, § 24-129; Ord. No. 87-210, § 10, 12-8-1987) 
Sec. 60-955. - Penalties.     The failure to comply with the requirements of section 60-949(2) and (3), or with any of the requirements of sections 60-950 and 60-951, shall be an offense punishable under section 1-17. Each day any such failure or violation continues shall constitute a separate punishable offense. (Code 1985, § 24-130; Ord. No. 87-210, § 11, 12-8-1987) 
Chapter 62 - VEGETATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Municipal authority to remove unsanitary or unsafe conditions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 62-1. - Authority of city manager to cut, trim and remove trees in city rights-of-way.     Whenever in the judgment of the city manager trees on city rights-of-way are in need of trimming or removal because of age, condition, or other reason, the city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to trim or remove said trees in his or her discretion. (Code 1985, § 28-1; Ord. No. 86-198, § 1, 7-22-1986) 
Sec. 62-2. - Award of contracts for clearing of lots by city.     Prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, the assistant purchasing agent for the city shall obtain bids from contractors or other qualified persons for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation not in excess of two inches in diameter, and for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation in excess of two inches but not in excess of four inches in diameter, and the board of city commissioners shall award a contract to the lowest and best bidder, such contract to remain in effect during the ensuing fiscal year. (Code 1975, § 13-9(e); Code 1985, § 28-21) 
Secs. 62-3—62-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREE PROTECTION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-117, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), adopted May 26, 2015, repealed the former division 1, §§ 62-25—62-41, division 2, §§ 62-71—62-73, division 3, §§ 62-105—62-109 and enactes new divisions 1—3 as set out herein. The former divisions 1—3 pertained to generally, public rights-of-way and other public lands, and private property. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 62-25. - Short title.     This division shall be officially known as the "Tree Ordinance of the City of Albany, Georgia". (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-26. - Intent.     It is the intent of this division through the conservation, preservation, and protection of trees to: (1)  Protect, conserve, and promote the aesthetic appeal, character and value of the city; (2)  To promote public health and safety through the reduction of noise, stormwater runoff, air pollution, visual pollution, artificial light glare, and heat; and (3)  To preserve the quality of life for the city's citizens. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-27. - Objectives.     The objectives of this division are to protect, maintain, and enhance the immediate and long-term health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Albany. The following objectives support this purpose by encouraging a productive balance between development and nature: (1)  To encourage the conservation, preservation, and protection of trees and prevent damage to the city's existing tree canopy; (2)  To promote and enhance the natural value of trees which contribute to the enhancement of public and private property values, contribute to air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff control, noise abatement, the reduction of energy for heating and cooling, and glare; (3)  To promote energy conservation by maximizing the shading and cooling effects of trees; (4)  To conserve, preserve, and protect a portion of existing trees and to ensure that local stock of native trees is replenished; (5)  To maintain natural beauty in developed areas by promoting the conservation, preservation, and protection of existing trees and planting of new trees; (6)  To promote the conservation, preservation, and protection of existing large shade trees by keeping their life needs in mind when developing; (7)  To promote new tree plantings during the land development and building construction process; and (8)  To create an environment where the trees will survive and thrive. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-28. - Applicability. (a)  Applicability. The provisions of this division apply to any tree activity on all lands in the city, public and private, except as specifically exempted in section 62-31, and no person shall commence nor allow any tree activity to commence on non-exempt property without first obtaining a tree permit from the city arborist. (b)  Access authority. The city arborist shall conduct such investigations as may be deemed necessary to carry out the duties prescribed in this division, and for this purpose shall be allowed to enter upon any non-exempt property for the purpose of investigation and inspection of sites with activities that may require tree permits or have tree permits. No person shall refuse entry or access to the city arborist or authorized representative who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with the city arborist or authorized representative while in the process of performing their official duties. (c)  Liability. Neither the approval of a tree permit under the provisions of this division, nor the compliance with provisions of this division shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor shall such approval or compliance impose any liability upon the city for damage to any person or property. The fact that a tree activity for which a tree permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this division or the terms of the tree permit. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-29. - Definitions.     Alley: A minor right-of-way used or intended to be used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting a street.     Altering of a tree (tree alteration, alteration of a tree, altered tree): Pruning, trimming, defoliating, topping, grading around the base, compaction of soil on or within critical root zone, damaging the tree, or other actions to the tree. This definition includes tree removal.     ANSI A300: Means the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations-Tree, Shrub, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance-Standard Practices. This is a document offering basic performance standards for tree pruning, published in 1995 by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or the same as amended from time to time.     Applicant: Any individual, landowner, lessee, building contractor, developer or other entity applying for a tree permit. The applicant must have authority over the tree activity and the implementation of the requirements of this division.     Appraised value: Means the dollar value assigned to a tree and calculated using the methods outlined in the latest edition of 'Guide for Plant Appraisal'.     Arboricultural specifications and standards of practice: A comprehensive manual compiled and maintained by the city arborist, known as the arborist specifications manual (ASM), that contains the regulations and standards required for the planting, maintenance, protection, and removal of trees on non-exempt property.     Arboriculture: Means the cultivation of trees, including planting, pruning, removal, or any other action which affects the growth and maintenance of trees.     Arborist: A professional certified by the International Society of Arboriculture who possesses the technical competence through experience and related training to provide for or supervise the management of trees and other woody plants in the public, commercial, or residential landscape. One who is versed in the art of arboriculture, including tree pruning, the prevention and cure of tree diseases, and the control of insect pests.     Berm: A mound of earth between two and six feet high used to buffer or screen a land use.     Best management practices (BMPs): Are technically correct and widely accepted practices and standards used by professional arborists, urban and community foresters, landscape architects, and other tree care and landscape professionals. The goal of BMPs is to provide basic and practical information on how to best accomplish the most important tree management activities. The goal of tree management is to maintain tree, forest, environmental, and community health.     Boundary tree: Means that any portion of the trunk of the tree straddles the actual property line between the city public property and the adjoining property. A boundary tree is the common property of both landowners.     Branch: A secondary shoot or stem arising from one of the main axes (i.e., trunk or leader) of a tree or woody plant.     Buffer: Land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance.     Caliper: The diameter of a tree trunk, measured six inches above the soil line up to and including four inches caliper size, and 12 inches above the soil line for trees larger than four inches caliper size. The caliper of multi-stemmed trees which branch within 12 inches of the soil line shall be the diameter of the dominant (or larger stem) measured six inches above the point of branching. Used for nursery stock and newly planted trees, and not for established trees.     Canopy tree: A large or medium tree with a crown size and shape that will typically provide significant shade and beneficial effects on temperature, air quality, water quality, and other environmental conditions, at maturity. Canopy tree species shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and have a caliper of at least two inches at planting. These species shall have an average mature crown spread of at least 25 feet. Synonymous with "shade tree".     Certificate of occupancy: A certificate issued by the City of Albany's Planning and Development Services certifying that all requirements for development or redevelopment of property have been met and authorizing occupancy of buildings and structures.     City: The City of Albany, Georgia; or, the geographical area lying within the municipal boundaries of the City of Albany, Georgia.     City arborist: A person duly appointed by the director of engineering, or his successor, to carry out the provisions of this division.     City manager: The administrative head of the City of Albany's municipal government.     Code enforcement officer: A person duly appointed by the director of planning and development services, or his successor.     Critical root zone: A more or less circular area above and extending 24 inches below the ground around the trunk of a tree with a radius equivalent to the distance to the dripline, or one and one-quarter feet for every one inch in DBH, whichever is greater or as determined at a preliminary site inspection by the city arborist. The critical root zone increases in size as a tree grows larger. It is the area that must be protected for tree survival.     Crown: The leaves and branches of a tree or shrub; the upper portion of a tree from the lowest branch on the trunk to the top.     CTLA: Means the council of tree and landscape appraisers, a national council that periodically defines the accepted professional methods for determining the appraised value of trees and the cost of cure for tree damage and destruction.     Cutting: The detaching or separating of any limb, branch, or root from a tree.     Dead tree: A tree that does not contain any living tissue, i.e., green leaves or live limbs.     Decay: Degradation of woody tissue caused by biological organisms.     Deciduous tree: Any tree which naturally loses its leaves in the fall.     Developed area: Any area, with the exception of federal and state properties, where building, construction, excavation or filling activities occur.     Dedicated tree account: An account of funds contributed from fines, application fees, and payments to meet tree density requirements for off-site tree planting. Account is to be used exclusively for the purchase of new trees and all materials necessary to properly install the trees and is accessible only by the city arborist or the executive director of Keep Albany-Dougherty Beautiful.     Diameter at breast height (DBH): The standard measure of tree size (for trees existing on a site). The diameter of a tree measured at a breast height of 54 inches above the ground. For trees with co-dominant (forked) stems, the trunk is measured below the fork and above the trunk flare, at the point of the smallest diameter. For multi-stemmed trees, the diameter is considered to be the sum of the diameters of all of the stems that contribute significantly to the crown.     Director of engineering: The head of the City of Albany's Engineering Department.     Diseased tree: Means a tree or part thereof which has become infected with pathogens or has become significantly diseased.     Dripline: An imaginary vertical line extending from the outermost branches of a tree to the ground, more or less forming a cylinder around the tree.     Emergency: Means damage to utility systems, or to public or private property or an immediate threat to the welfare of persons, due to a storm or other acts of God or other accident, which requires immediate attention to alleviate the conditions or complete repairs.     Engineering inspection supervisor: A staff position within the City of Albany's Engineering Department.     Establishment period: The length of time it takes for a planted tree to develop adequate roots and shoots such that it can survive in the landscape, generally considered to be three years from the time of planting.     Evergreen tree: Any tree that has leaves throughout the year and is always green.     Flush cut: An improper cut made into the stem or parent branch of a limb or branch being removed during pruning, instead of outside the branch collar.     'Guide for Plant Appraisal, latest edition': Authored by the council of tree and landscape appraisers (CTLA) is the professional plant appraiser's how-to manual for determining size, species, condition, and location factors that influence the value of trees. Methods are included by which casualty losses and damage from trespass can be assessed.     Hazard tree: As determined by the city arborist, any public or private tree or any part thereof, that is at risk for failure and threatens the health, safety, or general welfare of a person(s) or property and/or is a danger to public safety.     Healthy tree: As determined by the city arborist, a tree that is vigorous as indicated by leaf color and annual shoot extension, with a relatively symmetrical form typical of the species, with one-third or more of its height in live crown (live crown ratio of 33 percent or more), with roots, trunk, and crown absent of extensive and significant signs of insect or disease infection, wounds or other mechanical damage, decay and structural defects. For pine trees the live crown ratio may be less than 30 percent and the tree still otherwise considered healthy.     Impervious area: Area that is covered by pavement or structures. Pavement for this definition is considered to be areas traveled upon by motor vehicles for ingress, egress, and parking having an impervious material which prevents the percolation of runoff. Examples of such materials are: asphaltic concrete, Portland cement concrete, and paving blocks. A structure is anything constructed or erected that requires permanent location.     Invasive species: Non-native tree species, as identified on the list in subsection 62-37(c), that are a threat to native plants or animals because of their tendency to rapidly expand into and disrupt the local ecosystem.     ISA: Means the International Society of Arboriculture, an international organization that developed and administers the certified arborist, certified municipal specialist, certified tree worker, certified utility worker, and board certified master arborist programs.     Land alteration activity (referred to as a "tree activity"): (1)  The construction or installation of new impervious area that exceeds 5,000 square feet on non-exempt property; (2)  Clearing, tree removal, or altering any tree existing, planted, preserved or protected under this division or any predecessor ordinance on a site on non-exempt property; or (3)  Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil of a site on non-exempt property.     Land alteration permit (referred to as a "tree permit"): An authorized tree permit issued by the City of Albany allowing the commencement of tree activity.     Licensee: Means a person with a valid City of Albany occupational tax certificate as required in this division.     Living space: The minimum area allotted to each new tree for it to be able to grow and survive. Living spaces shall not overlap each other; that is, only one tree may occupy a certain area of land. The living space is the amount of rooting space needed by a tree as specified in the ordinance.     Maintenance: Any and all work performed on a tree including, but not limited to, pruning, removing, spraying, injecting, mulching, fertilizing, weeding, pest management, and stump grinding.     New trees: Trees listed in Appendix A (at the end of this division) or approved by the city arborist for installation shall be called a "new tree." New trees may be shade trees or ornamental trees.     Notice of violation: Means a written notice of ordinance violation, as described in section 62-47.     Occupational tax certificate: An annual license required to be obtained from the City of Albany Finance Director or designee by each person, firm, company or corporation engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city. The amount of the license fee shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the offices of the city clerk and finance director.     Ornamental tree: A tree normally reaching a height less than 40 feet but greater than a height of 15 feet, with a spread of at least 12 feet at maturity (as opposed to a shade tree). Palms shall be considered ornamental trees provided they are at least ten feet high at planting. The measurement distance for the palm shall be from the base at ground level to the main point of foliage of the tree, or the upper portion of the tree canopy.     Permit: Means a written approval issued by the city arborist and required for any activity on public trees, including maintenance, removal, and street tree planting.     Permittee: One who receives a permit.     Person: Any individual, landowner, lessee, building contractor, developer or other entity involved in any tree activity or use of real property, including agents, employees, independent contractors or other in association with any of the above, whether persons, corporations, partnerships, or joint ventures.     Pest: Means any insect, disease, or other organism harmful to trees.     Physical barrier: Material used to protect a tree from damage or access.     Private tree: Means a tree that is not a public tree.     Private property: Means any property owned by a person, firm, or corporation, not meeting the definition of public property, and not under the ownership of the City of Albany, Dougherty County, State of Georgia, or the federal government.     Protected tree: Any tree designated on a site plan, tree permit or land alteration application that is to be preserved for tree density unit credit.     Protection zone: The area around a protected tree requiring a physical barrier erected at its extents.     Pruning: Means the practice of cutting tree limbs according to the standards contained in ANSI A300.     Public property: Means any property owned by, dedicated to, or deeded to the public or for the public's use. City parks, cemeteries, public rights-of-way, and other publicly owned properties are included in this definition. This definition excludes any federal, state, or county owned properties except where otherwise provided by contract or law.     Public safety: Means the condition of being safe from bodily harm and/or property damage resulting from tree conditions and/or failures while using public property.     Public tree: Any tree located on property belonging to the City of Albany.     Public utility easement: Means the rights-of-way acquired by a utility or governmental agency to place utilities, including all types of pipelines, telephone and electrical cables, and cell phone towers.     Remove or removal: To take a tree away from its existing position and including such actions that may be reasonably expected to damage a tree sufficiently to cause it to die.     Replacement: Replacement of dead, dying, diseased, or removed trees with trees of equal or comparable size, species, vigor, and health.     Right-of-way: A strip of land over which the city has the right to ownership to construct a public street, sidewalk, alley, or use for public utilities.     Risk management services: Is responsible for the administration of the city's property and casualty insurance program. It includes subrogation of damages to city property.     Risk manager: Is an advisory position in risk management services of the City of Albany.     Shade tree: A tree normally reaching the height of 40 feet or greater, with a spread of at least 16 feet, at maturity.     Silvicultural practices: The practice of establishing, tending, and reproducing stands of trees. It involves prescribing such cultural operations as weeding, thinning, pruning, and measures to protect the trees from insects, disease, and natural elements.     Site: The area within the property boundaries of the principal parcel, to be developed; or contiguous parcels intended for development under a common scheme or plan.     Specimen tree: Any shade tree more than 25 inches DBH, any ornamental tree more than 12 inches DBH, which has been determined by the city arborist to be of a high value because of its species, size, growth form, age, or other accepted horticultural criteria.     Street tree: Any existing tree or any tree to be planted on city right-of-way.     Subrogation: Is the process of seeking reimbursement from the responsible party and/or insurance company when damages are caused by the negligence of others.     Timber harvesting: The logging of two or more acres of property for the purpose of selling the harvested wood products to a commercial wood processing mill.     Timber harvesting permit: A permit required when a two acres or larger tract of timber is commercially harvested. The timber harvesting company is responsible for obtaining the permit prior to beginning operations.     Topping: The indiscriminate cutting of tree branches to stubs or cutting of lateral branches such that they are not large enough to assume the terminal role. Other names for topping include "heading back", "tipping", "hat-racking", "rounding over", or any other term that can be described as severe cutting back of limbs as defined in ANSI A300.     Tree: Any perennial woody plant, usually, but not necessarily, single stem and long-lived, with a height greater than overall spread.     Tree activity: Same definition as a land alteration activity. "Tree activity" is the common usage.     Tree clearing: The removal of any tree of four inches DBH or greater; or the removal of any tree planted, or conserved under the requirements of this division or under the previous ordinance on non-exempt property.     Tree density unit (TDU): A numerical representation used to assign values to trees to calculate for tree density requirements; as in the case of trees protected during development process, or to determine the extent of replanting required on a site.     Tree evaluation formula: A systematic approach to secure the value of a tree by using four major factors: size, species, condition, and location. With the four factors established, a cost of cure or trunk formula can be implemented to determine a value for the tree. Formulas are based upon the latest edition of 'Guide for Plant Appraisal' by the council of tree and landscape appraisers (CTLA) and the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA).     Tree permit: Same definition as a land alteration permit. "Tree permit" is the common usage.     Tree removal: Any act that causes a tree to die or to decline to a degree requiring physical removal within a period of three years after said act, on non-exempt property, including but not limited to: (1)  Improper planting; (2)  Neglect; (3)  Damage inflicted upon the root system by machinery, storage of materials, or soil compaction; (4)  Changing the natural grade of the root system within the drip line; (5)  Excessive or improper pruning; and/or (6)  Paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious materials within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree.     Tree stump: Means the base part of a tree attached to root(s), including any portion of the tree trunk that remains after the tree has been cut.     Vandalism: Means to damage, mutilate, deface, or destroy any part of the woody structure of public trees that is above or below ground, affecting the short or long term health of the tree. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE PROPERTY 
Sec. 62-30. - Standards for tree activity.     In order to obtain the objectives of this division the following standards are applied: (1)  A minimum density of trees per acre of land is required; (2)  Non-exempt property which has a land alteration activity (see definition in section 62-29) to take place is required to meet the minimum tree density requirement; (3)  A tree permit, tree permit application and monitoring procedures are established; (4)  Certain kinds of trees are determined to be desirable or preferred that will greatly enhance the foliage cover for the city. To encourage the planting of these trees a higher value (tree density unit) is given to them; (5)  Certain kinds of trees are determined to be invasive and no value (tree density unit) is given to them; (6)  The planting of trees is required in parking areas for the purpose of segmenting the pavement expanse; (7)  Alterations, including maintenance of all trees, shall be done in accordance with the tree care industry association (TCIA), formerly known as the National Arborist Association Inc., Pruning Standards for Shade Trees (ANSI A300), and in accordance with those maintenance procedures referenced in this division; (8)  Tree protection measures are to be utilized for any trees that are to remain on the site; and (9)  Any permittee is required to replace any "new" tree planted which has died within three years of planting it on the site of the tree activity. Any on-site tree dying within three years of its planting on a site is considered to be a tree removal. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-31. - Exemptions. (a)  The following are exempt from the provisions of this division: (1)  Residential exemption. All single-family and duplex lots in any zone where permitted by the City of Albany zoning ordinance. (2)  Linear infrastructure projects. Examples include gas lines, fiber optic lines, gravity or force main sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and potable water lines. (3)  Landfills. Land used for state-permitted landfills. (4)  Borrow pits and surface mines. Land used for state-permitted borrow pits and surface mines. (5)  Telecommunication antenna tower sites. The area contained within the security fence surrounding an antenna tower. (6)  Airport. Land used for commercially operated airport. Tree planting is limited per the Federal Aviation Administration. (7)  Stormwater ponds. The area of the stormwater pond to include a 20-foot wide strip around the perimeter of the pond required for maintenance purposes. The engineer of record can deduct the acreage of the stormwater pond and maintenance strip from the overall acreage of the site when calculating required tree density units for the overall site. Additionally, any lot within a subdivision that is dedicated for use as a stormwater pond is exempt from the tree ordinance. (8)  Property zoned C-8 (Commercial Recreation District) is exempt from the requirements of the tree ordinance. (9)  City and county public works equipment and materials storage yards. (10)  City and county open ditch or canal stormwater conveyance systems. The area contained within the open ditch or canal and a 20-foot wide maintenance strip along the top of both banks. The exemption applies to both publicly owned stormwater conveyance systems and public systems contained within dedicated stormwater drainage easements. (b)  The following have limited exemptions from complying with this division: (1)  Hazards. In the event that any tree on non-exempt property shall be determined by the city arborist to be hazardous or in dangerous condition so as to immediately endanger the public health, safety or welfare or cause harm to a building, and requires immediate trimming or removal without delay, verbal authorization may be given by the city arborist for the tree to be trimmed or removed where trimming will not remove the danger. Application for a tree permit is required within 72 hours after the hazard action. Determinations of the city arborist may be appealed per section 62-40. (2)  Emergency. During the period of an emergency such as a flood, ice storm, thunderstorm, windstorm, tornado, or any other disastrous act of nature, the requirements of this division may be suspended by the city manager. No tree permit is required if the ordinance has been suspended. (3)  General agreement. See section 62-32 for details. (4)  Agricultural exemption. Any land presently zoned agricultural. No tree permit is required provided normal silvicultural practices are followed. A timber harvesting permit is required for any commercial timber operations involving the harvesting of two or more acres. (5)  Commercial tree operations. Trees grown specifically for sale, such as Christmas trees, nursery stock, commercial pine plantations, or commercial pecan orchards. No tree permit is required provided normal silvicultural practices are followed. A timber harvesting permit is required for any commercial timber operations involving the harvesting of two or more acres. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-32. - Execution of general agreement.     Utility companies and governmental agencies constructing or maintaining easements for water, sewer, electricity, gas, drainage, telephone or television transmission shall execute a written general agreement with the city which, at a minimum: (1)  As a policy, requires the least possible alteration of trees and specimen trees; (2)  Establishes design guidelines for construction and maintenance which identify the saving of trees and specimen trees as a factor to be considered in the design process; (3)  Requires a consultation process with and approval of the city arborist before the commencement of construction projects, maintenance work within five feet of trees, or the removal of trees and specimen trees; (4)  Provides that a breach of such agreement constitutes a violation of this division; and (5)  Provides that all pruning of trees comply with the Tree Care Industry Association (TCIA), formerly the National Arborist Association Inc., Pruning Standards for Shade Trees (ANSI A300). (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-33. - Duties of the Albany Tree Board. (a)  Establishment of the Albany Tree Board. There is hereby established an Albany Tree Board for the City of Albany. Said board shall consist of 17 members with its members appointed by the procedure below. Board members shall serve without compensation. All board members not chosen by position shall be reevaluated every two years by the board that appointed them and either reaffirmed for a new two year term or replaced. (1)  Seven members are appointed to serve two year terms by: The mayor and city commissioners (each shall appoint one member); (2)  Six members are appointed by position to serve as long as the position is held and include: Director of Albany-Dougherty Planning and Development Services, or designee; executive director "Keep Albany-Dougherty Beautiful", or designee; Georgia Forestry Commission's Dougherty County Forester; director of engineering, or designee; city arborist;, Director of Albany Utility Board or designee; (3)  Four members are appointed by the Albany Tree Board to serve two year terms and consist of the following: A currently licensed professional civil engineer in private practice whose main field of work is site development, or a registered landscape architect; a representative of Albany Board of Realtors; and two additional interested citizens; (b)  Duties of the Albany Tree Board. The Albany Tree Board shall: (1)  Provide written short and long range planning recommendations to the mayor and the city commission each calendar year; (2)  Every six years, or as directed by the mayor and city commission, the board shall review the current ordinance and send recommendations to the mayor and city commission to maintain current status or make adjustments to the current ordinance; (3)  Make recommendations for policies for managing trees on the city's public properties; (4)  Make recommendations for policies concerning general agreements; (5)  Perform other duties concerning the forestation of the city as directed by the mayor and city commission; (6)  Meet from time to time as convened by any nine members, or by the chairman, but in all events, shall convene and meet not less than once quarterly; (7)  All meetings of the tree board shall be open to the public. The tree board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its findings, proceedings at hearings, and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of Keep Albany-Dougherty Beautiful and shall be public record; and (8)  Until such time that bylaws are adopted by the tree board, a quorum will consist of a majority of the members. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-34. - Duties of the city arborist. (a)  Duties of the city arborist on private property. (1)  It shall be the duty of the city arborist to administer this division. (2)  The city arborist may at his(her) discretion use the code enforcement officer to assist in the administering of this division, though the ultimate responsibility for administration rests with the city arborist. The city arborist shall have the authority, either individually or with the code enforcement officer, to revoke, suspend, or void any tree permit and shall stop work or suspend all work on any site or any portion thereof which is in violation of this ordinance. (3)  The city arborist shall have the authority for approvals of the following: a.  Trees not on the tree list; b.  New tree caliper sizes above the maximum size; c.  Tree pruning, transplanting, protection, and maintenance; d.  Emergency tree removal; e.  Repairing damaged trees; f.  General agreements entered into under section 62-32. g.  Planting dates outside of the October 1 to April 15 period; h.  Requests for pruning, removal or planting of trees on public property; i.  Requirements of the tree care industry association (TCIA), formerly the National Arborist Association Inc., Pruning Standards for Shade Trees (ANSI A300), and maintenance procedures set out in any exhibits; and j.  Trees planted in accordance to the standards outlined in the Arboricultural Specifications Manual (ASM) developed and maintained by the city arborist. (b)  Duties of the city arborist on public property. (1)  The city arborist shall be responsible for permitting the removal of trees located on the public rights-of-way and other city property. Regardless the reason, no public tree in the City of Albany can be removed without the approval of the city arborist. (2)  The city arborist shall review all requests for the removal of trees located on the public rights-of-way for new commercial development. The city arborist is authorized, at his/her discretion, to require as a condition of granting of approval for such removal(s), that such property owner shall pay all costs of removing such tree(s) and also to require that the tree(s) removed be replaced at some other nearby location by planting another tree(s), not necessarily of the same type. The city arborist may approve, approve with modifications, or deny the request. (3)  The city arborist shall investigate all requests for the removal of trees located on the public rights-of-way by citizens. Public tree removal is permitted when trees are dead, dying, diseased, or hazardous. The city does not remove a public tree because it drops leaves, cones, or acorns. The city does not cut nor fill roots of public trees. (4)  The city arborist investigates trees located on the public rights-of-way and other city property that have been damaged or removed without an approved permit. (5)  The city arborist determines the value of public trees which are damaged or removed in accordance with the latest edition of the 'Guide for Plant Appraisal' and submits the calculations to the risk manager. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-35. - Procedure for land alteration permit application. (a)  Applications. All tree permit applications, together with site plans and documentation shall be reviewed by the city arborist for conformance to the provisions of this division and either approved, approved with revisions, returned for revisions, or not approved within 15 working days of receipt by the city arborist's office. If not approved, the reason for the non-approval shall be stated in writing, and dated. (b)  Submission. All tree permit applications for new development shall be submitted to the Albany Planning and Development Services for forwarding to the city arborist. Tree removal permit applications and timber harvesting permit applications should be submitted directly to the city arborist's office. Only complete applications will be accepted. A complete tree permit application contains the following: (1)  Name and address of property owner; (2)  Name, address and phone number of applicant if other than the property owner; (3)  Address of property to have the tree activity; (4)  Signature of applicant; (5)  Statement indicating which of the following is being applied for: a.  Tree altering with no other intended actions on non-exempt property; (information requirements may be reduced if allowed by the city arborist) b.  Tree altering as part of a site development plan on non-exempt property. (6)  Statement of which phase of the development the application is being applied for (NOTE: separate approvals are required for each phase, as each phase enters development); (7)  If another city permit is required for the site which requires a scaled plan (except for internal building plans), the landscape plan is required to be on a scaled plan of a scale equal to or larger than the other required plan (one inch equals 20 feet or larger). A fee is required (see schedule of fees as stated in the Code of Ordinance, City of Albany, GA). All application fees for tree permits shall be paid through the office of the city arborist into a dedicated tree account to be used only for the purchase of new and replacement trees and all materials needed to properly install the trees on public lands, rights-of-way, and on tree easements abutting public lands and rights-of-way, as designated by the city arborist or the executive director of Keep Albany-Dougherty Beautiful. (8)  Statement indicating how much (if any) of the existing impervious areas were constructed prior to May 12, 1992; This statement shall include: a.  Intentions for any existing impervious areas to be preserved and used after the land alterations have been completed; b.  The location and square footages of the existing impervious areas which will be preserved and used; c.  The location and square footage of all proposed new impervious areas; d.  The percentage of existing impervious areas compared to proposed impervious areas; (9)  Acreage of property on which the land alteration will take place; (10)  The total tree density units required for the site; (11)  The total tree density units from existing trees; (12)  The total tree density units from new trees; (13)  Existing tree density credit information: a.  Location of tree b.  DBH c.  Specific species (common name) d.  Square footage of living space e.  Tree protection measures f.  Tree unit credit for each size of tree g.  Tree unit credit for each species of tree (14)  New tree density unit information: a.  Location b.  Caliper c.  Specific species (common name) d.  Square footage of living space e.  Number of trees of each species (NOTE: no more than one-third of the total number of trees planted are to be from any one species) f.  Number of trees which are "shade" trees (NOTE: at least one-half of the total number of trees planted are to be "shade" trees) g.  Pre-approval for trees not listed in Appendix A h.  Tree unit credit for each species of tree (15)  Identification of all trees larger than four inches DBH on the City of Albany rights-of-way and indication of how these trees will be protected during construction. (16)  Any changes to the plan must be submitted to the city arborist at least ten working days prior to installation. Plans must be approved by the city arborist prior to any tree activity removal or planting. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-36. - Tree density required. (a)  Tree density required. (1)  Any site on which there will be a tree activity shall have not less than 15 tree density units per acre. (2)  The city desires not to create or impose undue hardship on lands which had impervious areas before the enactment of the first tree ordinance on May 12, 1992. Therefore for lands which do not meet the minimum tree density units and had impervious areas on May 12, 1992 the following applies: a.  The tree density units required are adjusted by a percentage. This percentage is the ratio of existing preserved and used impervious area which was on the site on May 12, 1992 divided by the overall area of the parcel being developed. The resulting percentage is multiplied by the TDU requirements for the site and that number is subtracted from the original TDU requirements to determine the reduced TDU requirements. b.  If requirement of subparagraph a. above causes an overall tree density unit total greater than the minimum tree density units of paragraph (1), then the required number of tree density units is reduced to require only the difference between the minimum tree density units of paragraph (1) and the existing tree density units. c.  The minimum required new tree density units shall not be less than ten percent or require less than one tree (whichever is greater) to be planted; (3)  Nothing in this division shall authorize the removal of existing trees as to reduce site tree units below 15 tree density units per site acre, and any such removal is prohibited. (b)  Sites with new paved parking areas. (1)  On sites where the tree density unit requirements have been met by trees retained on the site, any proposed or new parking areas shall be designed so as to provide for the preservation of existing trees, or living space for additional trees, to break up the expanse of the paved area(s) so that no new parking space shall be more than 75 feet from a tree density unit living space. (2)  On sites where the tree density unit requirements are not met by existing trees left on site, the site shall be designed to require planting tree density units in the expanse of the new parking area to meet the site's required tree density units; and at a ratio of not less than one tree density unit per 25 parking spaces, and so that no new parking space shall be more than 75 feet from a tree density unit living space. If there are tree density units remaining after meeting the previous requirement, then these tree density units may be placed at the applicant's discretion anywhere on the site as per section 62-37, (d) Tree density unit credit for new trees, (10) (11), and (12). (3)  Multi-level or covered parking areas are exempt from the requirements of subparagraphs (1) and (2) above. (c)  Off-site tree planting requirements/dedicated tree account. On sites to be altered having serious space limitations such as party walls, zero lot lines or other similar restrictions and having less than 7,500 square feet of paved area, the applicant may elect to: (1)  Where tree density unit requirements still remain, pay to the city $300.00 per remaining tree density unit. All checks or money orders shall be made out to the "City of Albany". The money shall be paid through the office of the city arborist into a dedicated tree account to be used only for the purchase of new and replacement trees and all materials needed to properly install the trees on public lands, rights-of-way, and on tree easements abutting public lands and rights-of-way, as designated by either the city arborist or the executive director of Keep Albany-Dougherty Beautiful. (2)  On sites to be developed with fewer than 100 parking spaces, when it is impractical to meet the criteria for replanting on the confines of the property to be developed, as determined by the arborist and/or engineering department, then applicant shall provide for replanting to occur on other properties within the city, public or private, that are acceptable to the city arborist, provided all other requirements are met. As an option to the provision for off-site replanting, the applicant may pay to the dedicated tree account $300.00 per tree density unit to plant the required number of replacement trees on public lands and rights-of-way. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-37. - Tree density unit credits. (a)  TDU credits. To receive any TDU credits the minimum caliper, the minimum square footage of living space and the minimum living space radius are required. This applies to healthy, actively growing trees and requires approval by the city arborist. If a tree is in a location where a protection zone is needed or is determined to be needed, a protection zone is required to receive any TDU credits for that location. (b)  Protection zone. The physical barrier shall extend a minimum distance in all directions from the tree base at least one foot for each inch of trunk diameter. Physical barriers include but are not limited to: fencing, security screens, silt fence style of fencing, and construction warning fencing. Special conditions may warrant an adjustment to this requirement. The code enforcement officer with the city arborist's guidance shall set the special conditions and may grant adjustments to this paragraph on a case by case basis. (c)  Tree density unit credit for existing trees. Conversion from "diameter at breast height" (DBH) to "tree density unit" (TDU) is provided in the table below. To receive credit for the trees remaining on site, the minimum living space and minimum radius for living space are required. (see Appendix A). If the existing tree is a species not on the new tree list, approval must be obtained from the city arborist to receive credit. Existing trees identified as invasive species by the city arborist will not receive credit. The list of invasive species, identified by common name, includes: Catalpa Tree, Cottonwood, Royal Princess Tree, Cherry Laurel or Black/Wild Cherry, Hackberry or Sugarberry, Mimosa, Chinaberry, Tree of Heaven, and Chinese Tallow. The city arborist shall add other tree species to the list as needed. TABLE INSET: DBH TDU 1 to 5 1 6 to 10 2 11 to 15 3 16 to 20 4 21 to 25 5 26 to 30 6 31 to 35 8 36 to 40 10 41 to 45 12 >45 14      Retention of large existing trees that are included in the preferred large shade trees list (Appendix A) is encouraged. An additional increase in units is provided for these trees. The increases are listed below: TABLE INSET: DBH Increase above units by this percentage 1 to 10 5% 10 to 20 10% 21 to 30 25% >31 50%  (d)  Tree density unit credit for new trees. New trees are either approved shade trees or ornamental trees. Each listed tree has an individual tree density unit depending on the size, shape, and desirability. The minimum tree density unit is one-half and the maximum is one and one-half. Trees are designated as small, medium, or large relative to their potential size and the minimum living space requirement ranges from 100 to 400 square feet for any new trees planted outside the perimeter of parking areas (see Appendix A). A minimum radius of three feet living space for trees planted within the landscape islands of parking areas is required. (1)  Appendix A (at the end of this division) contains the listing of trees that are available to receive credit. The appendix contains common tree name, botanical name, minimum living space, tree density units, and general comments. (2)  The caliper of new trees is required to be between one and one-half and three and one-half inches, except that a pine tree caliper is required to be between one and one and one-half inches. (3)  Palm trees are assigned credit based on height, not caliper, and receive one-half TDU credit for each ten feet height increment. (4)  All new trees shall be planted on site between October 1 and April 15 unless an operational underground or drip irrigation system exists in place or the city arborist grants permission otherwise. (5)  Trees not on the list are required to be reviewed and approved by the city arborist prior to any tree permit application submittal. (6)  At least one-half of the new trees shall be from the shade tree class regardless of whether planting is for the purpose of meeting parking area requirement or TDU requirement. (7)  No more than one-third of the new trees shall be from any one species regardless of whether planting is for the purpose of meeting parking area requirement or TDU requirement. (8)  For a new tree surrounded by existing or new pavement, the minimum required living space is 150 square feet for all species. (9)  Crape myrtles may be grouped together, in maximums of three per single living space, though the minimum living space becomes 150 square feet. (10)  Trees being placed for this requirement may not be placed in locations such as sight clear zones that may cause hazardous situations for traffic. (11)  Trees shall be placed such that full shape and height will be reached without trimming, cutting or altering. For example: a large shade tree (height over 40 feet) placed near or under a power line shall not be allowed. (12)  Trees shall not to be planted within ten feet of any existing or proposed natural gas or sanitary sewer lines and within five feet of any other existing or proposed underground utilities. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-38. - Receiving a building permit or certificate of occupancy. (a)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the city arborist has conducted the final inspection. (b)  Due to the restricted tree planting period (October 1 to April 15) an allowance is made for activities to be completed during the non-tree planting time. A bond or an irrevocable letter of credit may be posted with the city arborist which will allow the applicant to occupy or use the development before all requirements of this division are met. An example letter of credit shall be furnished by the city attorney upon request. (1)  The amount of the bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be $300.00 per required tree density unit. (2)  In no event shall a bond or irrevocable letter of credit be for a time period of longer than seven months. (3)  A bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be accepted only during the time of April 1 to October 1. (4)  A request for an extension of an existing bond or irrevocable letter of credit may only be done through the appeal process. A request for an extension appeal application does not exempt the bond or letter of credit from the original termination date of the bond or irrevocable letter of credit. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-39. - Enforcement and penalties. (a)  Each violation of this division or failure to comply with any of the requirements hereof shall be additionally punishable by a fine of $500.00 for each violation of this division payable to the dedicated tree account. Funds of the dedicated tree account are designated only for the purchase of new trees and all materials necessary to properly install the trees. (b)  Damage to all trees harmed shall be either repaired or replaced with the corresponding TDU's. The repair shall be to the maximum extent feasible as determined by the city arborist. The fine shall be paid and all damaged trees repaired or replaced before continuation of any further tree activity or tree permit application processing. (c)  Each violation of a provision of this division shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-40. - Appeals. (a)  Appeals of any decisions of the city arborist shall be directed to the tree appeals board. Appeals of any decisions of the tree appeals board can be directed to the entire Albany Tree Board for further consideration. Appeals of any decision by the entire Albany Tree Board can be appealed to the city manager, who has the final authority. The appeal shall follow the requirements below: (1)  Appeals shall be filed within three months of a city arborist decision; (2)  The appeal letter shall be addressed to the city arborist and contain the following information: a.  The specific reason for the appeal; b.  All supporting information relevant to the appeal; and c.  A written report from the city arborist why subject of the appeal was denied. (3)  The city arborist shall notify the chairman of the Albany Tree Board of the appeal within ten business days of the submittal of a completed appeal application. (4)  The chairman of Albany Tree Board shall convene the tree appeal board within ten business days of the date of notification by the city arborist. The tree appeal board shall consist of the following four members: the chairman of the Albany Tree Board, the planning and development services tree board designee, the engineering department tree board designee, and the Keep Albany-Dougherty Beautiful designee. All decisions by the tree appeal board must be unanimous to overturn the city arborist's decision. Decisions that are not unanimous will result in an automatic rejection of the appeal. The appellant shall be notified in writing within ten business days of the results of the appeal. (5)  The appellant can appeal the decision of the tree appeal board to the entire Albany Tree Board. The appellant shall notify the city arborist requesting an appeal to the entire Albany Tree Board within ten business days of receipt of the denial of appeal by the tree appeal board. If a regular quarterly Albany Tree Board meeting is not scheduled within 45 days of the notification of appeal, the chairman of the Albany Tree Board shall call a special meeting to vote on the appeal. A majority decision by the board is required for approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the appeal. The appellant shall be notified in writing within ten business days of the decision. (6)  The appellant may request that the city manager review the decision of the entire Albany Tree Board by submitting an appeal request in writing to the city manager within 30 days of the Albany Tree Board's decision. The city manager has 30 days from receipt of the written appeal to render a decision. All decisions of the city manager are final. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-41. - Conflict.     Where the provisions of this division conflict with other tree protection or landscape provisions contained within any other city ordinance, the stricter ordinance shall govern. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) APPENDIX ANEW TREE LIST PREFERRED LARGE SHADE TREES Minimum Living Space = 400 square feet Common Name (scientific name) Tree Density Units Black Tupelo (Nyssa sylvatica) 1.5 Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum) 1.5 Laurel or Darlington Oak (Quercus hemisphaerica) 1 Live Oak (Quercus virginiana) 1.5 Overcup Oak (Quercus lyrata) 1.5 Scarlet Oak (Quercus coccinea) 1.5 Shumard Oak (Quercus shumardii) 1.5 Southern Red Oak (Quercus falcata) 1.5 Swamp Chestnut Oak (Quercus michauxii) 1.5 White Oak (Quercus alba) 1.5 Willow Oak (Quercus phellos) 1  OTHER LARGE SHADE TREES Minimum Living Space = 400 square feet Common Name (scientific name) Tree Density Units American Beech (Fagus grandifolia) 1 Chinese Elm (Ulmus parvifolia) 1.5 Dawn Redwood (Metasequoia glyptostroboides) 1.5 Deodar Cedar (Cedrus deodara) 1 Ginkgo or Maiden Tree (Ginkgo biloba) 1 Longleaf Pine (Pinus palustris) 1 Sawtooth Oak (Quercus acutissima) 1 Southern Magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora) 1.5 Tulip Tree or Yellow Poplar (Liriodendron tulipifera) 1.5  ORNAMENTAL LARGE TREES Minimum Living Space = 400 square feet Common Name (scientific name) Tree Density Units Chinafir (Cunninghamia lanceolata) 1 Eastern Red Cedar (Juniperus virginiana) 1 Japanese Evergreen Oak (Quercus acuta) 1 River Birch (Betula nigra) 1.5 Weeping Willow (Salix babylonica) 1  ORNAMENTAL MEDIUM TREES Minimum Living Space = 250 square feet Common Name (scientific name) Tree Density Units American Holly (Ilex opaca) 1 Arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis and cultivars) 1 Chinese Pistache (Pistacia chinensis) 1 Japanese Cryptomeria (Cryptomeria japonica) 1 Japanese Pagodatree (Sophora japonica) 1 Japanese or Saucer Magnolia (Magnolia soulangiana) 1 Florida or Southern Sugar Maple (Acer floridanum) 1 Goldenrain Tree (Koelreuteria paniculata) 1 Leyland Cypress (Cupressocyparis leylandii) .5 Savannah Holly (Ilex opaca x attenuata) .5 Sweetbay Magnolia (Magnolia virginiana) 1 Trident Maple (Acer buergerianum) .5  ORNAMENTAL SMALL TREES Minimum Living Space = 100 square feet Common Name (scientific name) Tree Density Units Cabbage Palmetto (Sabal palmetto) .5 Cassine Holly (Ilex cassine) .5 Chaste Tree (Vitex agnus-castus) .5 Crape Myrtle (Lagerstroemia indica) .5 Croonenburg Holly (Ilex opaca v. croonenburg) .5 Eastern Redbud (Cercis canadensis) .5 Flowering Dogwood (Cornus florida) .5 Fringe-Tree or Grancy Graybeard (Chionanthus virginicus) .5 Hybrid Holly (Ilex or attenuata hybrids) .5 Japanese Flowering Apricot (Prunus mume) .5 Japanese Maple (Acer palmatum) .5 Nellie R. Stevens Holly (Ilex aquifolium or I. cornuta) .5 Purpleleaf Plum (Prunus cerasifera pissardii) .5 Red Buckeye (Aesculus pavia) .5 Sassafras (Sassafras albidum) .5 Yaupon Holly (Ilex vomitoria) .5      The tree permit fee information can be found in the City of Albany's Code of Ordinance under Appendix C (schedule of fees). Fees may be updated from time to time. The current fees are listed below. NOTE: Not part of the tree protection ordinance. Application fee of $100.00 if landscape plan required for permit. Application fee of $35.00 for tree permit only. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND OTHER PUBLIC LANDS 
Sec. 62-42. - Intent.     The intent of this article is to encourage the preservation and protection of trees on public property in the City of Albany. The purpose of the provisions contained herein include: protect the health, safety and welfare of both the public citizenry and the trees in the City of Albany by establishing standards and regulations to control planting, planning, removal, maintenance, and protection of the trees within the public rights-of-way and public land areas from undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, maintenance and protection practices, replacement of trees removed or destroyed by individuals, business entities or associations and by eliminating and guarding against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons using the public areas of the city; as well as to prevent damage to any public sewer or water main, gas line or other public property; and to guard all trees within the city against the spread of disease or pests. It is not intended to resolve or regulate disputes over trees on private property that do not affect general public safety. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-43. - Approval procedures.     The director of engineering shall have the responsibility, through the city arborist, to approve or deny requests for removal and replanting of trees on the public right-of-way, and other public places. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-44. - Maintenance of public trees.     All pruning and tree caring of conserved trees shall be done in accordance with ANSI A300. (a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees within the right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, on all parks, cemeteries, and on all city utility easements, as may be necessary to insure public safety, to conserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of the city, or to further the intent of this division. (b)  The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, visibility of street intersections, traffic control devices or other public improvements, or is infected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other pest. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person(s) or firm to engage in pruning, treating or removing public tree(s), except those persons who are employees of the city, contracted by the city, or approved volunteers supervised by either the city arborist, the executive director of Keep Albany-Dougherty Beautiful or the chairman of the Albany Tree Board. (d)  All tree stumps on public lands shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. All persons performing stump removal on public lands shall be responsible for compliance with the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq. (e)  No person shall physically impede employees of the city who are engaged in the planting, maintaining, pruning, treating, or removing of any tree or portion of a tree in any public right-of-way or property. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-45. - Moving buildings on streets. (a)  All requests for approval of house moving permits shall be submitted to the engineering department. The engineering department shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request. The engineering department shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the proposed route. (b)  If tree trimming or tree removal is required to facilitate the moving of a building or structure, the city arborist shall investigate the proposed route and determine whether the moving of any building or structure as proposed in, and over the route specified in the application can be done without excessive or damaging tree trimming or removal. The city arborist shall coordinate with the engineering department's representative on all tree trimming or tree removal required to facilitate the moving of a building or structure. (c)  The city's engineering department may issue a permit authorizing such tree trimming and/or removal containing conditions prescribed by the city arborist to assure against damage or injury to public trees and to provide indemnity for any damage or injury resulting from the work. In the alternative, the city arborist may require a permittee to select a different route which will not require excessive or damaging tree trimming and/or removal. (d)  The permittee shall contract with a city licensed tree removal company and bear all costs associated for tree trimming and/or removal. All private tree removal companies shall obtain an occupational tax certificate prior to commencing any tree work as per chapter 16, businesses, article II, regulations, except as specifically exempted in article I, in general, section 16-1. (e)  The city arborist may require tree replacement for any tree(s) removed as a condition of the permit. All tree replacement, installation and maintenance costs shall be borne by the permittee. (f)  The issuance of a permit does not authorize the permittee to break, injure, damage, move, or remove public trees without approval from the city arborist. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-46. - Injuring, damaging or removing trees on public property.     It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, mutilate, destroy, cut, carve, paint, set fire or allow to burn or remove any public tree; attach any device or structure (i.e., tree houses, lights, signs, rope, wire, nails, reflectors, mirrors, etcetera) to or on public trees unless otherwise authorized by the city arborist; store, spill or dump substances, whether liquid or solid, which may be harmful to trees, on any part of a public tree or within the critical root zone of a public tree; damage public trees through construction activities in violation of the conditions of a permit issued under this chapter. Such activities include, but are not limited to: making excavations or cuts in the soil near roots of public trees unless otherwise approved by the city arborist; damaging roots of a public tree by compacting or placing fill within the critical root zone; engaging in any pruning activity on public trees, including but not limited to: topping, heading, rounding or shearing. (a)  Any person who damages public trees shall be charged the cost of replacement of said tree or trees. Fines shall be in addition to the cost of replacement of said tree or trees in accordance with the civil penalty as set out in section 62-47 below. The replacement value of trees shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of 'Guide for Plant Appraisal' as published by the International Society of Arboriculture. (b)  If the city arborist deems the tree to be beyond repair, the responsible party shall compensate the City of Albany for the lost monetary value of the tree to the satisfaction of the city arborist. (c)  Should any person cause removal of any tree upon the public right-of-way, or other public property, after being denied a permit to do so, the city arborist shall cause a penalty of up to treble damages of the appraised value of said tree to be assessed against the responsible party. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-47. - Notice, violation and civil penalty. (a)  If any person violates this article or fails to comply with any provision of this article, the risk manager, or his/her designee, shall notify the person of the violation in writing. Said notice shall be delivered in person or by certified mail. (b)  Any person who violates any provision of this article or who fails to comply with a lawful order of the risk manager shall be issued a summons so charging the person notified and requiring such person to appear in municipal court for a hearing at a given time, place and date. Said summons shall be in the form of a written complaint setting forth the violation and the identity of the person complained against. Said summons shall be delivered in person by the risk management department or by certified mail. (c)  If the court determines that the person being summoned did violate this division, the court shall order mitigation as prescribed by (d) of this article. In addition to mitigation, the court may impose a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation of this article. (d)  If, as a result of the violation of any provision of this article, the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree located on city-owned property or public rights-of-way is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of such tree shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value of trees shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of the 'Guide for Plant Appraisal'. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-48. - Conflict.     Where the provisions of this division conflict with other tree protection or landscape provisions contained within any other city ordinance, the stricter ordinance shall govern. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-49. - Appeals.     Denial of request for tree removal on public property may be appealed in accordance with section 62-40. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Sec. 62-50. - Severability.     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this division is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this division. The city commission hereby declares that it would have passed this division and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, and words thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or words have been declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the remaining division provisions will be in full force and effect. (Ord. No. 15-117, § 2(Exh. A), 5-26-2015) 
Chapter 64 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 64-1. - Bus fare charges; special fares. (a)  The fare to be charged for transportation of persons on the regular route buses of the Albany Transit System shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (b)  Persons who are 62 years of age or older and who shall furnish to the Albany Transit System satisfactory evidence of such age shall be issued an identification card by Albany Transit System which shall entitle them to ride Albany Transit System fixed-route system buses for one-half of the basic adult fare. (c)  Persons certified by Albany Transit System as being disabled according to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and whose disability prevents them from using Albany Transit System fixed-route. (d)  Fares for the transportation of both elderly persons and handicapped persons on the handicap buses of the city shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1985, § 29-1.1; Ord. No. 88-171, §§ 1—5, 10-25-1988; Ord. No. 89-128, § 1, 4-11-1989) 
Sec. 64-2. - Eating, drinking or smoking on city buses prohibited.     It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided by section 1-17 for any person to eat, drink or smoke on any buses operated by the Albany Transit System. (Code 1985, § 29-3; Ord. No. 86-135, 4-8-1986) 
Sec. 64-3. - Charter fare rates. (a)  The charter fare rate for 35-foot transit coaches and minivans (vans with a maximum of 16 passengers), both within the county and outside the county, shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (b)  The maximum cost will be determined by the number of hours service is rendered. (Code 1985, § 29-4; Ord. No. 88-172, §§ 1—3, 10-25-1988) 
Secs. 64-4—64-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 64-29. - Title.     This article may also be known, cited and referred to as "The Taxicab Ordinance." (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-16), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-30. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     City means the incorporated area within the City of Albany, Georgia.     Commissioners means the mayor and board of commissioners of the city.     Cruising means moving about on the streets for the purposes of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or personal command.     Department means the code enforcement department of the city.     Director means the director of the code enforcement department and/or the director of the code enforcement department's designee.     Driver means any person who is issued a driver's permit and drives or operates a taxicab on the streets of the city.     Driver's permit means the required written authority granted by the director to persons who qualify to drive or operate a taxicab within the city upon meeting the requirements of this article.     License means the right and privilege granted by the director to companies which qualify for the operation of a taxicab company within the city upon meeting the requirements of this article.     License holder means any individual, firm, partnership or corporation that has possession of a license to operate a taxicab company issued by the director.     Operate means when a person picks up one or more passengers in the city for which such person is accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee that is determined by agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the taxicab is used or when a person maintains a physical place of business as a taxicab company within the city.     Street means and includes any street, alley, lane, avenue, court or public road in the city.     Taxi stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere that has been designate as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs.     Taxicab means any motor vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers for a fee or fare or offering to transport passengers for a fee or fare as a public conveyance and is fitted with a taximeter or other device used to compute such fee or fare.     Taxicab company means a person, firm, partnership or corporation licensed to do business by the department with its primary function being the operation of one or more taxicab under the provisions of this article.     Taximeter means a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which is designed to measure the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the times the vehicle travels or is in waiting, and to indicate the fare to be charged. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-17), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-31. - Operations deemed to be doing business in the city.     Any person, business or entity shall be deemed doing business in the city under this article if such person is picking up passengers in the city and accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the taxicab is used or by contract for the use of any motor vehicle or other vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers. Any person shall also be deemed doing business in the city under this article if such person has established a business relationship with independent contractors or operates taxicabs on such person's own behalf for the purpose of transporting passengers in the city. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-18), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-32. - Appeals procedure. (a)  Decisions of the director that adversely effect or aggrieve any applicant or license holder or driver's permit holder under this article may be appealed to the city manager, or the city manager's designee. All appeals shall be submitted in writing to the city manager within ten calendar days after issuance of written notification of the adverse decision. (b)  A hearing shall be conducted by the city manager on each appeal within 30 days of the date of the filing of the written appeal. The appellant shall be notified in writing of the date and time of the hearing at least seven calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The appellant in such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-19), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-33. - Delivery of notice.     For the purposes of this article, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served; when delivery to the last known address of the affected party is acknowledged by signed receipt of certified mail; or three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-20), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-34. - Occupation tax.     Each taxicab company licensed under the provisions of this article, with a location in the city, shall be subject to occupation tax as provided by the Occupation Tax Ordinance of the city. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-21), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-35. - Enforcement.     The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be conducted by the code enforcement department and city police department. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-22), 6-25-2008) 
Secs. 64-36—64-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAXICAB COMPANY REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 64-59. - License required.     No person, firm or corporation shall operate a taxicab or conduct the business of operating taxicabs in the city until the person has first applied for and obtained a license to do so. It shall be the duty of the director to examine the application and to either grant or refuse the license based on the requirements set forth in this article, including the payment of any fees required by this article. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-23), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-60. - Application. (a)  An application for a license shall be filed with the department upon forms provided by the department, and shall be sworn to by the applicant as true, correct and complete before a notary public. Each applicant is required to submit to a criminal history check. If the applicant is other than a sole proprietor then every partner, officer, manager and stockholder holding a ten percent or more interest in the company shall be subject to the provisions of this section. The applicant shall: (1)  Be at least 18 years of age. (2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. (3)  Not have been convicted, pleaded guilty, pleaded nolo contendere, forfeited bond or been imprisoned, within a period of five years prior to the date of application for a license, for violation of any of the following federal or state criminal offenses: criminal homicide; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs; illegal gambling, criminal trespass, public indecency, any theft or violence against person or property; peeping tom, leaving the scene of an accident; manslaughter resulting from the operation of a vehicle; racing on highways and streets; using a motor vehicle in fleeing or attempting to elude an officer; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle was used; perjury or false swearing; any crime of violence or theft or possession, sale or distribution of narcotics drugs, barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants; provided, however, that all applicants shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., relating to first offender status. If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea or verdict or dismissal. (4)  Never have been convicted of crimes against children, violent crimes, or sex crimes, in accordance with state law. (5)  File a list of all drivers who will be applying for a driver's permit and indicate whether the drivers are company employees or independent contractors. (6)  Advise the department of the number of taxicabs the applicant will be operating, listing the taxicab's vehicle identification number (VIN), each taxicab's state license tag number, and the year, make and model of each taxicab in use. (7)  Submit with the application written consent to conduct a criminal history check signed by the applicant. (8)  Submit with the application payment of any fees required by this article. (9)  Provide the following information: a.  Business: 1.  Trade name and legal name of business (if different from trade name); 2.  Business location, mailing address and telephone number; 3.  Federal employer ID number or Social Security number; 4.  Form of business (sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, etc.). b.  Applicant: 1.  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms currently or previously used by the applicant; 2.  The current business and residence addresses of the applicant; 3.  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair. (10)  Submit proof of the applicant's compliance with the provisions of section 64-62 regarding liability insurance for each vehicle to be used, whether the vehicle belongs to the company or to an independent contract driver. (11)  Provide such further information as the director shall require. (b)  The application may also include, but shall not be limited to, the information required for an occupation tax certificate as provided in the Code of Ordinances of Albany, Georgia. (c)  Failure to furnish the required information, in the form required, may result in the denial of the application or the revocation of the license. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-24), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-61. - Issuance. (a)  It shall be the duty of the director to examine the application and to either grant or refuse the license, in writing, based upon the requirements set forth in this article. (b)  If the director finds that the applicant is not qualified to engage in the taxicab business, the application shall be denied and the license shall be refused. The applicant shall have the right to file an appeal from the decision of the director in refusing to issue a license to the commissioners as set forth in section 64-32. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-25), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-62. - Insurance requirements. (a)  No license shall be issued or continued in effect unless there is in full force and effect liability insurance for each vehicle authorized in an amount not less than that required by the state for liability insurance policies on automobiles, as presently set forth in O.C.G.A. § 33-34-4 and as may hereinafter be amended. Such liability insurance shall inure to and be for the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the conduct of a license holder or a license holder's servants or agents. Written documentation of the above-stated insurance coverage, signed by an authorized agent of the insurer, shall be filed with the code enforcement department and shall be kept in each vehicle at all times. Such insurance shall be issued by an insurance company properly licensed by the insurance commissioner of the state to do business in the state. The insurance policy shall identify by serial number all vehicles insured under the policy and shall contain a provision obligating the insurance company issuing such policy to give at least 30 days' written notice of cancellation or change in coverage to the code enforcement department. (b)  Before any policy of insurance required by this article is amended or voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice thereof shall be immediately given by the license holder, in writing, to the department, alteration or voidance of an insurance policy required by this article without adequate notice to the department shall be grounds for immediate suspension of the license. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-25), 6-25-2008; Ord. No. 09-100, § 2(29-25), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 64-63. - Suspension, denial or revocation of license. (a)  A license may be denied, suspended or revoked by the director for the following reasons: (1)  Furnishing fraudulent or untruthful information or omitting information requested in any application or report. (2)  Failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article. (3)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license. (4)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse. (5)  Violation of any provision of this article. (6)  Conviction of any act, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any act, which would disqualify a person from obtaining a license. (7)  Discontinuing operations for a period of more than 30 days, or failing to begin operations within 60 days of the date of issuance of a license. (8)  Failure to properly install or properly maintain the taxicab meter required by section 64-133. (b)  Prior to any suspension or revocation by the director, the license holder shall be given written notification of the action, which shall include the grounds for such action and notice of the license holder's right to appeal. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-26), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-64. - Renewal of license/occupational tax certificate.     All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year, including the year of issue. Licenses may be renewed only between November 15 and December 31 of each year for the following year. Permits not renewed by March 15 shall be void and such license holder must reapply as a new applicant in order to obtain a license. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-27), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-65. - License holders responsible for violations by drivers.     License holders under this article are responsible for violations of this article by their drivers, whether such drivers are direct employees or independent contractors. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-28), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-66. - Alteration of license prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully alter, deface, obliterate, or destroy a license issued pursuant to this article. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-29), 6-25-2008) 
Secs. 64-67—64-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAXICAB DRIVER REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 64-91. - Permit required. (a)  No person shall operate or drive a taxicab for the purpose of doing business in the city, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so operated or driven, unless the driver of such vehicle shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article. (b)  No license holder shall employ any driver who has not first met the requirements of this article and been issued a driver's permit. (c)  No application for a driver's permit will be processed unless the license holder affirms in writing that they intend to hire the applicant if the driver's permit is approved (letter of intent must accompany license application). (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-30), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-92. - Application. (a)  Each applicant for a driver's permit shall: (1)  Be at least 18 years of age; (2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service; (3)  Not have been convicted, pleaded guilty, pleaded nolo contendere, forfeited bond or been imprisoned, within a period of five years prior to the date of application for a permit, for violation of any of the following federal or state criminal offenses: criminal homicide; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs; illegal gambling, criminal trespass, public indecency, any theft or violence against person or property; peeping tom, leaving the scene of an accident; manslaughter resulting from the operation of a vehicle; racing on highways and streets; using a motor vehicle in fleeing or attempting to elude an officer; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle was used; perjury or false swearing; any crime of violence or theft or possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants; provided, however, that all applicants shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., relating to first offender status. If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea or verdict or dismissal. (4)  Never have been convicted of crimes against children, violent crimes, or sex crimes, in accordance with state law; (5)  Not possess a driver's history which contains more than five moving traffic violations in the past five years, or violations of traffic offenses totaling more than 20 points as designated by the state department of driver services; (6)  Submit an application to the department on forms provided by the department. Such application shall be sworn to by the applicant as true, correct and complete before a notary public and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: a.  Name; b.  Age; c.  Sex; d.  Date of birth; e.  Driver's license number or, if the applicant is not a U.S. citizen, the applicant's alien identification number; f.  Residence address and telephone number; g.  Name and address of the taxicab company for whom the applicant will work; h.  A complete disclosure of all arrests for criminal and traffic violations, including the date, charge, location, and disposition of each offense; i.  Employment history for the two years immediately proceeding the date of the application; j.  Such other relevant information as shall be required by the director. (7)  Provide authorization and any information necessary to enable the director to investigate the driver's background, criminal history, and traffic record; and (8)  Be of good character as determined by the aforesaid investigation. (b)  Each application shall be accompanied by: (1)  A valid class C state driver's license of the applicant. The license must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-58 and 40-5-64. (2)  A criminal history consent form signed by the applicant. (3)  Certification that the applicant has read and understands the provisions of this article. (4)  Two current two-inch by two-inch (approximately) full-face photographs of the applicant. (5)  Payment of the fees for the driver's permit and background investigation required under this article. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-31), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-93. - Permit fees.     There shall be an annual fee as determined by the mayor and board of commissioners of the city for a taxicab driver's permit issued under this article, copies of which shall be on file in the department and city clerk's office. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-32), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-94. - Permit and notice to be displayed. (a)  The driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be placed on display in the taxicab to be operated by the holder of the driver's permit in a display case or holder designed for that purpose on the dashboard facing the passenger compartment, in clear view of the passengers at all times when the taxicab is for hire. (b)  A notice provided by the director shall be on display on the front dashboard facing the passenger compartment. The notice shall contain sufficient information to allow the customer to contact the director concerning compliments or complaints about the taxicab or driver. (c)  Failure to comply will result in the following penalty: (1)  First offense. One day suspension; (2)  Second offense. One-week suspension; (3)  Third offense. Loss of driver's permit and $500.00 fine to the taxicab company. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-33), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-95. - Criminal history record check.     The director shall conduct an investigation into the criminal history of each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit. In addition to the criminal history consent referenced in this section, the applicant shall, upon request from the director, provide criminal history information from the state, any other state, or any political subdivision thereof. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-34), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-96. - Consideration of application. (a)  It shall be the duty of the director to examine the application and to either grant or refuse the driver's permit based upon the requirements set forth in this article. (b)  In the event the driver's permit is denied, the director shall notify the applicant in writing with the specific grounds for the denial and notice of the applicant's right to appeal pursuant to section 64-32. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-35), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-97. - Suspension, denial or revocation of driver's permit. (a)  A driver's permit may be denied, suspended or revoked by the director for the following reasons: (1)  Furnishing fraudulent or untruthful information or omitting information requested in any application or report. (2)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a permit. (3)  Violation of any provision of this article. (4)  A conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any act, which would disqualify a person from obtaining a permit. (5)  Considering the number and severity of violations of any traffic law while operating a taxicab. (6)  Failure to properly install or properly maintain the taxicab meter required by section 64-133. (b)  In the event that a permit is denied, suspended or revoked, the director shall notify the applicant in writing with the specific grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation and notice of the applicant's right to appeal. (c)  The director may immediately suspend a driver's permit or cause a vehicle to be removed from service if the director has reasonable cause to believe that the driver or vehicle present an immediate danger to the public health or safety. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-36), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-98. - Driving after suspension or revocation of driver's permit prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any driver to operate a taxicab for the purpose of carriage of passengers during any period in which that driver's permit is suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-37), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-99. - Renewal of driver's permits. (a)  All driver's permits shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year. Driver's permits may be renewed, upon application and payment of the required fees, unless the permit for the preceding period has been revoked or is under suspension. The driver shall surrender his or her expired driver's permit before a renewed driver's permit will be issued. (b)  Each applicant for renewal will be subject to a driver's history background check from the state department of driver services covering the previous calendar year. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-38), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-100. - Alteration of driver's permit or notices prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully alter, deface, obliterate, or destroy a driver's permit or a notice to passengers or cause or allow the same. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-39), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-101. - Driver's permit not assignable. (a)  Every person to whom a permit has been issued shall return same to the department upon discontinuing operation of a taxicab for the driver named on the driver's permit. Such driver's permit shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person or be valid for any other driver. Taxicab driver permit holders who change employment shall apply to the department for an updated driver's permit, which reflects the proper taxicab company for which the driver will be employed. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any driver to allow his or her permit to be used by any other person. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-40), 6-25-2008) 
Secs. 64-102—64-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONDITION OF TAXICAB 
Sec. 64-131. - Taxicab in mechanically and good working order; noncompliance; inspection. (a)  Each vehicle doing business in the city as a taxicab shall be mechanically sound and in good working order to ensure the safety of drivers, passengers, and the other drivers on the roadways. All headlights, taillights, brake lights, top lights, turn signals, license plate lights, windshield wipers and washers, all vehicle glass, window cranks or electric windows, door locks, trunk lid, trunk hood, door handles, exhaust system, bumpers, fenders, body, tires and other vehicle parts shall be in good condition and functioning properly. Every vehicle operating under this article shall be inspected annually by a certified ASE (auto service excellence) facility verifying that the vehicle meets the following minimum safety requirements or may be scheduled inspections through the city Fleet Management Division, Central Services Department: (1)  Tires shall not be retread and shall have at least three lines of noticeable tread depth, not less than 3/32-inch deep. (2)  Braking system must be fully functional and in good working order. (3)  Exhaust system must be complete and enable the taxicab to run quietly. (4)  Equipped with safety restraints for each passenger the vehicle is designed to carry. (5)  Have a minimum of three doors designed for passenger entry and exit. Each door must be functioning and in good repair. (6)  Have a spare tire and jack. (7)  Have a current state license registration tag displayed properly on the vehicle. (8)  Bumpers must be tightly secured. (9)  Paint shall not be faded; waxing and washing should be done at reasonable intervals; distinctive markings and colors applied pursuant to this article must be clearly legible. (10)  Shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. (b)  Taxicabs found to be not in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be removed from service immediately. (c)  No license holder or driver shall drive or operate any vehicle, which does not meet the minimum safety requirements as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. (d)  The department must be notified within ten calendar days of any taxicab being taken out of service for any reason other than temporary maintenance. Temporary maintenance is maintenance that will be completed within a 30-day period. (e)  All taxicabs operating in the city shall be no more than ten model years older than the current calendar year on or after January 1, 2008. (f)  Any taxicab shall be subject to inspection at any time and without formal notice by the director or the director's designee, as well as any employee of the city police department. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-41), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-132. - Identification of vehicles; display required. (a)  Taxicabs subject to the provisions of this article shall display, in colors contrasting with the color of the vehicle, on each side of the vehicle, the correct name or trade name and telephone number of the license holder. Markings displaying the name of the business shall be a minimum of four-inch letters and a maximum of ten-inch letters. Other lettering shall be in minimum of two-inch letters and a maximum of six-inch letters. All markings and lettering shall be professionally applied and shall be either painted or permanently affixed. Provided any taxi cabs which presently display the fare in 1½ inch letters may continue to use such 1½ inch letters. (b)  Taxicabs shall be assigned an identification number by the director that shall be displayed on the front and rear bumper of each taxicab. Identification numbers shall be a minimum of four inches and shall be reflective white, silver or gray and shall be painted or permanently affixed. Such number shall be separate and distinct from that on any other public vehicle or taxicab permitted in the City of Albany, Georgia. (c)  Taxicabs operated on the streets of the city shall display, as a part of its equipment, an identification insignia on the top, which shall be electrically lit at night, and which top light shall carry either the name of the taxicab company, the word "taxi" or "taxicab" or "cab"; provided, however, that during the period in which a taxicab is occupied and under hire by a passenger, the identification insignia on the top of the vehicle shall not be lit. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-42), 6-25-2008; Ord. No. 09-100, § 2(29-42), 1-12-2009) 
Sec. 64-133. - Taximeters required. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Basic distance rate means the charge for distance for all intervals except the initial interval.     Basic time rate means the charge for the time for all intervals except the initial interval.     Cleared means a taximeter that is inoperative with respect to all fare when no indication of fare or extras is shown and when all parts are in those positions in which they are designed to be when the vehicle on which the taximeter is installed is not engaged by a passenger.     Cold tire pressure means the pressure in a tire when the tire is at ambient temperature.     Face means a taximeter upon which passenger charges are indicated.     Fare means that portion of the charge for the hire of a vehicle that is automatically calculated by a taximeter through the operation of the distance or time mechanism.     Fifth wheel test means a distance test similar to a road test except that the distance traveled by the vehicle under test is determined by a mechanism known as a "fifth wheel" that is attached to the vehicle and that independently measures and indicates the distance.     Flag means a plate at the end of the lever arm or similar part by which the operating condition of the taximeter is controlled.     Hired means a taximeter that is operative with respect to all applicable indications of fares or extras. The indications of fare include time and distance where applicable unless by another indication of the term "time not recording" or an equivalent expression.     Initial distance of time interval means the interval corresponding to the initial money drop.     Money drop means an increment of fare indication. The initial money drop is the first increment of fare indication following activation of the taximeter.     Multiple-tariff taximeter means one that may be set to calculate fares at any one of two or more rates.     Operating tire pressure means the pressure in a tire when the vehicle has been driven for at least five miles or eight kilometers.     Road test means a distance test, over a measured course, of a complete taximeter assembly when installed on a vehicle, the mechanism being actuate as a result of vehicle travel.     Rolling circumference means the straight-line distance traveled per revolution of the wheel that actuates the taximeter. If more than one wheel actuates the taximeter, the rolling circumference is the average distance traveled per revolution of the wheels.     Simulated road test means a distance test during which the taximeter may be actuated by some means other than road travel. The distance traveled is either measured by a properly calibrated roller device or computed from rolling circumference and wheel-turn data.     Single-tariff taximeter means one that calculates fares at a single rate only.     Subsequent distance or time intervals means the intervals corresponding to money drops following the initial money drop.     Taximeter means any instrument or device attached to a vehicle and designed to measure mechanically or electronically the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the times the vehicle travels or is in waiting and to indicate the fare to be charged. (b)  All taxicabs operated under the authority of this article, which charges are determined by mileage or by the length of time the vehicle is used, shall be equipped with a taximeter. The taximeter shall be fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times day and night, and, after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. All taximeters shall be installed, properly connected and repaired as prescribed by the manufacturer of such meter. Each taximeter shall have thereon some device, which designates when the taximeter is engaged. Any taximeter shall be subject to inspection at any time by the director, any code enforcement officer or any employee of the city police department. (c)  Taxicabs operating with nonelectronic taximeters shall be furnished with a sign approved by the director immediately adjacent to the taximeter which explains the way the fare shall be calculated if the taximeter reaches its highest fare before the passenger's destination is reached. The sign shall be pointed out to the passenger by the driver at the beginning of the trip. (d)  A taximeter shall be equipped with a primary indicating element. (e)  Except when a taximeter is being cleared, the primary indicating elements shall be susceptible of advancement only by the rotation of the vehicle wheels or by the time mechanism. (f)  Except when a taximeter is being cleared, indications of fare shall be clearly visible at all times and at least ten millimeters in height for the fare and four millimeters in height for all other indications. (g)  When a taximeter designed to calculate fares upon the basis of a combination of distance traveled and time elapsed is operative with respect to fare indication, the fare-indicting mechanism shall be actuated by the distance mechanism whenever the vehicle is in motion at such a speed that the rate of distance revenue equals or exceeds the time rate and may be actuated by the time mechanism whenever the vehicle speed is less than this and when the vehicle is not in motion. Means shall be provided for the vehicle operator to render the time mechanism either operative or inoperative with respect to the fare-indicating mechanism. (h)  Whenever the indicating elements of a taximeter are set to indicate a charge for the hire of the vehicle, the character of the fare indication shall be clearly shown on the taximeter face. When a taximeter is cleared, the indication "not registering," "vacant" or an equivalent expression shall be shown. (i)  Whenever a single-tariff taximeter is set so as to register charges, the indication "registering," "hired" or an equivalent expression shall be shown. (j)  Whenever a multi-tariff taximeter is set so as to register charges, the basis for the particular tariff for which it is set shall be shown. (k)  Indications of fare shall be displayed through and entirely protected by glass or other suitable transparent material securely attached to the housing of the taximeter. (l)  A taximeter shall calculate fares only upon the basis of distance traveled, time elapsed or a combination of distance traveled and time elapsed. (m)  A control lever-arm knob, handle or other convenient and effective means shall be provided to set the taximeter mechanism for the desired operating condition and to clear the taximeter. (n)  The several positions of the control level shall be mechanically defined and displacement from any of these positions shall be sufficiently obstructed that the accidental or inadvertent changing of the operating condition of the taximeter is improbable or controlled by a button or switch. Possible movement of this control lever to an operating position immediately following its movement to the cleared position shall automatically be displayed enough to permit the taximeter mechanism to come to complete rest in the cleared position. (o)  Adequate provisions shall be made for affixing lead and wire seals to a taximeter and to other parts required for service operation of a complete installation on a vehicle so that no adjustments, alterations or replacements affecting in any way the accuracy or indications of the device or the assembly can be made without mutilating the seals. The sealing means shall be such that it is not necessary to disassemble or remove any part of the device or of the vehicle to apply or inspect the seals. (p)  To determine compliance with distance tolerances, a distance test of a taximeter shall be conducted utilizing one or more of the following test methods: (1)  Road test. A road test consists of driving the vehicle over a precisely measured road course. (2)  Fifth wheel test. A fifth wheel test consists of driving the vehicle in a simulated road test; 150 pounds or 70 kilograms of test weights may be substituted in lieu of the second person. (q)  Maintenance and acceptance tolerances for taximeters shall be as follows: (1)  On overregistration, one percent of the interval under test. (2)  On underregistration, four percent of the interval under test, with an added tolerance of 100 feet or 30 miles whenever the initial interval is included in the interval under test. (r)  Maintenance and acceptance tolerances on individual time intervals shall be as follows: (1)  On overregistration, three seconds per minute (five percent). (2)  On underregistration, nine seconds per minute (15 percent) on the initial interval and six seconds per minute (ten percent) on subsequent intervals. (s)  When mounted upon a vehicle, a taximeter shall be so located that its face can be seen by a passenger from the rear compartment of the vehicle. Adequate lighting facilities shall be provided for so illuminating the face of the taximeter that the indications thereof may be conveniently read by the passenger and the face of the taximeter shall be so illuminated whenever the taximeter is in operation and artificial illumination is necessary for the convenient reading of its indications. (t)  The distance and time rates for which a taximeter is adjusted shall be given. (u)  A reinspection is required whenever a taximeter has been damaged or repairs that might in any way affect the accuracy of its indications have been made or any of the official security seals have been mutilated. Such device shall not thereafter be used until it has been officially examined and reapproved. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-44), 6-25-2008) 
Secs. 64-134—64-164. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OPERATING REGULATIONS 
Sec. 64-165. - Maximum rates and charges which may be imposed for taxicabs services. (a)  Established. The rates and charges which may be imposed for taxicab services shall be as established by the board of commissioners. (b)  Maximum fares permitted to be charged. The following shall be the maximum fares which taxicab owners and/or operators shall be permitted to charge, and it shall be unlawful and punishable pursuant to section 1-17 of the city Code to charge fares in excess thereof: (1)  Mileage rates. $2.15 for the first one-ninth mile or fraction thereof; $0.25 for each additional one-ninth mile or fraction thereof; (2)  Waiting time. $17.00 per hour waiting; this amount is easily applied and equates to 0.30 per minute easily tracked by the consumer vs. $17.00 per hour equaling 0.28333 minutes; (3)  Luggage. Applies to luggage loaded and unloaded by the drive; there will be no charge for one suitcase or similar item (excluding grocery items, and shopping parcels); $0.75 for each additional piece of luggage or similar item; (4)  Flat rates. a.  $15.00 for the first individual and $6.00 for each additional individual where a taxicab transports an individual to and from the Southwest Georgia Regional Airport to a hotel located in downtown Albany; b.  $17.00 for the first individual and $6.00 for each additional individual where a taxicab transports an individual to and from the Southwest Georgia Regional Airport to a hotel located in proximity of the Albany Mall; c.  $6.50 for the first individual and $2.50 for each additional individual where a taxicab transports an individual to and from any location within the central business district as defined in section 34-114. (5)  Hourly rate. In lieu of the above rate, and provided both the taxicab owner or operator and the individual are agreeable thereto, taxicabs may be hired at a maximum hourly rate of $18.00 per hour. (6)  Gas surcharge. The city commission shall be authorized to provide to taxi owners/operators the authority to impose a gas surcharge for each trip; such a charge if authorized shall be added to the trip rate (i.e., a gas surcharge of $1.25 will increase the increase mileage rate of the first one-ninth mile from $2.15 to $3.40). Any gas surcharge shall be good for one year unless changed or approved again by the board of city commissioners. (c)  Rate card dispayed. Every taxicab operated under this section shall have a rate card setting forth the authorized rates of fare displayed in such a place as to be in view of all passengers. (d)  Taximeter furnished; design and operations. All taxicabs must be equipped with a taximeter that is clearly visible to all passengers. The taximeter must be of standard design, construction and operation, and a room/doom light showing when the taxi is employed or not employed. As part of the inspection process outlined in section 64-133, all taximeters are subject to inspection by the director code enforcement director/chief of police. Upon an inspection that discloses the taximeter to be inaccurate, the taxicab must immediately cease operation. (e)  Posting of fares and charges. Copies of all fares and charges shall be posted in each taxicab and shall be of such size and positioned in such a manner as to be plainly visible to passengers being transported in the vehicle. (f)  Rate schedule. Rate schedule shall include rates for mileage, waiting time, extra passengers, excess baggage, and flat rates. (g)  Time and milage. No charge shall be made for time and/or mileage for traveling to the location of a prospective passenger. (h)  Passenger receipts. The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, on which shall be the name of the taxicab company, the taxicab number, name and permit number of the driver, trip origin and destination, amount of charges, and date of transaction. (i)  Penalty offenses. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this section will result in the following penalties: (1)  First offense, warning; (2)  Second offense, suspension of vehicle's taxi license for one week; (3)  Third offense, suspension of vehicle for 30 days and a fine to the taxi company of $1,000.00. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-45), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-166. - Failure, refusal to pay fare.     It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any vehicle having a valid driver's permit under this article after having hired the same, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-46), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-167. - Prohibitions of drivers.     No driver shall engage in selling or soliciting for the sale of intoxicating beverages, illegal drugs or produce, or solicit for prostitution, or use their taxicab for any purpose other than the transportation of passengers. This section shall not prohibit drivers from transporting passengers along with their purchased merchandise, which is subject to lawful sale in the city. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-47), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-168. - Occupancy.     No taxicab operating within the city shall carry more passengers than that recommended by the manufacturer of the vehicle or for which there is individual seating available. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-48), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-169. - Driver appearance.     All drivers shall be neat in appearance while on duty, clean in person and dress. No person shall operate a taxicab without shoes. A driver's clothing and shoes shall be neat and in good repair, free of holes, tears, fading, stains or soil. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-49), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-170. - Refusal to transport orderly passengers. (a)  No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly persons upon request unless such taxicab is previously engaged or is unable or forbidden to do so by provisions of this Code or state law. (b)  A driver may refuse to convey a passenger if such driver has reasonable cause to believe that the person intends to violate any law of the city, state or the United States. (c)  The provisions of this section are not intended to force a driver to convey a passenger if such driver has reasonable cause to believe that doing so places himself or others in danger. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-50), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-171. - Availability of service.     Taxicab companies operating under the provisions of this article shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use a taxicab. License holders shall maintain a central place of business from where they shall receive calls and dispatch services. The taxicab company shall answer all calls received by it for services in the city as soon as it can do so and, if such services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, it shall notify the prospective passengers of the estimated time in which the call can be answered and give the reason therefor. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-51), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-172. - Records and reports. (a)  Drivers must maintain daily trip logs upon which shall record all trips made by each vehicle each day, showing time and place of origin, destination of each trip and amount of fare and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle. The driver shall return all completed trip logs to the taxicab company at least weekly. Each taxicab company shall retain and preserve all drivers' trip logs for a minimum of 12 months. Trip logs are subject to inspection by the director and/or the city police department or their agents or designees upon request. (b)  License holders shall maintain the records required by this article at a place readily accessible for examination by the director, city police department, or their designees and access shall not be denied at any time of normal operation of business. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-52), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-173. - Sleeping, lounging or lying in taxicabs prohibited.     While any taxicab is parked or is otherwise in service, the driver will remain awake and alert at all times. Sleeping, lounging in a reclining posture, or lying in the taxicab is prohibited. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-53), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-174. - Report of charges.     Drivers shall report to the department any charges filed against them by any law enforcement officer, including, but not limited to, minor traffic charges, within 72 hours of the charge being made. Upon request by the director, said driver shall provide such details and/or documents as are available concerning such charges. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-54), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-175. - Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers. (a)  No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curbside thereof. The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment at all times when such vehicle is upon the street, provided further that nothing herein shall be held to prohibit driver from alighting to the side of the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers in and out of the vehicle. (b)  No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud tone of voice or in any manner obstruct the movement of any person or vehicle, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting their patronage. (c)  Drivers shall not receive or discharge passengers in the street but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk or to the extreme right-hand side of the street and there receive or discharge passengers, except on one-way streets where drivers may pull to the sidewalk or extreme right-hand or left-hand side of the street. (d)  No driver shall park or stand on any private property without the permission of the owner of said property, nor shall such driver park adjacent to clearly marked yellow curbs or "No Parking" zones. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-55), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-176. - Establishment and use of taxicab stands.     It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any taxicab stand within the city that causes taxicabs to queue on a street. Whenever any such taxicab stand is established, such taxicab stand may be used by taxicabs upon a rotation basis of "first-come-first-served." Drivers shall pull into taxicab stands from the rear and shall advance forward as the taxicabs ahead depart. Drivers shall stay within five feet of their taxicabs and shall not solicit passengers or engage in loud or boisterous talk while at the taxicab stand. Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding any taxicab of choice that is parked at a taxicab stand. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-56), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-177. - Telephone stands.     It shall be unlawful for any person to install or attach any telephone or similar device on any telephone post, telegraph post, tree post, or on the side of any building in any street, sidewalk, alley or lane in the city for the purpose of using such telephone in connection with the taxicab business. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-57), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-178. - Property left in taxicabs by passengers.     Any driver or permit holder discovering in any taxicab under his or her control personal property, which was lost or left therein by a passenger of such vehicle shall report such loss and deliver such property to the office of the taxicab company within 12 hours after the discovery of such property. The driver's report shall include brief particulars to enable the taxicab company to identify the owner of the property. The permit holder shall ensure that all reasonable steps are taken to locate the owner and return said property. The taxicab company shall retain the property on behalf of the owner for at least 60 days. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-58), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-179. - Smoking prohibited when taxicab is occupied by passenger. (a)  In accordance with the Albany Clean Indoor Air Ordinance, it shall be unlawful for the driver to smoke in such taxicab when one or more passengers occupy the taxicab. (b)  "No Smoking" signs with letters not less than one inch in height or signs with the international no smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) not less than three inches in diameter shall be clearly and conspicuously posted inside the passenger compartment of the taxicab by the driver or taxicab company owner. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-59), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-180. - Taxicab movement prohibited under certain circumstances.     No driver shall collect fares, make change, or take on or discharge passengers while such driver's taxicab is in motion. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-60), 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 64-181. - Compliance with laws and ordinances; safety.     Drivers shall operate such taxicab in accordance with the laws of the state and this Code. Drivers shall exercise due regard for the safety, comfort, and convenience of their passengers and the general public. (Ord. No. 08-120, § 2(29-61), 6-25-2008) 