THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA ____________ Published by Order of the Board of City Commissioners 2009 ____________ > OFFICIALS of the CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Willie Adams, Jr., M.D. Mayor ____________ Jon Howard Dorothy Hubbard Morris Gurr Roger Marietta Bob Langstaff, Jr. Tommie Postell City Commissioners ____________ Alfred D. Lott City Manager ____________ C. Nathan Davis City Attorney ____________ Sonja Tolbert City Clerk PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented through Ord. No. 07-111, adopted April 24, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of city commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Shelly Hayes, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Alfred D. Lott and city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. © Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. 2009. AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED 09-141 AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Albany, Georgia and it is hereby ordained by authority of same:     Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 64, each inclusive, is adopted.     Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 22, 2009 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.     Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.     Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of City Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.     Section 5. Ordinances adopted after September 22, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.     Section 6. The last sentence of Section 38-69(d) of the Code is changed to read "within five business days."     Section 7. The reference at lines 2 and 3 of Section 52-33 of the Code "but not less than semiannually" is deleted.     Section 8. There is added in alphabetical order to Section 60-127 of the Code "PTP means Pilot Testing Program."     Section 9. To the list of priority pollutants at Section 60-196(c) of the Code, there is added "Bis (2-chloroisopropyl) ether" and "1, 12-Benzofluoranthene" is deleted and in its place is "11, 12-Benzofluoranthene."     Section 10. The penultimate sentence of Section 60-131 (f) of the Code is changed to read "If no building permit is required, the appropriate charge shall be paid to the city at the time the water meter is installed or the size changed."     Section 11. The last sentence of Section 60-949(1) of the Code is changed to read "For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utility facilities is defined as a strip of land at least four (4) feet wide, but not wider than the width of the utility facility plus two (2) feet on either side thereof."     Section 12. This ordinance in no way changes any provisions of the City Charter and shall become effective upon its adoption. /s/         Dorothy B. Hubbard       Mayor Pro Tem   ATTEST: /s/         Sonja Tolbert       City Clerk   Adopted: December 15, 2009 Introduced by Commissioner:  Postell                       Date(s) read:  Dec. 15, 2009       
Chapter 30 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Fair housing laws, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-200 et seq. 
Sec. 30-19. - Policy; purpose and construction of article. (a)  It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city. (b)  The general purposes of this article are: (1)  To provide for execution in the city of policies embodied in title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (42 USC 3601 et seq.), as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988; (2)  To safeguard all individuals from discrimination in any aspect relating to the sale, rental, or financing of dwellings or in the provision of brokerage services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental of a dwelling because of that individuals race, color, religion, sex, disability or handicap, familial status, or national origin; (3)  To promote the elimination of discrimination in any aspect relating to the sale, rental, or financing of dwellings or in the provision of brokerage services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental of a swelling because of a person's race, color, religion, sex, disability or handicap, familial status, or national origin; and (4)  To promote the protection of each individual's interest in personal dignity and freedom from humiliation and the individual's freedom to take up residence wherever such individual chooses; to secure the city against domestic strife and unrest which would menace its democratic institutions; to preserve the public safety, health, and general welfare; and to further the interests, rights, and privileges of individuals within the city. (c)  This article shall be broadly construed to further the general purposes stated in this section and the special purposes of the particular provision involved. (Code 1985, § 14.5-10; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-200, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-20. - Definitions. (a)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-3-201 (Fair Housing—Definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 8-3-201, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 8-3-201. (b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commission means the Albany Fair Housing Commission, or a panel of three members of said commission.     Complainant means the person, including the director, who files a complaint under section 30-26.     Conciliation means the attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint, or by the investigation of such complaint, through informal negotiations involving the aggrieved person, the respondent, and the director.     Director means the director of the city fair housing commission created under section 30-24.     Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 30-21.     Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, or fiduciaries.     Respondent means: (1)  The person or other entity or the state or local government or agency accused in a complaint of an unfair housing practice; and (2)  Any other person or entity identified in the course of an investigation and notified as required with respect to respondents so identified under section 30-26(d). (Code 1985, § 14.5-11; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-201, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-21. - Unlawful practices in selling or renting dwellings; exceptions. (a)  Expect as exempted by subsection (b) or (d) of this section or section 30-23, it shall be unlawful: (1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin; (2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin; (3)  To make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin or an intention to make any such preference, limitations, or discrimination; (4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; (5)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin or with a disability; (6)  To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of: a.  That buyer or renter; b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; c.  Any person associated with that buyer or renter; or (7)  To discriminate against a person shall be follows: a.  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connections with such dwelling, because of a disability of: 1.  That person; 2.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 3.  Any person associated with that person; or b.  For purposes of this subsection, discrimination includes: 1.  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with disabilities, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, expect that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 2.  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; 3.  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that: (i)  The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities; (ii)  All the doors are designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons with disabilities in wheelchairs; and (iii)  All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: A.  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; B.  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environment controls in accessible locations; C.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and D.  Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. c.  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usableness for physically disabled people (commonly cited as "ANSI A117.1") suffices to satisfy requirements of subsection (a)(7)b.3(iii) of this section. d.  In regard to persons with disabilities, discrimination includes, in connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct dwellings in such manner that the dwellings have at least one building entrance on an accessible route, unless it is impractical to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. (b)  Exceptions. (1)  Nothing in this section, other than subsection (a)(3) of this section, shall apply to: a.  Any single-family dwellings sold or rented by an owner, if: 1.  Such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family dwellings at any one time; 2.  Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on such owner's behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three single-family dwellings at any one time; 3.  Such dwelling is sold or rented: (i)  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employees or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and (ii)  Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection (c) of this section; but nothing in this subsection (b)(1)a.3.(ii) shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or b.  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as the owner's residence. (2)  In the case of the sale of any such single-family dwelling by a private individual owner not residing in such dwelling at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such dwelling prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period. (c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: (1)  Such person has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; (2)  Such person has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or (3)  Such person is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. (d)  Nothing contained in this section shall require that a dwelling be made available for rental or lease to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. (Code 1985, § 14.5-12; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-202, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-22. - Discrimination in residential real estate related transactions; appraisals. (a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the term "residential real estate related transaction" means any of the following: (1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance: a.  For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or b.  Secured by residential real estate; or (2)  The selling, brokerage, or appraising of residential real property. (b)  Discrimination prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. (c)  Other factors that can be taken into consideration. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status. (Code 1985, § 14.5-13; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-204, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-23. - Permissible limitations in sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings by religious organizations or private clubs; housing for older persons. (a)  Permissible limitations. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preferences to such persons unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. (b)  Housing for older persons. The following shall be the provisions for housing for older persons: (1)  Definition. As used in this subsection, the term "housing for older persons" means housing: a.  Provided under any state or federal program that the director determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons as defined in the state or federal program; b.  Intended for, and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older; or c.  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. In determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this subsection, the director shall develop regulations which require at least the following factors: 1.  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or, if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; 2.  That at least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and 3.  The publication of and adherence to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. (2)  Limitations. Nothing in this article limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. The provisions in this article regarding familial status shall not apply with respect to housing for older persons. (3)  Requirements to be met. Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons by reason of: a.  Persons residing in such housing as of March 12, 1989, who do not meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(1)b. or c. of this section; provided, however, that new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(1)b. or c. of this section; or b.  Unoccupied units; provided, however, that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(1)b. or c. of this section. (4)  Conviction applicability. Nothing in this article prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. (Code 1985, § 14.5-14; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-205, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-24. - Powers and duties of director; housing and urban development programs of other agencies and departments. (a)  The authority and responsibility for administering this article shall be vested in the director of the city fair housing commission. (b)  The director may delegate any of the director's functions, duties, and powers to employees of the commission or to boards of such employees, including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing determining, ordering, certifying, reporting, or otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this article. (c)  All city departments and agencies shall administer their programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner to affirmatively further the purposes of this article and shall cooperate with the director to further such purposes. (d)  The director shall: (1)  Make studies with respect to the nature and extent of discriminatory housing from such studies; (2)  Publish and disseminate reports, recommendations, and information derived from such studies; (3)  Cooperate with and render technical assistance to local and other public or private agencies, organizations, institutions which are formulating or carrying on programs to prevent or eliminate discriminatory housing practices; (4)  Administrate the programs and activities relating to housing in a manner affirmatively to further the policies of this article; (5)  Adopt, promulgate, amend, and rescind, subject to the approval of the board of city commissioners after giving proper notice and hearings to all interested parties pursuant to the Georgia Administrative Procedure Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-13-1 et seq.), such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article; (6)  Cooperate with the United States Department of Housing Urban Development created by section 10(b) of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 (79 Stat. 667) and with other federal and local agencies the purposes of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 81), as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (102 Stat. 1619), and to cooperate with other federal and local agencies in order to achieve the purposes of this article; (7)  Accept gifts, bequests, grants, or other public or private payments on behalf of the city and pay such moneys into the city treasury; (8)  Accept on behalf of the city reimbursement pursuant to section 810 of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 85), as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (102 Stat. 1625), for services rendered to assist the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; and (9)  Secure from, and maintain with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, status as a "certified agency" under section 810 of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 85), as amended by the Fair Housing Act of 1988 (102 Stat. 1625), and as provided by the rules and regulations of said department. (e)  In any case where the federal department of housing and urban development has initiated an investigation or any action or proceedings against any person relative to any acts or omissions by such person which may be in violation of this article, the director shall have no authority to initiate or pursue against such person any investigation, civil action, or administrative enforcement covered by the provisions of this article with regard to the same acts or omissions or facts or circumstances to which the federal investigation or proceedings are applicable. (Code 1985, § 14.5-15; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-206, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-25. - Educational and conciliatory activities; conferences; consultation as to extent of discrimination; reports.     The director shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as in the director's judgment will further the purpose of this article. The director shall call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with this article and the director's suggested means of implementing this article and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement. The director shall consult with city officials and other interested parties to learn the extent, if any, to which housing discrimination exists in connection with director's enforcement of this article. The director shall issue reports on such conferences and consultations as the director deems appropriate. (Code 1985, § 14.5-16; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-207, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-26. - Discriminatory housing practice complaint procedures. (a)  An aggrieved person may, not later than one year after an alleged discriminatory housing practice has occurred or terminated, file a complaint with the director alleging such discriminatory housing practice. The director, on the director's own initiative, may also file such a complaint. Complaints shall be in writing and under oath and shall contain such information and be in such form as the director requires. Upon the filing of a complaint under this subsection, the director shall serve notice upon the aggrieved person acknowledging the filing and advising the aggrieved person of procedural time limits and the choice of forums provided under this article. (b)  The director shall, not later than ten days after the filing of a complaint or the identification of an addition respondent under subsection (d) of this section, serve on the respondent a notice identifying the alleged discriminatory housing practice and advising such respondent of the procedural rights and obligations under this article, together with a copy of the original complaint. Each respondent may file, not later than ten days after receipt of notice from the director, an answer to the complaint. (c)  Complaints and answers shall be verified and may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. (d)  A person who is not named as a respondent in a complaint, but who is identified as a respondent in the course of an investigation, may be joined as an additional or substitute respondent upon written notice to such person from the director as provided in subsection (b) of this section. In addition to meeting the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the notice shall explain the basis for the director's belief that such person is properly joined as a respondent. (Code 1985, § 14.5-17; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-208, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-27. - Investigations; conciliation agreements; final report; procedure on breach of conciliation agreement; disclosure of investigative information; action for temporary relief; transmittal of information where basis for action believed to exist. (a)  The director shall investigate an alleged discriminatory housing practice and complete such investigation within 100 days after the filing of a complaint unless it is impracticable to do so. If the director is unable to complete the investigation within 100 days after the filing of a complaint, the director shall notify the complainant and respondent of the reasons for the failure to complete the investigation. (b)  During the period beginning with the filing of such complaint and ending with the filing of a charge or a dismissal by the director, the director shall, to the extent feasible, engage in conciliation with respect to such complaint. A conciliation agreement arising out of such conciliation shall be an agreement between the respondent and the complainant and shall be subject to approval by the director. A conciliation agreement may provide for binding arbitration of the dispute arising from the complaint. Any such arbitration that results from a conciliation agreement may award appropriate relief, including monetary relief. Each conciliation agreement shall be made public unless the complainant and respondent otherwise agree, and the director determines that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of this article. (c)  At the end of each investigation under this section, the director shall prepare a final investigative report containing the following: (1)  The names and dates of contacts with witnesses; (2)  A summary and the dates of correspondence and other contacts with the aggrieved person and the respondent; (3)  A summary description of other pertinent records; (4)  A summary of witness statements; and (5)  Answers to interrogatories. A final report under this subsection may be amended if additional evidence is later discovered. (d)  Whenever the director has reasonable cause to believe that a respondent has breached a conciliation agreement, the director shall refer the matter to the city attorney with a recommendation that a civil action be filed for the enforcement of such agreement. (e)  Investigation information. (1)  Nothing said or done in the course of conciliation under this article may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this article without the written consent of the parties concerned. (2)  Notwithstanding subsection (e)(1) of this section, the director shall make available to the aggrieved person and the respondent at any time upon request following completion of the director's investigation information derived from an investigation and any final investigative report relating to that investigation. (f)  Legal actions. (1)  If the director concludes at any time following the filing of a complaint that prompt judicial action is necessary to carry out the provisions of this article, the director may authorize a civil action for appropriate temporary or preliminary relief pending final disposition of the complaint under this section. Upon such authorization, the city attorney may commence and maintain such an action. Any temporary restraining order or other order granting preliminary or temporary relief shall be issued in accordance with the Georgia Civil Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 9-11-1 et seq.). The commencement of a civil action under this subsection does not affect the initiation or continuation of administrative proceedings under this section and sections 30-30 and 30-31. (2)  Whenever the director has reason to believe that a basis may exist for the commencement of proceedings against any respondent under section 30-35(a) or for proceedings by any governmental licensing or supervisory authorities, the director shall transmit the information upon which such belief is based to the city attorney, or to such authorities, as the case may be. (Code 1985, § 14.5-18; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-209, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-28. - Procedure on filing of discriminatory housing practice complaint. (a)  The director shall, within 100 days after filing the complaint, determine based on the facts whether reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, unless it is impracticable to do so or unless the director has approved a conciliation agreement with respect to the complaint. If the director is unable to make the determination within 100 days after the filing of the complaint, the director shall notify the complainant and respondent in writing of the reasons for not doing so. (b)  Issuing a charge. (1)  If the director determines that reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the director shall, except as provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section, immediately issue a charge on behalf of the aggrieved person. (2)  The charge shall consist of a short and plain statement of the facts upon which the director has found reasonable cause to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, shall be based on the final investigative report, and need not be limited to the facts or grounds alleged in the complaint. (3)  If, after investigation, the director determines that the matter involves the legality of any state or local zoning or other land use law or ordinance, the director shall immediately refer the matter to the city attorney for appropriate action instead of issuing such charge. (c)  If the director determines that no reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the director shall promptly dismiss the complaint. The director shall make public disclosure of each such dismissal. The director may not issue a charge under this section regarding an alleged discriminatory housing practice after the beginning of the trial of a civil action commenced by the aggrieved party under an act of congress or a state law, seeking relief with respect to that discriminatory housing practice. After the director issues a charge under this section, the director shall cause a copy thereof to be served on each respondent named in such charge, together with a notice of opportunity for a hearing at a time and place specified in the notice, and on each aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint was filed. (Code 1985, § 14.5-19; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-211, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-29. - Subpoenas and discovery; penalties for violations. (a)  The director may issue subpoenas and order discovery in aid of investigations and hearings under this article. Such subpoenas and discovery may be ordered to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or discovery were ordered or served in aid of a civil action in superior court in which the investigation is taking place. (b)  Witnesses summoned by a subpoena under this section shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as witnesses in proceedings in superior courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a party shall be paid by the party. (c)  Penalties for violations. (1)  Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents, or other evidence, if it is such person's power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or other lawful order under subsection (a) of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. (2)  Any person who, with intent thereby to mislead another person in any proceeding under this article: a.  Makes or causes to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any report, account, record, or other document produced pursuant to subpoena or other lawful order under subsection (a) of this section; b.  Willfully neglects or fails to make or to cause to be made full, true, and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records, or other documents; or c.  Willfully mutilates, alters, or by any other means falsifies any documentary evidence; shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $1,000.00. (Code 1985, § 14.5-20; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-212, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-30. - City action for enforcement; fines; damages; civil action by local agency; administrative proceeding. (a)  City action for enforcement. (1)  When a charge is filed to initiate an administrative complaint under section 30-26, a complaint, a respondent, or an aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint was filed may elect to have the claims asserted in that charge decided in a civil action brought by the city attorney on behalf of the aggrieved person as provided under subsection (a)(2) of this section in lieu of a hearing under subsection (d)(1)a. or b. of this section. The election must be made not later than 20 days after the receipt by the electing person of service, the person making such election shall give notice of doing so to the director and to all other complainants and respondents to whom the charge relates. (2)  If the director has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance or as a result of an investigation under section 30-27 finds that there is reasonable cause to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred, at the recommendation of the director, the city attorney, after reviewing the director's findings and determining that such charge is well grounded in fact and warranted by law, shall bring an action in the name of the city on behalf of the aggrieved person seeking relief under this section in a superior court. (3)  If an election is made under subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section, the director shall authorize and, not later than 30 days after the election is made, the city attorney, after reviewing the director's charge and determining that such charge is well grounded in fact and warranted by law, shall commence a civil action on behalf of the aggrieved person seeking relief under this section in a superior court. (b)  Whenever an action filed in court pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section or section 30-34 or 30-35 comes to trial, the director shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary compliance. (c)  Fines and damages. (1)  The court may impose the following fines if the respondent has been adjudged to have committed a discriminatory housing practice: a.  Up to $10,000.00, if the respondent has not previously been found guilty of committing a discriminatory housing practice; b.  Up to $25,000.00, if the respondent has been found guilty of committing one prior discriminatory housing practice within the preceding five years; or c.  Up to $50,000.00, if the respondent has been found guilty of committing two or more discriminatory housing practices within the preceding seven years. (2)  The court may award reasonable attorney's fees and costs to the director or aggrieved person in any action in which the director or aggrieved person prevails or to the respondent in any action in which the respondent prevails only upon a showing that the action is frivolous, unreasonable, or without foundation. (3)  In addition to the remedies set forth in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section, the court may award actual damages and punitive damages to the aggrieved person. Punitive damages awarded under this subsection may be awarded only when the evidence shows that the respondent's action showed willful misconduct, malice, fraud, wantonness, oppression, or that entire want of care which would raise the presumption of conscious indifference to consequences or to the rights of the aggrieved party. (d)  Administrative proceeding. (1)  If the director is unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this article and has reasonable cause to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred: a.  The director may institute an administrative proceeding under the Georgia Administrative Procedure Act O.C.G.A. § 50-13-1 et seq.; or b.  The person aggrieved may request administrative relief under the Georgia Administrative Procedure Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-13-1 et seq.), within 20 days after receipt of service of a charge filed under section 30-28. When an administrative hearing is to be instituted under subsection (d)(1)a. or b. of this section, the director shall refer the case to the fair housing commission to conduct a hearing in accordance with this article. The fair housing commission shall designate a panel of three of its members, one of which must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state, and the tribunal shall have all the power and authority granted to agencies in conducting hearings and rendering final orders under the Georgia Administrative Procedure Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-13-1 et seq.), including, but not limited to subpoena power. (2)  Not more than seven working days after the case has been referred to the fair housing commission, the director shall serve on the respondent and the person aggrieved person's attorney by registered or certified mail, a written notice together with a copy of the complaint requiring the respondent to answer the charges contained therein at hearing before the fair housing commission at a time and place specified in the notice. Such notice must contain all general and specific charges against the respondent. (3)  The respondent shall serve an answer with the fair housing commission by registered or certified mail or statutory overnight delivery not more than 20 working days after receipt of the notice of hearing, which 20 working days may be extended by the fair housing commission in the fair housing commission's discretion for an additional time not to exceed ten working days. The respondent's answer must show by a certificate of service that the respondent has served a copy of the answer on the complainant or the complainant's attorney at the last known address of the complainant or the complainant's attorney where the complainant is represented by an attorney. Upon leave of the fair housing commission, the complainant may amend the charges contained in the notice of hearing. The respondent may amend an answer at any time prior to the hearing or, upon leave of the fair housing commission, may amend thereafter. No final order shall be issued unless the respondent has had the opportunity of a hearing on the charges contained in the notice of hearing or amendment on which the final order is based. If the respondent fails to answer the complaint, the fair housing commission may enter the respondent's default. Unless the default is set aside for good cause shown, the hearing may proceed under the available evidence. (4)  At any time after a notice of hearing is served upon a respondent, discovery shall be authorized in the same manner and fashion as discovery is permitted under O.C.G.A. §§ 9-11-26 through 9-11-37. Any order contemplated in O.C.G.A. §§ 9-11-26 through 9-11-37, may be issued by the fair housing commission. Judicial enforcement of any such order may be obtained by the complainant or respondent in the same manner as is provided for the enforcement of final orders in O.C.G.A. § 45-19-40. (5)  A respondent who has filed an answer or whose default in answering has been set aside for good cause shown may appear at the hearing, may examine and cross examine witnesses and the complainant, and may offer evidence. The complainant and, at the discretion of the fair housing commission, any other person may intervene, examine and cross examine witnesses, and present evidence. (6)  Efforts at conference, conciliation, and persuasion shall not be received in evidence. (7)  Testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath and shall be stenographically or otherwise recorded be a certified court reporter. After the hearing, the fair housing commission at the fair housing commission's discretion may take further evidence or hear arguments upon notice to all parties with an opportunity to be present. (8)  Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article, all proceedings of the fair housing commission shall be conducted as provided for with respect to contested cases in the Georgia Administrative Procedure Act O.C.G.A. § 50-13-1 et seq.). (Code 1985, § 14.5-21; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-213, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-31. - Orders of fair housing commission. (a)  If the fair housing commission determines that the respondent has not engaged in a discriminatory housing practice, the fair housing commission shall state the fair housing commission's findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue a final order within 30 days after the hearing unless, for good cause shown, such time is extended by the fair housing commission, dismissing complaint. (b)  If the fair housing commission determines that the respondent has engaged in a discriminatory housing practice, the fair housing commission shall state that fair housing commission's findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue a final order within 30 days after the hearing unless, for good cause shown, such time is extended by the fair housing commission, granting such relief as may be appropriate, which may include actual compensatory damages suffered by the aggrieved person and injunctive or other equitable relief and reasonable attorney's fees and costs. A prevailing respondent may be awarded reasonable attorney's fees and costs only upon a showing that the proceeding is frivolous, unreasonable, or without foundation. Attorney's fees may be awarded against a complainant or an aggrieved party if such party joined in the proceeding on its own as an intervening party. (c)  No order of the fair housing commission shall affect any contract, sale, encumbrance, or lease consummated before the issuance of such order and involving a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant without actual notice of the charge filed under this article. In the case of an order with respect to a discriminatory housing practice that occurred in the course of a business subject to licensing or regulation by a governmental agency, the director shall, not later than 30 days after the date of the issuance of such order, or, if such order is judicially reviewed, 30 days after the order is in substance affirmed upon review, send copies of the findings of fact, conclusions of law, and the order to that governmental agency and recommend to that governmental agency appropriate disciplinary action. In the case of an order against a respondent against whom another order was issued within the preceding five years under this section, the director shall send a copy of each such order to the city attorney. (d)  If the fair housing commission finds that the respondent has not engaged or is not about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice, as the case may be, the fair housing commission shall enter an order dismissing the charge. The director shall make public disclosure of each such dismissal. (Code 1985, § 14.5-22; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-214, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-32. - Appeal from order of fair housing commission; attorney's fees and costs. (a)  Any party to a hearing before the fair housing commission may appeal any final order of the fair housing commission by filing a petition for review in the superior court within 30 days of the issuance of the final order. The fair housing commission shall not be a named party. The director must be served with a copy of the petition for review. Within 30 days after the petition is served on the director, the director shall forward to the court a certified copy of the record of the hearing before the fair housing commission, including the transcript of the hearing before the fair housing commission and all evidence, administrative pleading, and orders, or the entire record if no hearing has been held. For good cause shown, the court may require or permit subsequent corrections or additions to the record. All appeals for judicial review shall be in accordance with the Georgia Administrative Procedure Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-13-1 et seq.). (b)  The court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the fair housing commission as to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact. The court may affirm a final order of the fair housing commission or remand the case for further proceedings. The court may reverse or modify the final order if substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because the administrative findings, inferences, conclusions, or decisions are: (1)  In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions; (2)  In excess of the statutory authority of the agency; (3)  Made upon unlawful procedures; (4)  Affected by other error of law; (5)  Not supported by substantial evidence, which shall mean that the record does not contain such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support said findings, inferences, conclusions, or decisions; or (6)  Arbitrary, capricious, or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion. (c)  If, upon judicial review of any order of the fair housing commission or in a proceeding in which a complainant seeks enforcement of a conciliation agreement, the court rules in favor of the complainant, then the court in its discretion may render an award of reasonable attorney's fees and costs of litigation in the superior court to the complainant. A prevailing respondent may be awarded court costs and reasonable attorney's fees only upon a showing that the action is frivolous, unreasonable, or without foundation. (Code 1985, § 14.5-23; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-215, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-33. - Filing order of administrative or fair housing commission in superior court and judgment thereon.     Any person affected by a final order of the director of the fair housing commission may file in the superior court of the country of the residence of the respondent a certified copy of a final order of the director or of the fair housing commission unappealed from or of a final order of the fair housing commission affirmed upon appeal, whereupon said court shall render judgment in accordance therewith and notify the parties. Such judgment shall have the same and all proceedings in relations thereto shall thereafter be the same as though the judgment had been rendered in an action duly heard and determined by the court. (Code 1985, § 14.5-24; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-216, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-34. - Civil actions by aggrieved persons. (a)  Commencement of civil action. (1)  An aggrieved person may commence a civil action in superior court not later than two years after the occurrence or the termination of an alleged discriminatory housing practice or the breach of a conciliation agreement entered into under this article, whichever occurs last, to obtain appropriate relief with respect to such discriminatory housing practice or breach of a conciliation agreement. (2)  The computation of such two-year period shall not include any time during which an administrative proceeding under this article was pending with respect to a complaint or charge under this article based upon such discriminatory housing practice. This subsection does not apply to actions arising from a breach of a conciliation agreement. (3)  An aggrieved person may commence a civil action under this subsection whether or not a complaint has been filed under section 30-26 and without regard to the status of any such complaint, but if the director has obtained a conciliation agreement with the consent of an aggrieved person, no action may be filed under this subsection by such aggrieved person with respect to the alleged discriminatory housing practice which forms the basis for such complaint except for the purpose of enforcing the terms of such conciliation agreement. (4)  An aggrieved person may not commence a civil action under this subsection with respect to an alleged discriminatory housing practice which forms the basis of a charge issued by the director of the fair housing commission has commenced a hearing on the record under this article with respect to such change. (b)  Granting of relief. (1)  The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent or temporary injunction temporary restraining order, or other order and may award to the plaintiff reasonable attorney's fees court costs, actual damages, and punitive damages not to exceed penalties permitted by the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, 42 USC 3601 et seq., as amended. Punitive damages may be awarded under this article only when the evidence shows that the respondent's actions showed willful misconduct, malice, fraud, wantonness, oppression, or that entire want of care which would raise the presumption of conscious indifference to consequences or to the rights of the aggrieved party. (2)  Where it is proved that the aggrieved party took an active part in the initiation, continuation, or procurement of civil proceedings against a respondent, the aggrieved party may be liable for abusive litigation as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 51-7-80 et seq. (c)  Relief granted under this section shall not affect any contract, sale, encumbrance, or lease consummated before the granting of such relief and involving a bona fide purchaser, lessee, or tenant without actual notice of a complaint filed with the director or civil action under this section. (d)  Upon timely application, the city attorney may intervene in such civil action if the city attorney certifies that the case is of general public importance. Upon such intervention, the city attorney may obtain such relief as would be available to the city attorney under section 30-35 in a civil action to which such section applies. (Code 1985, § 14.5-25; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-217, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-35. - Civil actions by city attorney. (a)  Whenever the city attorney has reasonable cause to believe that a person or group of persons is engaged in a pattern or practice of resistance to the full enjoyment of any of the rights granted by this article or that any group of persons has been denied any of the rights granted by this article and such denial raises an issue of general public importance, the city attorney may commence a civil action in superior court. (b)  Commencement of civil action. (1)  The city attorney may commence a civil action in superior court for appropriate relief with respect to a discriminatory housing practice referred to the city attorney by the director under section 30-28(b)(3). A civil action brought under this subsection (b)(1) of this section may be commenced not later than 180 days from the date a reasonable cause determination is issued by the director. (2)  The city attorney may commence a civil action in superior court for appropriate relief with respect to breach of a conciliation agreement referred to the city attorney by the director under section 30-28(b). A civil action brought under this subsection (b)(2) may be commenced not later than 90 days after the referral of the alleged breach under section 30-26(d). (c)  The city attorney, on behalf of the director or other party at whose request a subpoena is issued under this article, may enforce such subpoena in appropriate proceedings in the superior court for the county in which the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts business. (d)  Awards, penalties, damages. (1)  In a civil action brought under subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the court: a.  May award such preventive relief, including a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, or other order against the persons responsible for a violation of this article as is necessary to assure the full enjoyment of the rights granted by this article; b.  May award such other relief as the court deems appropriate, including actual damages to persons aggrieved; and c.  May, to vindicate the public interest, asses a civil penalty against the respondent: 1.  In an amount not exceeding $50,000.00 for a first violation; or 2.  In an amount not exceeding $100,000.00 for any subsequent violation. (2)  In a civil action brought under subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the court in its discretion may allow the prevailing party reasonable attorney's fees and court costs only upon a showing that the action is frivolous, unreasonable, or without foundation. (e)  Upon timely application, any person may intervene in a civil action commenced by the city attorney under subsection (a) or (b) of this section which involves an alleged discriminatory housing practice with respect to which such persons is an aggrieved person or a conciliation agreement to which such person is a party. The court may grant such appropriate relief to any such intervening party as is authorized to be granted to a plaintiff in a civil action under section 30-34. (Code 1985, § 14.5-26; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-218, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-36. - Cooperation with federal and local agencies.     The director may cooperate with the federal and local agencies charged with the administration of federal and local fair housing laws or ordinances and, with the consent of agencies, utilize the services of such agencies and their employees. In furtherance of such cooperative efforts, the director may enter into written agreements with such federal or local agencies. All agreements and terminations thereof shall be forwarded to the board of city commissioners and maintained in a record by the city clerk. (Code 1985, § 14.5-29; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-221, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-37. - Coercion, intimidation, threats, or interference.     It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of such persons having exercise or enjoyed, or an account of such persons having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this article. (Code 1985, § 14.5-30; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-222, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-38. - Compliance with the federal law.     Compliance with the provisions of the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-430) shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of sections 30-20 and 30-21(a)(7)b. In addition, should any provision of this article relating to the treatment of persons with disabilities be in conflict with any provision of the Fair Housing Amendment Act of 1988, then the provisions of the latter shall prevail. (Code 1985, § 14.5-31; Ord. No. 97-153, § 8-3-223, 12-9-1997) 
Sec. 30-39. - Fair housing plan adopted.     A fair housing plan for the city, a copy of which is shall be maintained for public examination in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted by reference, and incorporated herein as fully as if set forth verbatim. (Code 1985, § 2-341; Ord. No. 89-148, § 1, 7-25-1989) 
Chapter 32 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); the state Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; municipality's liability for torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 32-19. - Chain of command. (a)  The chief of police is the ranking officer of the police department and is vested with authority over all personnel within the department, both sworn officers and civilian personnel. In such capacity the chief of police may delegate any of the chief of police's responsibilities to any of his or her subordinates. Should the chief of police be off duty and if in the opinion of the ranking officer at the police station, a decision requiring the personal attention of the chief of police is necessary, then the chief should always be consulted. (b)  The deputy chief of police is second in command of the police department and is directly charged with the operation of the department in the absence of the chief of police. In such absence the deputy chief of police assumes all of the duties and authority of the chief and at all times shall assist the chief police in the performance of his or her duties. The deputy chief of police shall take the same oath and give the same bond as prescribed for the chief of police. In case of sickness of the chief of police or in the chief of police's absence from the city the deputy chief of police shall act in the chief of police's place and all duties imposed by the Code upon the chief of police are hereby imposed upon the deputy chief of police when acting for the chief. (c)  In the absence or unavailability of the chief of police, then in order of seniority, the deputy chiefs of police are authorized to assume the responsibilities and duties imposed by law on the chief of police. (Code 1975, § 22-39; Code 1985, § 21-16; Ord. No. 10-105, § 2, 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 32-20. - Bonds. (a)  The chief of police of the city shall execute a bond and all of the remaining police officers of the police department shall execute bonds conditioned as provided in section 2-131. The amounts of the bonds shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (b)  Unsworn civilian employees of the department shall come under the provisions of section 2-131. (Code 1975, § 22-2; Code 1985, § 21-17) 
Sec. 32-21. - Duties. (a)  All members of the police force, shall, perform all duties imposed upon them by law. (b)  It shall be the duty of every police officer to guard the city by day and by night, to enforce obedience to all laws and ordinances of the city, to preserve peace and order at all hours of the day or night. The time and place of their duty shall be designated by the chief of police subject to the control of the city manager. (c)  All members of the police force are hereby empowered, authorized, directed and instructed to police Chehaw Park, and to enforce thereon all of the laws of the state, and all of the laws and ordinances generally of the city, and all of the ordinances, rules and regulations which specifically pertain to Chehaw Park, as fully as if Chehaw Park were within the corporate limits of the city. Police officers shall have the power in the park to make arrests and to issue and serve summons and citations for the violation of the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, returnable to the courts generally of the state or to the municipal court judge of the city, as the case may be. (Code 1975, § 22-4; Code 1985, § 21-18) 
Sec. 32-22. - Arms and uniforms—Kind; style.     The kind and style of uniform and arms shall be determined by the chief of police. Each officer and member of the force shall give a receipt for his or her equipment, which shall be charged to him or her and, if unaccounted for when retiring from office, the value thereof shall be recovered on his or her bond. (Code 1975, § 22-5; Code 1985, § 21-19; Ord. No. 89-183, § 1, 12-27-1989) 
Sec. 32-23. - Same—Property of city.     The uniforms and equipment furnished to the police force by the city shall remain the property of the city and shall be, when a change is ordered or on resignation, termination or retirement from office, returned to the city. The members of the force shall be liable on their bonds for any loss or careless destruction of or damage to their uniforms or equipment. (Code 1975, § 22-6; Code 1985, § 21-20) 
Sec. 32-24. - Arrest by police; appearance bonds.     All police officers shall arrest offenders against the ordinances of the city and bring or have them before the court, the recorder or other person acting in his or her stead, as early as practicable. Such police officer may, in his or her discretion and according to the exigencies of the case, hold such offender until proper bond be given for such offender's appearance for trial or serve written summons, as provided by law, upon such offender, requiring such offender to be and appear at the proper session of the police court in conformity with the schedule as laid down by the municipal court judge. (Code 1975, § 22-7; Code 1985, § 21-21) 
Secs. 32-25—32-52. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHIEF OF POLICE 
Sec. 32-53. - Appointment; oath.     The chief of police shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of Charter section 3(i). Before qualifying and entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, the chief of police shall make and subscribe before some officer authorized to administer the same, the following oath, and a record shall be made of same:     I, _______, do solemnly swear that I will faithfully and impartially discharge the duties imposed upon me as chief of police of the city. (Code 1975, § 22-21; Code 1985, § 21-32) 
Sec. 32-54. - Duties generally. (a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to attend all meetings of the board of city commissioners and all trials before the police court. It shall be the chief of police's duty, as well as members of the police force, to execute all warrants, serve all summonses, subpoenas, citations, notifications or rules placed in his or her hands by the mayor, the board of city commissioners or city clerk, in accordance with the requirements of the city ordinances. The chief of police shall collect all fines and costs imposed by the mayor or the board of city commissioners and police court. (b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police at all times of the day or night to preserve the public peace, prevent the commission of crime and arrest offenders, to protect the rights of persons and property, to regard the public health, to provide proper police at fires, to protect the firefighters and property thereat, to protect strangers and travelers at railway stations, to enforce obedience to all ordinances of the board of city commissioners which are applicable to police or health, to attend all meetings of the board of city commissioners and to see that the ordinances, rules and regulations of the same are carried into effect and to discharge such other duties as may be required of him or her by ordinances. (Code 1975, § 22-31; Code 1985, § 21-34) 
Sec. 32-55. - Chief executive officer; responsible for good order of city and conduct of police force. (a)  The chief of police shall be the chief executive officer of the police department, but shall always be subject to the orders and regulations of the city manager and it shall be the chief of police's duty to promulgate the same. It shall be the duty of the police force to respect and obey all orders of the chief of police, not in conflict with the law or ordinances of the city. (b)  The chief of police shall be held responsible for the good order of the city and the general conduct of the officers and employees of the police force. It is enjoined on the chief of police to pay frequent visits to various portions of the city at uncertain times and thus be able to supervise the conduct of officers and employees. (c)  The chief of police shall hold his or her deputy chief, officers and civilian employees of his or her departments strictly responsible for the proper discharge of their duties. The chief of police shall be responsible for the proper care of the police station, apparatus and property of the city belonging to the department. The chief of police shall have the authority to make recommendations for promotions of members in the department subject to the approval of the city manager. The chief of police shall be held accountable for the organization and operation of the police department and is responsible for its training, acquisition of equipment, and overall performance of duty. The chief of police shall have the responsibility of preparing a budget for the police department and submitting same to the city manager on an annual basis. (d)  The chief of police shall be authorized to establish rules and regulations governing the conduct and activities in operation of the police department including the delineation of beats. The chief of police shall furnish a copy of such rules and regulations to the city manager. The chief of police shall be empowered by the city manager to authorize overtime for members of the police department when pressure of police business so dictates. (Code 1975, § 22-32; Code 1985, § 21-34) 
Sec. 32-56. - Arrests.     It shall be the duty of the chief of police, for any violation of the ordinances of the city, to arrest or see to the arrest of all persons so offending and hold them in custody until a trial is had in the manner prescribed for the trial of offenders. Any such person may be discharged from arrest upon such person's giving bond for his or her appearance before the municipal court. (Code 1975, § 22-34; Code 1985, § 21-35) State Law reference— Arrest of persons generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 32-57. - Fire alarms.     Upon the alarm of fire in the city, the chief of police or shift commander upon request from the fire department shall respond forthwith to the fire, to give assistance as the fire chief may require. (Code 1975, § 22-35; Code 1985, § 21-36; Ord. No. 02-116, § 1, 5-28-2002) 
Sec. 32-58. - Riots; enlisting aid, etc.     It shall be the duty of the chief of police to suppress all riots or public outbreaks within the city or its police jurisdiction. For this purpose the chief of police shall be and is hereby empowered with authority to call upon any or all citizens capable of bearing arms, to aid in suppressing such riots or outbreaks, and, upon their neglecting or refusing to render such aid, the chief of police shall report their names to the mayor or recorder. (Code 1975, § 22-37; Code 1985, § 21-37) State Law reference— Immunity of persons assisting law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-3-22. 
Sec. 32-59. - Prisoners, property, etc.     The chief of police shall take proper care of and be accountable for all city property that shall be put in his or her charge and report to the city manager and board of city commissioners on the condition of the same at such times as may be required. The chief of police shall be responsible for seeing that city prisoners who are confined to the county jail shall have clean and healthy conditions, that they be provided with the necessary articles as health and comfort require, and that they receive a proper diet in suitable quantity. (Code 1975, § 22-36; Code 1985, § 21-38) 
Sec. 32-60. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-105, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2010, repealed § 32-60, which pertained to failure to collect money or care for city property and derived from Code 1975, § 22-22; Code 1985, § 21-39. 
Sec. 32-61. - Reports.     The chief of police shall make a report in writing to the city manager each month showing the condition and activities of the police department and including any other data deemed necessary by the city manager. (Code 1975, § 22-33; Code 1985, § 21-40) 
Chapter 34 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Cities are authorized to exercise power over parking facilities and traffic control devices, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4) and (11); power of local authorities with respect to uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 34-1. - Definitions adopted.     The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 ("Definitions"), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1. (Code 1985, § 15-1) State Law reference— Municipal authority to adopt O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 by reference, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; future amendments or repeal of adopted provisions of state law effective in city without action of board of city commissioners, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-373. 
Sec. 34-2. - Applicability of chapter; drivers of federal, state, county and city vehicles.     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the state, county or city and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. (Code 1975, § 15-5; Code 1985, § 15-2) 
Sec. 34-3. - Streets, ways and parking areas—Owned by public or quasi-public bodies.     The provisions of this chapter shall cover and be applicable to and upon all streets, ways and parking areas which are owned by public or quasi-public bodies, provided that the consent of such bodies shall first be obtained. (Code 1975, § 15-10; Code 1985, § 15-3) 
Sec. 34-4. - Same—Privately owned.     The provisions of this chapter shall cover and be applicable to and upon all privately owned streets, ways and parking areas which are offered to the shopping public by the owners or lessees of such areas for the use by prospective customers for traveling and parking, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-3. (Code 1975, § 15-11; Code 1985, § 15-4) 
Sec. 34-5. - Existing signs and devices ratified; authority to change or alter, etc. (a)  All existing traffic control or regulatory signs and devices, including street and sidewalk markings now in existence, are hereby ratified and approved as being official and as having been designated and established by the official of the city having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. (b)  The director of engineering shall modify, change, eliminate or redesignate any of the existing traffic flows, regulatory devices, signs or markings, and, whenever such change is effected, the same shall, upon the entry of the minutes of the public safety committee or committee of the whole of the board of city commissioners, become official in all respects. (Code 1975, § 15-114; Code 1985, § 15-5) State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate traffic by official traffic-control devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(2). 
Sec. 34-6. - General responsibility.     The director of engineering is hereby empowered and made responsible for the designing of traffic flows, regulatory and warning devices, including the installation and maintenance of traffic signals, street signs and markings. The chief of police is hereby empowered and made responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, including compliance with regulatory traffic devices, signs and street markings. (Code 1975, § 15-3; Code 1985, § 15-6) 
Sec. 34-7. - Adoption of Uniform Rules of the Road by reference.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, excluding O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-393 through 40-6-394, known as the "Uniform Rules of the Road," are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited in this article. (Code 1985, § 15-21) 
Sec. 34-8. - [Traffic calming policy.]     A resolution approving and adopting a traffic calming policy, adopted October 27, 2009, is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set out at length, and a copy is on file and available from the city clerk or director of engineering in the offices of the city. (Ord. No. 15-128, § 1, 12-15-2015) Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, reference to the adoption of the traffic calming policy has been included herein as § 34-8. 
Secs. 34-9—34-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
Sec. 34-39. - Use of coasters, roller skates or similar devices restricted.     It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, to go upon any roadway except while crossing a street or a crosswalk and except upon streets or sidewalks set aside as play areas. (Code 1975, § 15-15; Code 1985, § 15-7) State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate persons upon skates, coasters, sleds and other toy vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(18). 
Sec. 34-40. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles in motion.     It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (Code 1975, § 15-13; Code 1985, § 15-9) 
Sec. 34-41. - Speed restrictions—Generally.     The following rules, regulations and restrictions shall apply in the city, relative to the speed of vehicles: (1)  Where no special hazard exists the following speeds shall be lawful and any speed in excess of such limits shall be unlawful: a.  30 miles per hour in any residential district; b.  At the speed set in section 34-42 in all areas outside residential districts. (2)  Whenever the city shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that any speed set forth in this section is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of a highway, the city shall determine and declare a reasonable and safe speed limit thereat which shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such intersection or other place or part of the highway. (3)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to relieve the plaintiff in any civil action from the burden of proving negligence upon the part of the defendant as the proximate cause of an accident. (4)  The speed limit for posted school zones shall be 25 miles per hour. (5)  It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle in the parking areas or other public areas adjacent to ball fields in the city at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the traveled portion of public streets. (Code 1975, § 15-81; Code 1985, § 15-22; Ord. No. 81-160, § 1(15-84), 5-26-1981) State Law reference— Municipal authority to alter or establish speed limits, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-183, 40-6-371(a)(10). 
Sec. 34-42. - Same—Specific streets.     Special speed zones and special speed limits shall be established by the city commission, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk and in the office of the director of engineering. (Code 1975, § 15-82; Code 1985, § 15-23; Ord. No. 81-153, § 1, 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 81-182, § 1, 7-28-1981; Ord. No. 81-187, §§ 1, 2, 8-25-1981; Ord. No. 84-111, § 1, 2-14-1984; Ord. No. 84-126, § 1, 4-24-1984; Ord. No. 84-183, § 1, 9-11-1984; Ord. No. 84-209, § 1, 11-13-1984; Ord. No. 86-241, § 1, 10-28-1986; Ord. No. 87-113, § 1, 3-10-1987; Ord. No. 87-185, § 1, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 89-120, § 1, 3-28-1989; Ord. No. 89-151, § 1, 8-8-1989; Ord. No. 90-128, § 1, 5-22-1990; Ord. No. 91-164, § 1, 9-10-1991; Ord. No. 91-178, § 1, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 91-185, § 1, 12-10-1991; Ord. No. 92-102, § 1, 2-11-1992; Ord. No. 92-103, § 1, 2-11-1992; Ord. No. 92-132, § 1, 6-9-1992; Ord. No. 92-163, § 1, 12-8-1992; Ord. No. 94-159, § 1, 10-11-1994; Ord. No. 94-160, § 1, 10-11-1994; Ord. No. 94-161, § 1, 10-11-1994; Ord. No. 94-162, § 1, 10-11-1994; Ord. No. 01-156, § 1, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 04-128, §§ 1, 2, 9-28-2004; Ord. No. 08-103, § 2, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 08-129, § 2, 7-23-2008; Ord. No. 10-127, §§ 1, 2, 7-27-2010; Ord. No. 12-101, § 1, 2-28-2012; Ord. No. 14-119, § 1, 8-26-2014; Ord. No. 15-114, § 1, 4-28-2015; Ord. No. 18-114, § 9-11-2018) 
Sec. 34-43. - Funeral and other processions.     Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. (Code 1975, §§ 15-64, 15-65; Code 1985, § 15-24) 
Sec. 34-44. - Cutting corners.     It shall be unlawful for any person to cut corners at intersections by driving through service station areas or other properties for the purpose of avoiding traffic, signal devices or stop signs. (Code 1975, § 15-68; Code 1985, § 15-25) 
Sec. 34-45. - Colliding with stationary objects near roadway prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any motor vehicle to collide with any parked, stopped or standing vehicle, or other stationary object in or adjacent to the travelled portion of any roadway in the city. (Code 1985, § 15-26; Ord. No. 95-101, § 1, 1-9-1995) 
Sec. 34-46. - Quiet zones.     Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle, except in an emergency. (Code 1975, § 15-122; Code 1985, § 15-27) 
Sec. 34-47. - Truck routes; use of same required; exception. (a)  Every person operating any truck destined for or departing from the major truck terminals in the city and all trucks being operated and engaged in through traffic in the city shall use only the streets, avenues and thoroughfares so designated by the board of city commissioners. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any truck to be operated upon any of the streets, avenues and thoroughfares within the city other than those designated as through streets by the board of city commissioners; provided however, that vehicles, while being used in making deliveries or taking on cargo for transportation, may deviate from such through truck routes for such purposes only. (c)  The official truck routes within the city shall be established, from time to time, by the board of city commissioners and will be available for public examination as a schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk. (d)  For the purposes of this regulation, the term "truck" means a heavy duty vehicle requiring a class A license and having a GVWR of more than 26,001 lbs. (e)  Exceptions to this rule are contained in title III, miscellaneous regulations, article I, section 1.17 of the city's zoning ordinance which allows for limited deviation from the designated routes as therein specified. (Code 1975, § 15-24; Code 1985, § 15-29; Ord. No. 13-120, § 2, 6-25-2013) 
Sec. 34-48. - Automated red light enforcement. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     In operation means operating in good working condition.     Operator means any individual driving and/or in possession of a vehicle.     Owner means the owner, lessee, or renter of the vehicle as shown, in the case of vehicle owners, in the records of the state department of public safety (or any other state vehicle registration office) or, in the case of vehicle lessees or renters, in the records of the lessor or renter.     Recorded images means images recorded by a traffic light signal violation monitoring system on: (1)  Two or more photographs; (2)  Two or more microphotographs; (3)  Two or more digital images; (4)  A videotape; or (5)  Other recorded images showing a traffic control signal displaying a circular red or red arrow signal along with the rear of each vehicle at the time it is used or operated in violation of this section.     Signature means any manual or facsimile of a person's signature.     System location means the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video, digital or electronic camera is directed and in operation.     Traffic light signal violation monitoring system means a device adapted for use at a signalized intersection or crosswalk, working in conjunction with a traffic control signal or independently to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red signal indication. (b)  Offense. The following provisions shall be the traffic regulation for automated red light enforcement: (1)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown by a steady circular green signal. (2)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown by a steady green arrow signal indication. (3)  The owner of a vehicle shall be liable for a monetary penalty imposed pursuant to this section if such vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a traffic light signal violation monitoring system, to have failed to comply with a traffic light signal as designated in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section or violate any other traffic regulation specified in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-20 and 40-6-21. (c)  Proof certificate. The following provisions shall be proof certification for automated red light violations: (1)  Proof that a particular vehicle entered an intersection in violation of subsection (b) of this section, as detected by a traffic light signal violation monitoring system, together with proof that the particular vehicle is registered with the state department of public safety (or any other state vehicle registration office) in the charged person's name, shall raise the evidentiary presumption and constitute prima facie evidence in any prosecution of a violation of that section that the charged person was the person driving the vehicle depicted in the recorded image. (2)  A certificate, sworn to or affirmed by a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by a law enforcement agency for which such device is authorized, based on inspection of recorded images produced by a traffic light signal violation monitoring system shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. (3)  Any recorded images detected by a traffic light signal violation monitoring system shall be available for inspection in any proceeding to adjudicate the liability for such violation pursuant to this section. (4)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the owner, lessee, or renter of the vehicle files a notarized affidavit by regular mail with the clerk of the municipal court that such owner, lessee, or renter was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation or testifies in open court under oath that such owner, lessee, or renter was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. (5)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if a certified copy of a police report, showing that the vehicle had been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged violation, is presented, prior to the return date established on the citation issued pursuant to this section, to the court adjudicating the alleged violation. (6)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the charged person can provide evidence that he or she was not the registered owner of the vehicle at the time and date that the alleged violation occurred. A bill of sale that includes, the name of the purchaser and the seller, the date of the sale, and the vehicles license tag dated prior to the alleged violation will constitute evidence that the charged person was not the registered owner of the vehicle at the time that the alleged violation occurred. (7)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of subsection (b) of this section as part of a funeral procession. (8)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of subsection (b) of this section in order to avoid impeding the efforts of an emergency vehicle to pass through the intersection. (9)  Not withstanding any other provision of this section, if the recorded image detected by a traffic light signal violation monitoring system depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of subsection (b) of this section is commercially licensed, then the owner of that vehicle shall be sent notice of the date, time and location of the alleged violation with at least two recorded images thereof. Within ten days of the receipt of said notice, the owner of the vehicle shall provide proof to the city of the name and address of the driver of the vehicle at the date, time and location of the violation and within the same time period, shall provide the driver of the vehicle with at least two recorded images of the alleged violation. After receipt by the city of the proof of the name and address of the driver of the vehicle, the driver of the vehicle shall be prima facie responsible for such violation. Failure of the owner of the vehicle found to be in violation of subsection (b) of this section to provide the name and address of the driver at the time of the violation within the period prescribed shall cause the owner to be held responsible as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. (d)  Penalty; effect of a conviction. The following provisions shall be the penalty for automated red light violations: (1)  Imposition of a penalty pursuant to this section shall be deemed a noncriminal violation and not as an operator and shall not be made a part of the operating record of the person upon whom such liability is imposed nor shall it be used for insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. The monetary penalty imposed by this section for each violation shall be equal to the fine issued by the city municipal court for disregarding a traffic device at the time of the alleged violation and shall not include court costs. The monetary penalty imposed by this section for each violation shall double the amount of the fine issued by the city municipal court for disregarding a traffic device if the alleged violation occurs in a designated "School Zone," as defined by the state law. (2)  Failure to pay the civil penalty or file an appeal within 30 days after notification of the violation shall result in an additional penalty. Every 30-day period thereafter shall result in another additional penalty. The amount of the additional penalties shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (3)  The city may establish procedures for the collection of the civil penalties and may enforce the penalties by a civil action in the nature of a debt. (e)  Summons. The following shall be the summons regulations for an automated red light violation: (1)  A summons for a violation of this section may be executed by the city by mailing by first class mail a copy thereof to the address of the owner, lessee, or renter of the vehicle as shown, in the case of vehicle owners, in the records of the state department of public safety (or any other state vehicle registration office) or, in the case of vehicle lessees or renters, in the records of the lessor or renter. (2)  No proceedings for contempt or arrest shall be instituted for failure to appear on the return date of the summons. (f)  Private entities. A private entity may enter into an agreement with the city to be compensated for providing the traffic light signal violation monitoring system or equipment, and all related support services, to include consulting, operations and administration. However, only a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by a law enforcement agency for which such device is authorized, may swear to or affirm the certificate required by subsection (c) of this section. (Code 1985, § 15-31; Ord. No. 01-155, §§ 1—6, 10-23-2001) 
Secs. 34-49—34-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING 
Sec. 34-76. - Obstructing traffic.     It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or a police officer. (Code 1975, § 15-148; Code 1985, § 15-46) 
Sec. 34-77. - Bus and taxicab stands. (a)  The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand respectively, except that this section shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. (b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. (c)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this section or elsewhere in this Code to the contrary, taxicabs are authorized and permitted to park on the streets of the city in parking spaces regularly authorized and provided for vehicular parking, except during the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily. (Code 1975, § 15-157; Code 1985, § 15-47) 
Sec. 34-78. - Parking on public easement.     It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle upon that portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines. (Code 1975, § 15-150; Code 1985, § 15-48) 
Sec. 34-79. - Parking for display, repairs, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of displaying it for sale or washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Code 1975, § 15-150; Code 1985, § 15-49) 
Sec. 34-80. - Parking on private property.     It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle, motorcycle, bicycle or any other type of vehicle on the private property of another without permission of the owner to so park. (Code 1975, § 15-145; Code 1985, § 15-50) 
Sec. 34-81. - City parking lots.     The manner, location, time and duration of parking permitted on parking lots owned, operated or maintained by the city shall be determined from time to time by or under the direction of the city manager. Signs shall be erected giving direction as to the manner, location, time and duration of parking permitted in such lots, and whenever signs have been so erected, no person shall park a vehicle in any of such lots contrary to the location, manner, time or duration specified on such signs. (Code 1975, § 15-146; Code 1985, § 15-51) 
Sec. 34-82. - Regulations governing business parking lots. (a)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Business parking lot means and includes all publicly or privately owned streets, ways and parking areas which are offered to the shopping public by the owners or lessees of businesses. (b)  Parking restricted to bona fide customers when signs posted. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a bona fide customer of a business served by a business parking lot to enter or occupy such business parking lot, where the owner of the business parking lot has posted signs giving conspicuous notice to all that such persons will be prosecuted. A person is a bona fide customer within the meaning of this section only for the period during which such person is actually shopping or utilizing service facilities. To comply with the requirements of this subsection, such signs shall be of a size not less than 24 inches by 24 inches in size, with light reflective letters not less than three inches in height. Such signs shall be permanently mounted not less than six feet nor more than eight feet from the front. There shall be at least one sign posted at each entrance and at each exit to each row of parking spaces in the parking lot. Each sign shall read:     "Notice: Customer parking only. Noncustomers entering or parking will be prosecuted under Albany Code section 34-82." (c)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage while in a business parking lot. (Code 1985, § 15-52; Ord. No. 86-121, §§ 1—3, 2-25-1986; Ord. No. 86-183, § 1, 7-8-1986) 
Sec. 34-83. - Handicapped persons appointed to enforce provisions regulating use of handicapped parking places; powers; eligibility; forms. (a)  All handicapped persons, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-221(5), appointed to enforce the provisions of the Parking Law for Persons with Disabilities (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220) shall serve without compensation and at the pleasure of the city manager or the city manager's designee. (b)  To be eligible for appointment, applicants shall file an application substantially in the form as established by the city manager or the city manager's designee from time to time, shall undertake such training course and attend such training classes as shall be required by the city, and shall take the oath of office substantially in the form as established by the city manager or the city manager's designee from time to time. Prior to entering upon the performance of their duties, each applicant shall sign a "Memorandum of Understanding" on the form as established by the city manager or the city manager's designee from time to time and such other forms and acknowledgements as shall be required by the city manager or the city manager's designee, not inconsistent with law. (c)  Each applicant shall sign a criminal history consent form, consenting for the city to investigate the criminal record, if any, of the applicant. (Code 1985, § 15-53; Ord. No. 90-113, §§ 1—5, 3-13-1990) 
Sec. 34-84. - Restricted parking.     It shall be unlawful for any person to park in a motor vehicle, motorcycle, or any other type of vehicle on either side of Edgewater Drive as it surrounds Lake Loretta from dusk to dawn. Dusk shall be indicated by the illumination emitted from the streetlights on Edgewater Drive and dawn shall be indicated by the succession of illumination from the streetlights located on Edgewater Drive. (Code 1985, § 15-54; Ord. No. 97-120, § 1, 5-28-1997) 
Sec. 34-85. - Overtime and prohibited parking. (a)  It is unlawful and punishable for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by any such person to be parked over time, beyond the time of legal parking time or allow the vehicle to remain parked on any public street, highway or alley in violation of any posted signs regulating or prohibiting parking in any such location. It is a rebuttal presumption that the vehicle is operated by or with the permission of the registered owner of the vehicle. (b)  Violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18. (c)  Appearance bonds are hereby established for violation of this section. The amount of the appearance bonds shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the offices of the city clerk, municipal court, and finance director. (d)  Any clearly marked public safety vehicle, belonging to the city or other federal, state, county or municipal governing authority whose driver is engaged in the performance of his or her official duties as an employee of the city, or other federal, state, county or municipal governing authority is hereby exempted from the provisions of this section and any such vehicle and driver is authorized to park in excess of the posted parking regulations. (Code 1985, § 15-55; Ord. No. 98-148, §§ 1—4, 11-10-1998) 
Secs. 34-86—34-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOTORIZED CARTS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate motorized carts, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-331. 
Sec. 34-114. - Designated area.     There is hereby designated an area within the corporate limits of the city known as the central business district (CBD), said area being more particularly identified on the map attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived to-wit:     That portion of the city west of the east bank of the Flint River; on the south by the alley lying immediately north of Mercer Avenue; on the west by the alley lying immediately west of Madison Street; and on the north by the alley lying immediately north of Roosevelt Avenue. (Code 1985, § 15-71; Ord. No. 04-140, § 2, 12-14-2004) 
Sec. 34-115. - Limited operation of motorized carts.     A motorized cart as defined O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1-(32), may be operated upon such of CBD's municipal streets as approved by the police and fire chiefs of the city and only by an individual who holds not only a current motor vehicle operator's license issued or approved by the state but also a vehicle for-hire chauffeur's permit issued by the state and only when offering a tour service or guide service and only by compliance with section 34-116. (Code 1985, § 15-72; Ord. No. 04-140, § 2, 12-14-2004) 
Sec. 34-116. - Permit and required conditions.     Any person, partnership or corporation wishing to avail itself of this article must comply with the following: (1)  A person must hold an appropriate occupational license issued by the city. Such a license shall not be issued to anyone who has within three years prior to the date of such application been: a.  Convicted of a felony; b.  Convicted of a crime of moral turpitude; c.  Convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicated beverages or drugs. (2)  Any motorized cart must be in safe mechanical condition. The motorized cart must be operated in conjunction with an appropriately designed and constructed passenger carriage. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each motorized cart and carriage shall be equipped with electrically powered lights and turn signals; shall have a fire extinguisher and first aid kit on board at all times; as well as any other matters deemed necessary by the police and fire chiefs. The police and fire chiefs are authorized to set forth appropriate rules and regulations to ensure that such motorized carts are in safe mechanical condition and that all necessary safety equipment remains in tact and operative in said motorized carts. (3)  The person must submit in writing to the police and fire chiefs the exact route to be used and they must approve the route. (4)  All motorized carts shall be brought to a full stop upon approaching and before crossing railroad tracks at grade. (5)  The person shall maintain insurance with companies licensed to do business in the state acceptable to the city for the protection of the city and naming it as an additional insured, against all claims, losses, costs or expenses arising out of injuries or death of persons whether or not employed by the person, damage to property, whether arising from the acts or omissions, negligence or otherwise of such person or any of its agents, employees, patrons, or other persons, and growing out of the use of said city streets by such person, such policies to provide for a liability limit on account of each accident resulting in the bodily injury or death to one person of not less than $1,000,000.00, a liability limit of not less than $1,000,000.00 for each accident for property damage. Such person shall also carry product liability insurance for personal injuries and/or death in the amount not less than $1,000,000.00 for any one person. Such person shall furnish evidence to the city of the continuance in force of said policies by providing a copy of the policy to both the risk manager and central services director of the city along with a receipt showing the first year's premium has been paid in full. Said policy of insurance must specifically provide that it cannot be cancelled absent notice to the city. (6)  The person agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers, and employees, their successors and assigns, individually and collectively, with respect to all claims, demands or liability for any injuries to any person (including death) or damage to any property arising out of the activities of such person or based on alleged negligence of such person, its officers, agents, or employees, and such person shall defend against all such claims and pay all expenses of such defense, including attorney fees, and all judgments based thereon; provided that such person's obligation shall not extend to any damage, injury or loss due to the negligence of the city. (7)  The rates for services charges by such persons shall be submitted in writing to the police chief and the person shall not exceed such rates. (8)  No person while operating a motorized cart may solicit or otherwise seek business by shouting or otherwise using physical gestures to gain attention of any individuals. (9)  Motorized carts shall observe all of the rules of the road as provided in Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq. (10)  Motorized carts may be parked only at those areas within the CBD as designated by the chief of police. Likewise, the loading or unloading of passengers may only take place at the area designated for such activity by the chief of police. (11)  Motorized carts may be operated only during daylight hours unless they comply with the equipment regulations promulgated by the commissioner of motor vehicle safety, all as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-330. Hours of operation are limited to: a.  Monday through Friday, 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. b.  Saturday, Sunday and Holidays as prescribed by the city: New Year's Day; Dr. Martin L. King, Jr. Day; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Thanksgiving Day; Day after Thanksgiving Day; Christmas Eve and Christmas Day, 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. (12)  Motorized carts may not be operated when it is raining or whenever visibility is limited. (Code 1985, § 15-73; Ord. No. 04-140, § 2, 12-14-2004) 
Sec. 34-117. - Subject to city ordinances.     Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article may result in revocation of the occupation license for such activity and shall also be considered a violation of section of this Code. (Code 1985, § 15-74; Ord. No. 04-140, § 2, 12-14-2004) 
Chapter 36 - NUISANCES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Municipal authority to prohibit public and private littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 36-1. - Definition.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Applicable codes means: (1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 8-25-1 et seq.; and (3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. after October 1, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law.     City means any incorporated city within this state.     Closing means causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry.     Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq., known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act.     Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products.     Governing authority means the mayor and board of commissioners of the City of Albany, Georgia.     Interested parties means: (1)  Owner; (2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; (3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; (4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and (5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises.     Nuisance means anything within the city that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this article.     Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record.     Public authority means any members of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or city.     Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this chapter adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter or any agent of such officer or officers.     Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure.     Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. (Code 1985, § 16-1; Ord. No. 01-128, § 1(exh. A), 6-27-2001; Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-7a), 2-28-2006) 
Sec. 36-2. - Enumeration of nuisances. (a)  Nuisances not deemed to be exclusive. The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. (b)  Declared nuisances. The following are hereby declared to be nuisances: (1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things which interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the community. (2)  Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood thereof. (3)  Discharging of offensive matter. The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. (4)  Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. (5)  Stagnant water. Any stagnant pool of water (excluding city owned holding ponds) in the city. (6)  Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United States Geological Survey shall be the standard for such grading, and smoke shall be defined as and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. (7)  Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. (8)  Nonconforming structures, machines, etc. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used within this city contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or city ordinance. (9)  Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. (10)  Privies. The construction or maintenance of any surface closet, privy or privy vault on any premises within the city. (11)  Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. (12)  Depositing trash, garbage, refuse, furniture, or other household goods, etc., on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, furniture, household goods, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish and trash which is a menace to public health and safety in the city. (13)  Accumulation of junk. The retention, storage or accumulation of any automobile, motor vehicle, mechanized equipment, machinery, appliance, scrap metal, or other scrap material on property for a period of ten days or longer in a condition that prevents its use for the purpose for which it was originally manufactured so as to affect the public health, safety and welfare of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood thereof. (14)  Sales of controlled substances; drug pushers. The following provision for sales of controlled substances and drug pushers shall be: a.  Any business where illegal sales of controlled substances take place on the premises with such frequency that the judge determines that the owner or operator or manager in charge of such business knew, or in the exercise of ordinary care should have known, that such sales were taking place and such owner, operator or manager in charge has failed to take effective action to stop such sales. b.  Any business where persons who are known to the owner or operator or manager in charge of such business, or should in the exercise of ordinary care be known to them, or who are reputed to be illegal sellers or purveyors of controlled substances, are permitted to loiter on the premises without legitimate business reasons. (15)  Utilization of premises for sales, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances; devices used in furtherance of sales, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances. The following shall be the utilization of premises for sales, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances; devices used in furtherance of sales, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances: a.  Any premises of whatever type or nature where illegal sales, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances takes place on the premises with such frequency that the judge determines that the owner, operator, manager, or person in charge of the premises, knew, or in the exercise of ordinary care should have known that such sales, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances was taking place and such owner, operator, manager, or person in charge of the premises has failed to take effective action to stop such sales, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances. b.  Any premises of whatever type or nature which installs devices, including, but not limited to, steel doors, electric locks, and peep holes, which control the ingress and egress of the public at large, to further the illegal sale, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances taking place on the premises and which devices are without legitimate business reasons. (16)  Prohibited outside storage and use. No person shall permit or allow the outside storage of or use of appliances, household fixtures, furniture or similar items designed for indoor use. a.  Standards. It shall be a violation of this section for any landowner or person leasing, occupying or having control of any real property, to keep, maintain, deposit or perform or permit on such property the outdoor use, outdoor storage or outdoor placement of household appliances, household furniture, or household furnishings, unless such items are designed for outdoor use and are used on the premises for purposes of the landowner or person leasing, occupying or having control of the property. The term "outdoor" includes a porch. However, the use, storage or placement of household appliances, household furniture or household furnishings on a porch is not prohibited if the porch is completely enclosed by fully intact glass or fully intact screens. A porch is a platform completely covered by a roof located at and attached to or abutting against the entrance to a building. Screens are framed wire mesh or framed plastic mesh used to keep out insects and permit airflow. b.  Exception. Wood furniture completely coated with paint or another weatherproof coating may be used outside provided that it is not visible from the public right-of-ways. (Code 1985, § 16-2; Ord. No. 01-128, § 1(exh. A), 6-27-2001; Ord. No. 08-119, § 1, 6-25-2008) 
Sec. 36-3. - Prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. Any person maintaining or permitting the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense as defined by and as punishable by sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1985, § 16-3; Ord. No. 01-128, § 1(exh. A), 6-27-2001; Ord. No. 04-126, §§ 1, 2, 8-24-2004) 
Sec. 36-4. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances.     It is the intent of the mayor and board of commissioners that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. (Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-6), 2-28-2006) 
Sec. 36-5. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions. (a)  Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, brushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this article. (b)  Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section. (c)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all property, developed or undeveloped, within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, and to the original city lots. (d)  All weeds located on any undeveloped lot, regardless of zoning classification shall be cut no less than 50 feet from a public way or the property of another. (Code 1975, §§ 13-9(c), (j), 13-23(g), (h); Code 1985, § 28-16; Ord. No. 93-127, § 1, 5-11-1993; Ord. No. 98-143, §§ 1, 2, 9-22-1998) Cross reference— Nuisances generally, ch. 16. 
Sec. 36-6. - Height permitted. (a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible for its management, maintenance or upkeep, to permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a height in excess of 12 inches above the ground within 100 feet of any building. (b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible for its management, upkeep or maintenance, to allow weeds, grass, or other vegetation to grow or accumulate to a height in excess of 12 inches above the ground within 50 feet of a public way or of the property of another. (Code 1975, § 13-9(a), (b); Code 1985, § 28-17; Ord. No. 93-128, § 1, 5-11-1993) 
Sec. 36-7. - Notice to abate. (a)  In the event of a violation of this article, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove such excess growth within seven (7) days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail, or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. (b)  Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States Mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made. (Code 1975, § 13-9(d)) Note— At the request of the city, the former § 28-18 of (Code of 1985) has been renumbered as § 36-7 in this Code. 
Sec. 36-8. - Owner's failure to comply to cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. (a)  Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified pursuant to the provisions of section 36-40, the city is authorized to have the contractor enter upon the property, and the contractor is authorized to enter same, and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. The code enforcement department shall issue a "lot cleaning order" to the contractor, who shall promptly perform the work and submit the contractor's bill to the code enforcement department. The department shall inspect the work, and if satisfactory, shall approve the bill for payment and forward it to the chief finance officer for payment. (b)  The chief finance officer shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account, which shall include the cost of the abatement of the nuisance including, but not limited to, the cost of cutting the vegetation and all associated administrative and inspection fees demanding payment thereon and before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than 15 days nor later than 45 days after payment to the contractor. (c)  If payment under subsection (b) of this section shall not have been made on or before the date named, the chief finance officer shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the municipal court judge, notifying such owner to show cause before the municipal court judge at a time and place and on a date named therein why execution should not issue against the property for its approved amount. (d)  If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this article, that the notice required of section 36-7 was given, that the work was performed and the cost thereof paid by the city, and that the city has not been reimbursed, then execution shall issue for such amount, in the same manner as liens are executed to recover the costs of repair or demolition of abated nuisances under section 36-78. (e)  Any person in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense as defined by and as punishable by sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1975, § 13-9(f)—(i), (m); Code 1985, § 28-19; Ord. No. 93-126, § 1, 5-11-1993; Ord. No. 17-112, § 1, 9-26-2017) Note— At the request of the city, the former § 36-77 has been renumbered as § 36-8. Additionally, the former §§ 36-7 and 36-8 have been renumbered as §§ 36-9 and 36-10. 
Sec. 36-9. - Remedies.     The remedies provided in this article are cumulative of all other remedies which the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code, all ordinances, laws or regulations of the city, or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance, and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. (Code 1975, § 13-9(l); Code 1985, § 28-20) Note— See note at § 36-8. 
Sec. 36-10. - Duties of owners.     It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. (Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-7b(1)), 2-28-2006) Note— See note at § 36-8. 
Secs. 36-11—36-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC OFFICER 
Sec. 36-39. - Powers of public officers.     The public officers designated in this chapter shall have the following powers: (1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; (2)  To administer oaths and affirmation, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; (3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; (4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as they deem necessary to carry out the purposes of the chapter; and (5)  To delegate any of their functions and powers under the chapter to such officers and agents as they may designate. (Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-9), 2-28-2006) 
Sec. 36-40. - Appointment of public officer.     The mayor and board of commissioners of the city appoints or designates the director of planning and community development, city fire marshal, city fire chief, city police chief, director of public works and the director of public works' designees and the code enforcement director or the code enforcement director's designee as public officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter. (Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-7b(2)), 2-28-2006) 
Secs. 36-41—36-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABATEMENT PROCEDURES 
Sec. 36-69. - Repair or removal of junk upon receipt of notice.     Upon receipt of notice/summons in writing from the chief of police, director of code enforcement or their designee, the owner or person in possession of any premises upon which is located any junk shall within seven days either: (1)  Repair such junk and place it in legally operable condition; (2)  Cause such junk to be removed from the premises and disposed of in a manner so as not to constitute a violation of any of the ordinances of the city and so as not to constitute a nuisance; or (3)  Submit to the code enforcement department a plan satisfactory to the code enforcement director for placing such junk in a legally operable condition reasonable under all the circumstances, or appear before the municipal court judge at the place, date, and time designated by the notice/summons. (Code 1985, § 16-4; Ord. No. 01-128, § 1(exh. A), 6-27-2001; Ord. No. 04-126, §§ 1, 3, 8-24-2004) 
Sec. 36-70. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. (a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if such public officer finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents of the city. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, such conditions include the following: (1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; (2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; (3)  Dilapidation; (4)  Disrepair; (5)  Structural defects; (6)  Uncleanliness; and (7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. (b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. (Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-8), 2-28-2006) 
Sec. 36-71. - Service of complaints. (a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served in the following manner: At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of hearing. (b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. (c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. (d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this chapter on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. (Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-10), 2-28-2006) 
Sec. 36-72. - Other powers preserved.     Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the judge to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the judge to punish by contempt for failure to comply with the municipal court's order. (Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-11), 2-28-2006) 
Sec. 36-73. - Abatement of nuisances arising from the presence of junked motor vehicles. (a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot, tract, parcel of land or premises in the city to suffer, permit or allow any junked motor vehicle, to-wit: a vehicle, automobile, truck, van or trailer or any contrivance thereof that is inoperative, wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, stripped or partially stripped, to be parked, left or maintained thereon; and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a junked motor vehicle on the real property of another. The presence of such a junked motor vehicle shall constitute a public nuisance per se. (b)  This section is not the exclusive regulation within the city. It shall be supplemental and in addition to the other regulatory statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City of Albany, Georgia or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (c)  Except in circumstances where the public health and safety requires an immediate hearing before the municipal court as set forth in subsection (d) of this section, the director of the code enforcement department or the director of the code enforcement department's designee, shall give written notice to the owner of the vehicle or the person in possession, charge or control of the real property affected, that, in the opinion of the director, a public nuisance exists. Such notice shall be deemed adequate when attached to the vehicle so as to be visible to persons outside the vehicle. Such notice shall state that action to eliminate the nuisance is requested within the number of days specified in the notice, and shall further state that, if such action is not taken within the time specified, summons will be issued requiring the party notified to appear in the municipal court to have determined there whether a nuisance exists and should be abated. (d)  If the director of the code enforcement department or the director of the code enforcement department designee shall determine that such a nuisance exists on any property within the city, it shall be the duty of the director or the director's designee to issue summons to the owner of the real property affected, persons in possession of the real property affected, and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the junked motor vehicle unless identification numbers are not available to determine ownership, to appear before a judge of the municipal court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, to determine whether a nuisance exists and should be abated. (e)  Summons or complaints issued in accordance with subsection (d) of this section shall, in all cases, be served upon owners and persons in possession of said real property, and owner of the junked motor vehicle whose identity is known; and the return of service signed by the public officer or the public officer's agent or an affidavit of service executed by a duly authorized citizen of this state reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon such person personally or by leaving such copy at the place of such person's residence shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owners and parties in interest. (1)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the city, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such summons or complaint to be served upon such party or parties by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen that such party was served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence, shall be conclusive as to such service. (2)  Nonresidents of the state shall be served by publishing the same once each week for two weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. A copy of such complaint or summons shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected by the complaint or summons. A copy of such complaint or summons will also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notices in the county in which the property is located, and such filing of the summons or complaint shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to such nonresident by registered or certified mail. (3)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or summons upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided for nonresidents of the state as set out hereinabove or service may be perfected upon any person, firm or corporation holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. (f)  If, upon a hearing as provided for herein, a judge of the municipal court shall find that a nuisance exists, and further orders any party to abate said nuisance within a specified time, then a failure to abate and said individual may be subject to a contempt action. (g)  If the nuisance, as adjudged by the municipal court, is not abated as ordered within ten days from the date of such adjudication, then the director of the code enforcement department, or the director of the code enforcement department's designee, is authorized to remove any junked motor vehicle from the property in question. The cost to the city of this abatement shall be charged to parties adjudged responsible for such nuisance abatement. If the owner of the real property affected has been adjudged responsible for abatement, and the charges remain unpaid for a period of 30 days after payment is due, the mayor or the mayor's designee shall cause an execution to be issued against the owner of the property for those charges. The execution shall be a lien on the property and, when recorded in the general execution docket of the county, shall be a lien on all property of the defendant in execution from the date of such recording. (h)  The director of the code enforcement department, or the director of the code enforcement department's designee, is authorized to dispose of any junked motor vehicle pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. (Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-12), 2-28-2006) 
Sec. 36-74. - Procedures for determining premises or property to be unsafe or unhealthful; complaint, notice, and hearing.     Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. (Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-7b(3)), 2-28-2006) 
Sec. 36-75. - Findings of fact and order for dwelling, building, or structure. (a)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: (1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used be in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or (2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. (b)  For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a the state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-7b(4)), 2-28-2006) 
Sec. 36-76. - Owner's failure to comply to repair or demolish dwelling, building or structure. (a)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling or structure a placard with the following words:     "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." (b)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; (Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-7b(5), (6)), 2-28-2006) 
Sec. 36-77. - Reserved. Editor's note— At the request of the city, § 36-77 has been renumbered as § 36-8. 
Sec. 36-78. - Costs to be a lien; waiving of lien; citation for violations.     The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. (1)  The lien provided for in section 36-77 shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. (2)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this article shall transmit to the tax commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq. provided, however that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the city whose lien is being collected. (3)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 may be initiated at any time following receipt by the tax commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this chapter. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties or unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. (4)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority and tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. (5)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. (6)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. (7)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. (8)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. (Ord. No. 06-103, § 1(16-7b(7)), 2-28-2006) 
Secs. 36-79—36-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VACANT BUILDINGS 
Sec. 36-97. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Code enforcement and planning and development services means the director of such department or such director's designee.     Statement of plan means a specific written document prepared by the property owner regarding the vacant structure and plans for its rehabilitation, maintenance or demolish.     Vacant structures means a structure or building that is unoccupied for a period of 90 days. (Ord. No. 08-104, § 1(16-13.1), 2-26-2008) 
Sec. 36-98. - Registration of vacant buildings. (a)  Whenever code enforcement provides written notice to the owner of the existence of a vacant building or dwelling, the owner shall within ten days of such notice register said structure with planning and development services. This registration must be renewed at the end of each six months if the structure is still a vacant building. planning and development services is authorized to establish a fee schedule so as to enable the city to offset its reasonable expenses in providing this notice and monitoring the information provided. This fee will be kept in planning and development services' office and in the office of the city clerk. (b)  Planning and development services is authorized to prepare the necessary forms which shall include the owner's name, address and telephone number; the name, address and telephone number of any other responsible party or local representative of the owner; the common address of the structure as well as the tax map, map block and parcel tax identification. (c)  Should the owner fail to respond to such notice, code enforcement shall issue summons setting a hearing in municipal court asserting the owner should be punished as set forth in section 1-17. (Ord. No. 08-104, § 1(16-13.2), 2-26-2008) 
Sec. 36-99. - Statement of plan. (a)  At the time a structure is registered as required in section 36-98, the owner shall submit to planning and development services a statement of plan. The plan shall include at least the following: (1)  The length of time the owner expects the vacancy to continue. (2)  The proposed rehabilitation or improvements to be made to the structure so as to make the structure suitable for its intended use. (3)  A form in which the owner grants permission to the director or its designee to enter and inspect the property. (4)  A description of what will be done to secure the structure so that it will not become open to the general public planning and development services is authorized to establish a fee schedule so as to be able to monitor the proposed statement of plan. This fee will be kept on file in planning and development services' office and the office of the city clerk. (b)  Should the owner fail to submit a statement of plan or fail to comply with such plan after it has been approved by planning and development services, code enforcement shall issue summons setting a hearing in municipal court asserting that the owner's action or lack of action constitutes a violated section 1-17. If the owner fails to appear at said hearing, code enforcement is authorized to proceed to secure the structure so that it will not become open to the general public. The amount of the cost of such work shall be a lien against the real property and code enforcement may make application to the municipal court for issuance of a fi. fa. (Ord. No. 08-104, § 1(16-13.3), 2-26-2008) 
Sec. 36-100. - Vacant buildings or structures that are open to the general public.     A vacant building or structure that is open to the general public by casual entry, is a public nuisance and subject to abatement as provided in section 36-71 et seq. A vacant building or structure shall be considered properly maintained if it: (1)  Has all doors and windows and other openings weather-tight and secured against entry by the general public as well as animals. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, all doorways, windows and other openings shall be in accordance with section 36-103. (2)  All roof and roof flashings shall be sound and tight such that no rain will penetrate the structure and must allow for appropriate drainage so as to prevent deterioration of the interior walls or other interior portions of the building. (3)  The building must be maintained in good repair, be structurally sound and free from rubbish, garbage, and other debris. (4)  Structured members of the building shall be capable of bearing both live and dead loads and the foundation walls likewise shall be capable of supporting an appropriate load. (5)  The exterior of the structure shall be free of loose or rotten materials as well as holes. Any exposed metal, wood or other surface shall be protected from the element by appropriate weather-coating materials (paint or similar treatment). (6)  Any balconies, canopies, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes or other overhanging extensions shall be in good repair, appropriately anchored. The exposed metal and wood surface of such overhanging extensions shall also be protected from the element against rust or decay by appropriate application of paint or similar weather-coating. (7)  Any accessories or appurtenant structures, including but not limited to garages, sheds and other storage facilities shall meet the same standards. (Ord. No. 08-104, § 1(16-14), 2-26-2008) 
Sec. 36-101. - Inspections by director.     Upon request of code enforcement, the owner of a vacant building shall permit inspection of the premise by code enforcement as well as appropriate police and/or fire officials. The reason for such inspections is to make sure that the building will support entry by police and fire personnel in cases of emergency. Should code enforcement have reason to believe an emergency situation exists such that there is an immediate danger to public health, welfare or safety, code enforcement may enter along with fire and/or police personnel to inspect the structure. Absent such an emergency, code enforcement will request permission from the owner to conduct such inspection and upon a refusal by the owner, code enforcement shall seek an appropriate search warrant. (Ord. No. 08-104, § 1(16-14.1), 2-26-2008) 
Sec. 36-102. - Vacant building permits.     Planning and development services will issue a vacant building permit upon being satisfied that the building or structure has been inspected and is in compliance with all of the above maintenance standards. This permit will be valid for a period of six months, at the end of which the inspection process must again be carried out by planning and development services and/or its designee(s). (Ord. No. 08-104, § 1(16-14.2), 2-26-2008) 
Sec. 36-103. - Board up permits (a)  No person, firm, association or corporation shall erect, install, place, or maintain boards over the doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure or otherwise secure such openings by a means other than the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure without first applying for and, within 30 days of application, completing all steps necessary for the issuance of a boarding permit and thereafter having a valid and current boarding permit therefor from the building official. Any properties with boards existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived will have one year from the date of the ordinance's adoption to make application to continue to board. (b)  The director of planning and development services shall issue a boarding permit required by subsection (a) of this section upon the submission of a written application by the owner of the property or such owner's authorized representative or contractor, upon the payment of the required fee and upon the confirmation through inspection by the director of code enforcement or the director of code enforcement's designee that the boarding or other method of securing the building or structure has been done in compliance with this article. The director of planning and development services is authorized to establish a fee schedule so as to enable the city to offset its reasonable expenses in reviewing the application and monitoring the boarding process. (c)  The boarding permit issued pursuant to this section shall authorize the boarding or other securing of a building or structure for an initial period of six months. If the structure is still boarded at the end of each such six months, the boarding permit may be renewed upon the submission of a written application by the owner of the property or their authorized representative or contractor with the submission of the application occurring no later than ten business days prior to the expiration of the original permit, upon the payment of the required fee and upon the confirmation through inspection by a city code enforcement officer that the boarding or other method of securing the building or structure has been done in compliance with this article. The issuance of a renewal-boarding permit shall also be subject to all of the following conditions: (1)  The owner shall submit a detailed plan for correction, repair or rehabilitation of violations of state or local building and housing standards and for the securing of the doors, windows and other openings by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure or, alternatively, a detailed plan for sale of the property to another person or entity with provision in the sale of correction, repair or rehabilitation; (2)  The owner shall submit a time line for applying for appropriate permits for such work and for completing such work prior to the expiration of the renewal permit, or alternatively, a timeline for the sale of the property; (3)  The permit may be revoked by written notice of the director of planning and development services, at the recommendation of the director of code enforcement, if the owner fails to comply with the plan for such work or fails to comport to the timeline submitted. (d)  A boarding permit may not be extended beyond the renewal period nor may a new application for the same property be accepted by the director of planning and development services within one year of the date of expiration of the prior permit, except upon the submission of a written application by the owner of the property or their authorized representative or contractor, upon the payment of the required fee, upon the confirmation through inspection by a city code enforcement officer that the boarding or other method of securing the building or structure has been done in compliance with this chapter and upon demonstration that "good cause" for the renewal exists. "Good cause" shall require a showing by the owner that the permit renewal is made necessary by conditions or events beyond the owner's control, such as inability to obtain financing for repair or rehabilitation, inability to locate a suitable buyer, unanticipated delays in construction or rehabilitation, or unanticipated damage to the property. In addition, where appropriate, "good cause" shall also require a showing by the owner that the owner has exercised reasonable and due diligence in attempting to complete the needed repair, rehabilitation or correction or is attempting to sell the property. In the event that the director of planning and development services determines that there exists good cause to renew the permit and that all other conditions are met, the permit may be renewed by the owner for an additional one year, subject to all of the same conditions imposed on the original renewal permit. (e)  Exceptions. Board up permit shall not be required in the following circumstances: (1)  Temporary emergency situations, including but not limited to damage caused by vandalism, theft or weather and hurricane preparation. (2)  Seasonal residences. (Ord. No. 08-104, § 1(16-14.3), 2-26-2008) 
Sec. 36-104. - Standards for securing building. (a)  Compliance with minimum standards. The boarding of the doors, windows or other openings of any building or structure any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, shall comply with the following minimum standards: (1)  Securing by boarding. Windows and similar openings shall be boarded with exterior grade plywood of a minimum thickness of five-eighths inch nominal or its equivalent. Vent holes may be required, as deemed necessary by the city. The plywood shall be secured in place by two inches by four inches or four inches by four inches cross members, secured to the plywood by three-eighths inch plated carriage bolts with large washers at each end and with the cross member turned so that the carriage bolt goes through the larger dimension. Bolts used to secure the cross member shall be threaded to the correct length. A minimum of two cross members shall be used on each window and, depending on the size of the opening, additional cross members may be required. Each cross member shall be a continuous piece of lumber, and each must extend at least one foot past the window opening in each direction. Bolts and nuts used to secure the cross members to the plywood must be tightened enough to slightly deflect the wood. Bolt heads must fit tightly against the wood and not give a surface for pliers or pry bars. (2)  Exterior doors. Exterior doors shall be boarded with exterior grade plywood of a minimum thickness of five-eighths inch nominal or its equivalent, fitted to the entry doorjamb with maximum one-eighth inch clearance for each edge. The existing door should be removed and stored inside the building. The plywood shall be attached to three horizontal two-inch by four-inch wooden crossbars each with two three-eighths inch carriage bolts and matching hardware. The plywood shall be attached to the door entry with three case hardened strap hinges of the types specified by the building official and the plywood shall be secured by a case hardened steel hasp and minimum two-inch case hardened padlock also of the type specified by the city. (3)  Painting of boarded openings. All boarded openings shall be painted with a minimum of one coat of exterior paint, which is of a color compatible with the exterior color of the building or structure. (4)  Alternative methods of securing a building. Upon application for a boarding permit, the building official may approve alternative methods of securing a vacant and unoccupied building or structure. In making the determination to approve any alternative method, the city shall consider the aesthetic and other impacts of such method on the immediate neighborhood and the extent to which such method provides adequate and longterm security against the unauthorized entry to the property. (b)  Additional requirements. In connection with the boarding of the doors, windows or other openings of any building or structure or any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, the owner shall also comply with all of the following requirements: (1)  All utility service to the building or structure shall be terminated by removal of the meters and termination of electric power at the pole. Compliance with this subsection may be waived in writing by the city as to the electric utility service in the event that electricity is needed to power exterior security lighting, an alarm system or equipment to be used in connection with rehabilitation of the building or structure for which there is an active and current building permit; (2)  The sewer shall be capped in a manner approved by the city so as to prevent the accumulation of methane gas in the building or structure; (3)  The interior of the building or structure shall be cleaned of all trash, junk, garbage, debris, and solid waste, and personal possessions shall be removed from the interior of the building or structure, so as to eliminate any fire or health hazard and prevent hindrance to firefighting equipment or personnel in the event of a fire. Disposal of such trash, etc., must comply with any and all provisions of the city Code and no such trash, etc., shall be placed on city right-of-way. (Ord. No. 08-104, § 1(16-14.4), 2-26-2008) 
Secs. 36-105—36-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BIRD ROOSTS 
Sec. 36-124. - Abatement.     Whenever the district health officer shall certify in writing to the city manager that the public health is threatened or adversely affected by the roosting of birds at a location specifically described in the certification, and requests therein that the roosting of such birds be abated, the city manager shall give notice to the owner of the property to abate the roosting of birds within one week by cutting and removing from the property all harborage, reed growths, underbrush, small trees, oaks and scrub oaks to the extent that the birds will no longer use the location for a roosting place. (Code 1985, § 16-16; Ord. No. 01-128, § 1(exh. A), 6-27-2001) 
Sec. 36-125. - Notice.     The notice provided for by section 36-124 shall be in writing and shall be delivered in person to the owner. The notice shall also be served on the person in actual possession of the property, if any. Because of the urgency of the health problem created, if the owner cannot immediately be located and served, or is unknown, or is a nonresident of the county, it shall be sufficient notice for the city manager to post such notice on the property one week before further action is taken. (Code 1985, § 16-17; Ord. No. 01-128, § 1(exh. A), 6-27-2001) 
Sec. 36-126. - Each day separate offense.     After the delivery or posting of the notice required in section 36-125 to the owner, each day the owner fails to comply with the notice shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided in section 1-17. (Code 1985, § 16-18; Ord. No. 01-128, § 1(exh. A), 6-27-2001) 
Sec. 36-127. - Removal by city.     If the owner shall fail to comply with the notice required by section 36-125, within one week after the delivery or posting of such notice, the city is authorized to enter upon the property, and cut and remove all of the vegetation. (Code 1985, § 16-19; Ord. No. 01-128, § 1(exh. A), 6-27-2001) 
Sec. 36-128. - Costs.     The chief finance officer shall determine the cost of work authorized by section 36-127, based on employee time and equipment used, or based on the contract price if by contract, and shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment thereof on or before a date named in the demand, which shall not be earlier than 15 days nor later than 45 days after the completion of the work. (Code 1985, § 16-20; Ord. No. 01-128, § 1(exh. A), 6-27-2001) 
Sec. 36-129. - Order to show cause.     If payment of the costs assessed pursuant to section 36-128 shall not have been made on or before the date named, the chief finance officer shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the municipal court judge, notifying such owner to show cause before the municipal court judge at a time and place and on a date named therein why execution should not issue against the property for such amount. (Code 1985, § 16-21; Ord. No. 01-128, § 1(exh. A), 6-27-2001) 
Sec. 36-130. - Execution.     If it shall appear at the hearing to show cause that the property was in the condition certified by the health officer, that the notice required by section 36-125 was given, that the work was performed and the costs thereof incurred by the city and have not been paid by the owner, then execution shall issue for such amount signed by the recorder and shall be executed in the same manner as liens are executed to recover the costs of repair or demolition of abated nuisances under section 36-78. (Code 1985, § 16-22; Ord. No. 01-128, § 1(exh. A), 6-27-2001) 
Secs. 36-131—36-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE CONTROL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 23, 2010, deleted the former Art. VI, Div. 1, § 36-147, Div. 2, §§ 36-178—36-182, Div. 3, §§ 36-191—36-197, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to noise control and derived from Code 1975, § 16-26(a)—(c); Code 1985, § 17-20; Code 1985, §§ 17-41—17-45; Ord. No. 90-171, §§ 1—5, 11-27-1990; Ord. No. 97-123, § 1, 6-10-1997; Ord. No. 04-108, §§ 1, 2, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 04-109, §§ 1, 2, 3-23-2004. It should be noted that §§ 36-191—36-197 bore no history notes. For a completed derivation, see the Code Comparative Tables at the end of this volume. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 36-147. - Use of loudspeakers or public address systems upon public property prohibited; exception by permit; application; penalty. (a)  The use and operation of a loudspeaker or public address system upon the streets, alleys or public property within the city limits for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure by any person is prohibited and declared to be unlawful unless such person shall obtain a written permit from the city manager, or his designee, at least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the use thereof. (b)  To obtain the permit referred to in subsection (a) of this section, written application shall be made to the city manager, or his designee, by the person desiring to use the loudspeaker or public address system, in which application the applicant shall state the time, place and manner of the proposed use and the type of loudspeaker or public address system which is proposed to be used, and the vehicle, if any, upon which the same shall be located. The application must be received 14 days prior to the proposed use. The factors to be considered include, but are not necessarily limited to (1)  The previous experience with the applicant; (2)  The time of the event; (3)  Other activities in the vicinity of the proposed location; (4)  The cultural or social benefits of the proposed activity; (5)  The effect of the activity on any adjacent residential property. The permit may impose conditions, including but not limited to: (i) maximum height that speakers may be off the ground; (ii) that permit holders change the arrangement of the amplifying equipment or sound instruments upon the request of the city police department so as to minimize the disturbance to others resulting from the position or orientation of the amplifying equipment; (iii) adequate provisions to insure the proper cleanup of any litter resulting from the event for which the permit to exceed was obtained; (iv) adequate private security for the purpose of crowd and traffic control—and shall be part of any permit. The adequacy of such private security shall be determined by the city police department. (c)  Limit on permits. Permits shall be subject to the following limitations: (1)  Permits will only be granted for temporary purposes not to exceed eight continuous hours in any one time period; (2)  No more than two permits shall be allowed per address (person or group of persons) during any six-month period. January 1 through June 30 shall constitute one six-month period. July 1 through December 31 shall constitute the second six-month period. (3)  No permit shall be granted for the time period between 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (4)  If the permit holder fails to provide such security then the permit shall be considered revoked and use of the loudspeaker(s)/amplification shall cease. (d)  Cooperation. Permit holder(s) shall agree to cooperate with the city police department by being available at the site of the event during the entire time period for which a permit has been issued. If at any time the permit holder is absent, then the permit shall be considered revoked and use of loudspeaker(s)/amplification shall cease. (e)  The city manager, or his designee, will respond in writing within five days of the proposed use. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Secs. 36-148—36-177. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS OF NOISE ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PROPERTY 
Sec. 36-178. - Legislative findings and purpose. (a)  The City of Albany, Georgia, having received an increasing number of complaints from the citizens of the city concerning radio and other noises emanating from vehicles on the public streets and ways and properties of the city, and having made certain observations on the subject, hereby finds and declares that: (1)  Excessive noise, when unnecessary to the carrying on of religious, political, civic, or commercial activities, or when not generated in the course of other activity necessary to carrying on the daily life, creates a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. (2)  Those noises which are most obnoxious to public health, safety and welfare in the city are those which are loud, boisterous, raucous, unseemly, or which are generated solely for the purpose of entertainment of a person or group of persons without regard to the health, welfare and safety of others who are unable to avoid being subjected to such noises. (3)  There has been an alarming increase in the frequency and volume of noise from the many portable sound reproducing devices available today, such as portable radios, tape recorders, and cassette players. (b)  It is, therefore, the intent of this division to strike an appropriate balance between the right of individuals to obtain information and derive pleasure by listening to radios and other devices, and the right of the public to a peaceful and healthful environment. It is not the intent of this legislation to interfere unduly with freedom of speech or religion by regulating the initial production or amplification of sound. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 36-179. - Prohibited noise. (a)  Purpose. This section is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city through the control of noise. It shall be the intent of this section to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. (b)  Sound measurement standards for code enforcement and law enforcement personnel. For the purposes of this section, "plainly audible" shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth in subsection (c) of this section which can be heard from the distance of 100 feet or more, using the following sound measurement standards: Measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the source of the sound. For music and other noise, words and phrases need not be discernable. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated, any radio, tape recorder, cassette player, or other machine or device for reproducing sound, if it is located in or on any of the following: (1)  Any public or private property, including any building, public street, sidewalk, park, thoroughfare; or (2)  Any motor vehicle on a public street, highway, public space, or private property within the corporate limits of the city; and if the sound generated is audible at a distance of 100 feet from the device producing the sound or from the building in which the sound is produced. (d)  Possession by a person or persons of any of the machines or devices enumerated in subsection (c) of this section shall be prima facie evidence (which may be rebutted) that person operates, or those persons operate, the machine or device. (e)  Upon receipt by the police department of a complaint by any citizen detailing an incident of excessive or annoying music emanating from a motor vehicle, either parked or mobile, which meets the criteria enumerated in subsection (c) of this section and any of its subsections, provided the complainant provides information including, but not limited to: (1)  Date and time of the occurrence; (2)  Location of the occurrence; (3)  License tag number and state of issue; (4)  Vehicle description, to include color, and make/model if known; (5)  Description of the vehicle operator if known; And if the complainant indicates a willingness to serve as a witness in municipal court should a case be made, by providing the following information for the issuance of a witness subpoena to municipal court: (1)  Name of complainant; (2)  Address of complainant; (3)  Telephone number of complainant; (f)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated, any radio, recording player, musical instrument, or other machine or device for reproducing sound at any organized group event or program outside of a building between 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. (g)  Exceptions. (1)  Any event held in the area known as the central business district (CBD). (2)  Any event held on any of the Civic Center Complex properties. (3)  Any other event that has obtained prior approval from the city board of commissioners, and the city manager, such as block parties, etc. (4)  Nothing in this section shall apply to any event held or sponsored by any government agency or school. (h)  Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of this section within the city, shall be penalized in accordance with sections 1-17 and 1-18 of this Code. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 36-180. - Enforcement; powers of arrest or summons.     Any authorized police officer shall issue a summons for any violation of this division, except they may arrest for instances when: (1)  The alleged violator refuses to provide the officer with such person's name and address and any proof thereof as may be reasonably available to the alleged violator. (2)  When the alleged violator refuses to cease such person's illegal activity after being issued a citation. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 36-181. - Penalty.     Violations of this division shall constitute offenses punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18 of this Code. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 36-182. - Other remedies.     No provision of this division shall be construed to impair or replace any common law or statutory cause of action, or other legal remedy, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this division or from the privacy rights of such individuals. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Secs. 36-183—36-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOUND LEVEL LIMITATIONS 
Sec. 36-191. - Definitions.     All terminology used in this division, not defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. The following words and terms, when used in this division, shall have the following meanings:     Ambient noise means the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually being a composite of sounds with many sources near and far.     A weighted sound level is the sound level as measured using the "A" weighting network with a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. The unit of reporting is Db(A). Sounds measured with the "A" weighting network approximate the response of human hearing when measuring sounds of low to moderate intensity.     C weighted sound level is the sound level as measured using the "C" weighting network with a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. The unit of reporting is Db(C). The "C" weighting network is more sensitive to low frequencies than is the "A" weighting network.     Commercial or business property category means all property which is used primarily for the sale of merchandise or goods, or for the performances of service, or for office or clerical work.     Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, or demolition of buildings or structures.     Decibel (dB) means the unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location.     dBA means the A-weighted unit of sound pressure level.     dBC means the C-weighted unit of sound pressure level.     Emergency means any occurrence or set or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action.     Emergency work means any work or action performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency.     Impulsive sound means a sound having a duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.     Industrial or manufacturing property category means any property which is used primarily for manufacturing or processing.     Institutional property category means any property which is used primarily for public purposes such as city hall or a city park.     Muffler means a sound-dissipative device or system for attenuating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine where such a device is part of the normal configuration of the equipment.     Multifamily dwelling means any building or other shelter that has been divided into separate units to house more than one family.     Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.     Noise disturbance means any sound that: (1)  Endangers the safety or health of any person; (2)  Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or (3)  Endangers personal or real property.     Noise sensitive facility means any facility whose operations may be detrimentally impacted by excessive sound levels. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, hospitals, and places of worship.     Octave band means all the components in a sound spectrum whose frequencies are between two sine waves components separated by an octave.     Place of public entertainment means any commercial facility open to the general public for purposes of entertainment.     Real property line means the line, including its vertical extension that separates one parcel of real property from another.     Residential property category means all property on which people live and sleep or that which is not commercial or industrial.     Sound level meter (SLM) means an instrument used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to type 1 or type 2 standards as specified in ANSI Standard S1.4-1983 or the latest version thereof.     Sound pressure level (SPL) means 20 multiplied by the logarithm, to the base ten, of the measured sound pressure divided by the sound pressure associated with the threshold of human hearing, in units of decibels. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 36-192. - Sound levels. (a)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound source in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits set forth in table 1 when measured at or within the real property line of the receiving property using the slow response setting unless otherwise noted. Such a sound source would constitute a noise disturbance. Table 1 Sound Level Limits by Receiving Property Receiving Property Category Time Sound Level Limit (dBA) Residential or noise sensitive facility 7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m. 60 11:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 55 Commercial or business 7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m. 65 11:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 60 Industrial or manufacturing At all times 70  (b)  If the noise is an impulsive sound, the fast response setting shall be used and the daytime (7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.) limits of table 1 shall be increased by ten dBA. (c)  In a multifamily dwelling, it shall be unlawful to create or permit to be created any noise that exceeds the daytime (7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.) limit of 55 dBA and the nighttime (11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) limit of 45 dBA as measured from the closest neighbor's dwelling. (d)  In places of public entertainment it shall be unlawful to create or permit to be created any noise that exceeds an average of 95 dBC in any ten-minute period when operating in accordance with section 8-109 of this Code. The sound level limit for all other times shall be 55 dBC. The sound shall be measured at a point which is found by traveling a straight line distance from the center of the sound board through to the inside center rear of the facility. The measurement assumes that the sound board is not more than 100 feet from the center stage. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 36-193. - Exemptions. (a)  Noise generated from government sponsored or approved celebrations or events shall be exempt from the provisions of this division. (b)  The following are exempt from the sound level limits of section 36-192: (1)  Sound by public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or authorized public safety personnel for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; (2)  Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building, provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted or ten minutes if intermittent; (3)  Noise from any automobile alarm, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted or ten minutes if the sound is intermittent; (4)  The generation of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration; (5)  Noise resulting from any practice or performance sponsored by or associated with the educational process administered by a recognized institution of learning, including, but not limited to, band, choir, and orchestral performances; (6)  Noise that results from the activities of an organized sports league; (7)  Unamplified bells, chimes or carillons while being used in conjunction with religious services between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; (8)  Emergency work; (9)  Events with amplified sound that are operating within the time and volume parameters set forth in an approved special administrative permit. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 36-194. - Restricted uses and activities.     Notwithstanding the provisions of section 36-192 and the exceptions above, the following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth below: (1)  Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall not be operated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or on Saturday or Sunday before the hour of 8:30 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable limits set forth in section 36-192. At all other times, the limits set forth in section 36-192 do not apply to noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and year maintenance equipment, provided that all motorized equipment is operated with a functioning muffler. (2)  Commercial or industrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall be operated with a muffler. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall not be operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a residential property line, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, or at any time off Sunday, unless: a.  Such activities are deemed emergency work; or b.  Such activities meet the limits set forth in section 36-192. At all other times, the limits set forth in section 36-192 do not apply to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment. (3)  Domesticated animals may not make any vocalizations (including barking, baying, howling, crying, or making any other noise) for more than ten minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if intermittent. (4)  The collection of trash or refuse in residential districts is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (5)  No person shall operate, play, or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device in such a manner as to create a continuing noise disturbance at 100 feet from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 36-195. - Procedures for the determination of sound levels. (a)  Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including but not limited to, design, maximum and fluctuating rates. All noise measurements shall be made at or within the property line of the impacted site, unless otherwise directed in this division. When instrumentation cannot be placed at or within the property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto as is reasonable. For the purposes of this division, noise measurements are measurements are measured on the A- or C-weighted sound scale, as applicable, of a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics established by ANSI. (b)  Measurements shall be taken by police or code enforcement officers, or code enforcement inspectors, appropriately trained in the use of a sound level meter. (c)  The ambient noise levels shall be subtracted from the measured sound levels of the source under investigation by using Table 2 to determine the sound levels from the source of interest alone. If the ambient sound level is less than four dB higher than the background sound level, the source level cannot be derived and a violation of the article cannot be substantiated. Table 2 Correction for Ambient Noise (in dB) Difference between ambient and background sound levels Correction factor to be subtracted from ambient level for source level 0 to 3dB Unsustainable Violation 4 to 5dB 2dB 6 to 8dB 1dB 9dB or more 0dB  (d)  Fixed amplified sound reproduction devices. If the source of sound is an amplified sound reproduction device on private property (e.g., in a residential, industrial or commercial zoned area), and the complainant states that the rhythmic bass component of the music is disturbing, then the sound level measurements may be taken within the dwelling, porch, yard, hotel room, office space, etc., of the complainant. These sound level measurements shall be conducted with the sound level meter set for "C" weighting, "fast" response. Such measurements shall not be taken in areas that receive only casual use, such as hallways, closets and bathrooms. For the purposes of these measurements, the ambient sound level is that sound level which is measured in the building when the sound source under investigation is not prominent, or in a room on the same floor that is relatively unaffected by the sound source under investigation. This "C" scale measurement shall be in addition to the property line measurement described in subparagraph (a) of this section. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 36-196. - Special variances. (a)  The city manager or the city manager's designated representative shall have the authority, consistent with this division, to grant special variances. (b)  Any person seeking a special variance pursuant to this division shall file an application with the city manager or the city manager's designated representative. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound into compliance with this division would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on the other persons. Notice of an application for a special variance shall be given by the chief or the chief's representative to persons who frequent the area of the sound or activity and who may be adversely affected by the granting of the variance. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the special variance may file a statement with the city manager or the city manager's representative containing any information to support such individual's claim. (c)  In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the city manager or the city manager's designated representative shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community, and other persons of not granting the special variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse impact of granting the special variance. Applicants for special variances may be required to submit any information the city manager or the city manager's representative may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the city manager or the city manager's representative shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the special variance. (d)  Special variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. The special variance shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the special variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this division regulating the source of sound or activity for which the special variance was granted. (e)  Application for extension of time limits specified in special variances or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial special variances. (f)  The city manager or the city manager's designated representative will approve or deny a request for special variance within 30 days of the completed application. An application will be considered complete with the city manager or his designated representative has received not only the initial application but also any additional information requested by the city manager or his designated representative. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 36-197. - Enforcement procedures; miscellaneous. (a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the city may prosecute noise related violations by issuance of a municipal court citation, in which case, the penalty for a violation shall be as set forth in section 1-17 of this Code. In addition to issuing a fine as provided in section 1-17, or in lieu thereof, the municipal court judge may issue an order requiring immediate abatement of any sound source alleged to be in violation of this section. (b)  No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefore, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this article or from other law. Additionally, it is not the intent of this article to repeal, or otherwise affect, subsection 36-2(b)(1) of this chapter. (c)  Severability clause. A determination of the invalidity or unconstitutionality by a court of competent jurisdiction of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection or part of this article shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of this article. (Ord. No. 10-137, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) 
Secs. 36-198—36-202. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BLIGHTED PROPERTY 
Sec. 36-203. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Blighted, as applied to a piece of property, means that property is being maintained in a blighted condition.     Millage rate means only the general millage rate for city maintenance and operations.     Public officer means the building inspector, code enforcement director, city manager, police officer or any other city official who is authorized by law and this Code to exercise the powers prescribed by this section, or any agent of such officer or officers, or any other employee, officer or officers designated by the city manager for purposes of this section. (Ord. No. 08-140, § 1(16-15(a)), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 36-204. - Blighted condition designation.     In order for the property in question to be subject to official identification as blighted and subject to increased taxation, the property must be determined to be: (1)  Unfit for human habitation or unfit for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or (2)  Vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or (3)  Constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; and (4)  Not a dwelling house, which is being used as the primary residence of one or more persons. (Ord. No. 08-140, § 1(16-15(b)), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 36-205. - Procedure for identification of property as blighted.     The procedure for official identification of real property as blighted includes: (1)  A request from a public officer or at least five residents of the city charging that any building, structure or property meets criteria described in section 36-204. (2)  An investigation or inspection by a public officer and determination that the property in question meets the criteria described in section 36-204. (3)  A public officer's issuance of a complaint in rem against the property. The complaint shall state which condition under subsection (2) of this section exist on the property and what steps should be taken to remediate the property. (4)  A public officer's causing a summons and a copy of the complaint to be mailed via certified to the owner of the property. The latter is anyone revealed by a certification of title to the real property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court of the city (hereinafter "municipal court") at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. (5)  If after such notice and hearing, the municipal court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question meets the criteria in section 36-204, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause its written findings to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order. (6)  No property shall be designated as blighted unless the municipal court of Albany enters an order that finds the property in question meets the criteria described in section 36-204(1), (2) or (3). This order constitutes official identification of real property as maintained in a blighted condition. (7)  If the municipal court finds that the property is blighted, it shall, in the same order, list what must be done to remove the blighted condition designation, and give the owner a deadline in which to finish the work. (Ord. No. 08-140, § 1(16-15(c)), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 36-206. - Imposition of increased tax rate.     Property, which has been officially designated as blighted, shall be subject to an increased rate of city ad valorem taxation equivalent to a triple (three times) the normal millage rate applied to the property, applied at the time of the issuance of the subsequent tax bill, as provided by general law. The increased rate continues to be applied to all subsequent tax bills until the property's designation as maintained in a blighted condition is removed as provided in this section. This increased rate of taxation and the official identification of the property as blighted remain with the property if transferred to another owner. (Ord. No. 08-140, § 1(16-15(d)), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 36-207. - Revenue segregated.     Revenue collected from increases in rate of ad valorem taxation shall be segregated and applied to community redevelopment purposes. (Ord. No. 08-140, § 1(16-15(e)), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 36-208. - Remediation.     The property in question may be rehabilitated at any time through remedial actions or redevelopment that conforms with the municipal court order setting forth what must be done to remove the identification of the property as maintained in a blighted condition. Owner may request removal of the property's designation as blighted from the city manager or from the municipal court upon proper proof, including an inspection by a public officer, that the property has been remediated and now conforms with the court order listing what must be done to remove the identification of the property as blighted. The city manager shall be notified in writing ten days before any hearing in the municipal court. (Ord. No. 08-140, § 1(16-15(f)), 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 36-209. - Remediation property tax rate.     Property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed as provided in this section will become eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation equivalent to 50 percent of the normal millage rate applied to the property, applied at the time of issuance of the subsequent tax bill, as provided by general law. This decreased rate is applied to three years tax bills. (Ord. No. 08-140, § 1(16-15(g)), 10-28-2008) 
ARTICLE VIII. - PARKING OF VEHICLES ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY 
Sec. 36-210. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to regulate the parking of vehicles or equipment on any surface that is not an improved surface in the front or side yard areas of an improved single-family residential lot to prevent damage to underground infrastructure that would be caused by the weight of vehicles parked over such infrastructure and which would also result in unsightly and permanent damage to such areas, thereby having a negative effect on the aesthetics of single-family residential areas affected by such practices and the property values of residences in those affected areas. (Ord. No. 14-109, § 1, 6-25-2014) 
Sec. 36-211. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Blockface means that portion of a block that abuts a street between two intersecting streets, or between an intersecting street and the termination of the street.     Civic club means an association, whether or not incorporated, that encompasses a residential area and that, by means of action or efforts by such association or its membership, actively seeks to promote or protect the interests of the area as a separate or identifiable neighborhood or community. At a minimum, a civic club shall have or maintain a name related to or identifying its connection to a residential area, a membership list, a slate of officers, whether paid or volunteers, and a means of communicating with owners of residences in the area on issues or matters of interest to that residential area.     Director means the director of the department of planning and development services or his/her designee.     Front yard means an area extending the full width of an improved single family lot between its side property lines, the front property lot line and a line that is an extension of the front line of the residential structure located on a lot, excluding a driveway. The front yard of a corner lot shall be determined by the street address of the residence located on such lot.     Homeowners association is a corporation formed by a real estate developer for the purpose of marketing, managing, and the selling of homes and lots in a residential subdivision.     Improved surface means an area, excluding a driveway, the surface of which is comprised of selected materials constructed to a depth sufficient to distribute the weight of a vehicle or equipment over such area to preclude deterioration and deflection of the area due to vehicle or equipment load, adverse weather, or other conditions. Examples of materials with which an improved surface might be constructed include asphalt, concrete, permeable pavement, or other materials approved by the director of engineering or his/her designee.     Lot means contiguous land under common ownership, as shown on the most recently approved ad valorem tax rolls of the city that is used or developed as a unit for residential or nonresidential uses, regardless of whether the land consists of a platted lot or a portion of a platted lot or a combination thereof. Two or more platted lots that have been combined in their entireties as a single building site shall not constitute a single lot for purposes of an application or petition filed pursuant to this article.     Owner means the owner of a single-family residential lot in a residential area that seeks the application of this section to such residential area, as such ownership is reflected in the records of the Dougherty County Tax Department at the time of the filing of an application or petition as defined in this ordinance.     Residential area means an area in which not less than 60 percent of the lots are developed and used for single-family residential structures and purposes.     Side yard means an area of an improved single-family lot circumscribed by a line parallel to and extending along the side of a residential structure located on the lot which line is joined at right angles by lines parallel to and that extend along the front and rear lines of the residential structure on the lot to the side property line of the lot, excluding a driveway.     Single-family residential has the meaning ascribed in title I of the zoning ordinance.     Vehicle or equipment means and includes any house trailer, mobile home, motor vehicle, truck, passenger motor vehicle, motor home, camper cabin, motorcycle, trailer, boat, farm machinery or similar equipment or any truck with more than two axles or any trailer, mobile home or motor home with a length exceeding 20 feet. (Ord. No. 14-109, § 1, 6-25-2014) 
Sec. 36-212. - Parking of vehicles prohibited in certain residential areas; application and procedures. (a)  Application of section. This section shall apply to those residential areas designated by ordinance of the city commission in accordance with the procedures outlined in this section. (b)  Offense. It shall be an offense for any person to park or to cause, suffer or permit the parking of a vehicle or equipment on any surface that is not [an] improved surface as defined in this article, within any front or side yard of a single-family residence in a residential area subject to this section. It is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle or equipment is the person who parked, caused, suffered or permitted the vehicle or equipment to be parked in violation of this article. (c)  Application; petition, who may file. A request to apply this section to a residential area shall be initiated by filing with the director a written application or petition as follows: (1)  An application authorized by the board and signed by the president of an active homeowners association or civic club that encompasses the residential area described in the application; or (2)  A written petition signed by at least 60 percent of the owners within the area. (d)  Application; petition; submittal. Applications and petitions are to be submitted to the department of planning and development services. (e)  Written application or petition; information required. An application or petition shall contain such information as the director shall require, including the following: (1)  A map of the proposed boundaries of the residential area requested to be made subject to this section. If the residential area is defined by a plat or map duly filed of record, a reference to such plat or map shall be sufficient; and (2)  If the request is a letter from a homeowners association or civic club, the name, mailing address, telephone number and email address of a person with the homeowners association or civic club or an owner within the area described in item (1) of this subsection who shall be the contact for the request; or (3)  If the request is in the form of a petition, the name and mailing address, including street number, street name and zip code, of all signers of the petition, one of whom shall be designated in the petition as the contact for the request. Each signer of a petition, by his or her signature, shall be deemed to have affirmed that such person is an owner within the residential area described therein, and a statement to that effect shall appear on the face of the petition. (f)  Residential area; size and configuration requirements. The description of a residential area in an application or petition shall include at least one contiguous blockface. (g)  Filing of request; review and action by director. The application or petition referenced in the preceding subsection shall be filed with the director, and upon receipt, the director shall determine whether such application or petition is complete. An incomplete application or petition shall be returned to the contact person named therein, specifying its deficiencies. Upon being revised to comply with this section, the application or petition may be re-filed with the director at a subsequent filing date. (h)  Notice required by applicant. Within ten days after the filing of a complete application or petition, the party filing such application or petition shall provide notice thereof to all owners by: (1)  The posting of signs on private property at such locations and containing such information as the director shall prescribe; and (2)  At least one of the following methods: a.  An electronic message directed to all owners within the residential area; b.  Inclusion in a newsletter or other similar publication customarily used by the neighborhood association or civic club to disseminate information of interest to all owners within the residential area; or c.  Any other writing or publication deemed by the party making the request as the most effective means of providing notice of such filing to all owners within the residential area. (3)  All signs required to be posted by this subsection shall remain in place continuously until: a.  The city commission passes an ordinance applying this section to the residential area or acts to deny the application or petition. (4)  All costs to prepare, install, maintain and remove the signs required by this subsection shall be borne by the party filing the application or petition required by subsection (c) of this section. (i)  Notice required by director. Within ten days after the filing of a complete application or petition, the director shall give written notice thereof to all owners within the residential area. A failure by the director to provide the notice required by this subsection, or failure of any owner to receive such notice, does not affect the validity or finality of decisions reached under this article. (j)  Protest; deadlines. An owner may protest an application or petition by timely filing a written protest with the director within 20 days after the date of the director's notice letter. (k)  Approval by director. The director shall approve an application or petition and refer the matter to the city commission for final action upon determining that: (1)  The notice provisions of subsection (h) of this section have been fully and timely performed or completed.     If the evidence presented to the director demonstrates the likelihood that the parking of vehicles or equipment in the front or side yards of residences in the residential area has caused, or is presently causing, a diminution in the value of the residences in such area, degrades the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or tends to damage underground infrastructures leading to the loss of water or other conditions contrary to the public interest, the director shall recommend the application or petition favorably to the city commission. The director's determination shall be set forth in writing, copies of which shall be provided to any interested party upon request. In the absence of any such finding, the application or petition shall be denied. (l)  Action by city commission. Upon consideration of the recommendation of director of planning and development services, the city commission shall either: (1)  Adopt an ordinance extending the application of this section to the requesting residential area; or (2)  Deny such recommendation and request, which action shall be final in all respects.     The city clerk shall provide a true and correct copy of any ordinance extending the application of this section to a residential area to the code enforcement and police departments and shall cause a certified copy of such ordinance to be recorded in the real property records. (m)  Effective date; term of application. An ordinance extending the application of this Code to a residential area shall be in force as of its effective date and shall terminate 20 years after such effective date, unless earlier terminated by an ordinance adopted by the city commission. (n)  Re-filing of request. In the event of a denial of a request under this article by the city commission, no further request shall be filed for the same neighborhood or residential area, or portion thereof, within the six months following the date of such denial; provided, however, if new information is submitted to the director indicating a material change in off-street parking practices within the residential area sufficient to warrant the filing of a new application or petition, the director may waive the six-month limitation. (o)  The director shall be authorized to promulgate rules and procedures for the efficient administration of this section, including provisions for the issuance of temporary permits that allow, on a limited basis and for a limited period, the parking of vehicles or equipment in areas where such conduct is otherwise prohibited by this section. (Ord. No. 14-109, § 1, 6-25-2014) 
Sec. 36-213. - Enforcement.     The provisions of this article may be enforced by any law enforcement or code enforcement officer. (Ord. No. 14-109, § 1, 6-25-2014) 
Sec. 36-214. - Penalty.     Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a $50.00 fine not to exceed $150.00 maximum. "Each day a violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense."     That, if any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article, or the application of same to any person or set of circumstances, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, void or invalid, of the remaining portions of this article or their application to other persons or sets of circumstances shall not be affected thereby, it being the intent of the city commission in adopting this article that no portion hereof or provision or regulation contained herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of any unconstitutionality, voidness or invalidity of any other portion hereof, and all provisions of this article are declared to be severable for that purpose. (Ord. No. 14-109, § 1, 6-25-2014) 
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of the state, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; abandoned motor vehicles generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 38-1. - Interfering with city officers prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, interrupt or interfere with any city official or employee of the city, in the performance of such official's or employee's duties at any time (Code 1975, §§ 16-2, 22-8, 22-9; Code 1985, § 17-1) 
Sec. 38-2. - Fortunetelling. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     For gain includes the receipt or acceptance of payment, either in cash or in kind, donation, gratuity or reward of any kind.     Fortunetelling means and includes fortunetelling, astrology, clairvoyancy, palm reading and any other practice which involves forecasting the future. (b)  Deceptive to the public. The practice of fortunetelling is hereby found and declared to be inherently deceptive to the public. (c)  Penalties for certain acts. The following shall be the penalties for certain acts: (1)  Any person, whether individually and for themselves, or as an employee or agent of another, who shall, within city limits, perform or offer to perform for gain any act of fortunetelling of an offense. (2)  Any person engaging or offering to engage or holding themselves out as engaging in the practice of fortunetelling for gain within the city limits shall be guilty of an offense. (Code 1975, § 16-5; Code 1985, § 17-3) State Law reference— County governing authority to prohibit, regulate, or tax the practice of fortunetelling, phrenology, astrology, clairvoyance, palmistry, or other kindred practices, businesses, or professions where a charge is made or a donation accepted for the services and where the practice is carried on outside the corporate limits of the municipality, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-15. 
Sec. 38-3. - Restricted and prohibited conduct at city boat docks. (a)  Between dusk and dawn, the use of city operated and maintained boat docks shall be restricted to the launching and retrieving of boats. It shall be unlawful for any person to be present upon a city boat dock premises from dusk to dawn the following day, except for the purpose of launching boats, or retrieving boats from the water. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages of any kind on city operated and maintained boat dock premises at any time. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be present at any time on city operated and maintained boat dock premises while under the influence of alcoholic beverages. For purposes of this section, the term "under the influence of alcoholic beverages" means having consumed alcoholic beverages to the extent that the person's conduct has been noticeably affected thereby. (d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any boat dock operated by a lessee under lease from the city. (Code 1985, § 17-4; Ord. No. 85-215, §§ 1—4, 8-27-1985) 
Sec. 38-4. - Regulations governing the operation, construction and connection of CATV systems. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any persons in this city any television signals by means of a CATV system unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained from the city, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the city, or within any other public property of the city, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street, but is designate or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained from the city, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. (c)  Anyone convicted of violating the terms of this section shall be punished as provided by sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1985, § 17-5; Ord. No. 86-148, § 1, 5-13-1986) 
Sec. 38-5. - Registration of guests and vehicles at motels, hotels and other similar establishments.     Any person or persons occupying any room or rooms in a motel, hotel, roadhouse, public dancehall, or any other similar establishment by whatever name called shall register or cause himself to be registered before occupying the same and, if travelling by motor vehicle, shall register at the same time the license plate of such motor vehicle and the manufacturer's name of such motor vehicle; and no person shall write or cause to be written or, if in charge of a register, knowingly permit to be written in any register of any of the establishments enumerated in this section, a name or designation other than the true name or names in ordinary use of the person registering or causing himself to be registered therein, or the true name of the manufacturer of such motor vehicle or the correct license plate and number thereof. Every person to whom a license is issued for the operation of a motel, hotel, roadhouse, public dancehouse, or any other similar establishment by whatever name shall provide a permanent register for the purposes set forth in this section and make it available for inspection upon demand. (Code 1985, § 17-6; Ord. No. 88-105, § 1, 1-26-1988) 
Sec. 38-6. - Performance of certain acts at the civic center prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any actor, performer, or other person performing before an audience at the Albany James H. Gray Civic Center to injure, maim, kill, or otherwise harm any living animal as a part of or in the performance of such person's act or entertainment; and it shall be unlawful for any person so engaged to utilize or employ dead animals in any way whatsoever in connection with or as a part of such person's act or performance. (Code 1985, § 17-7; Ord. No. 88-187, § 1, 12-13-1988) 
Sec. 38-7. - Curfew for minors—During evening hours. (a)  For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply: the term "public place" means any street, highway, alley or right-of-way, to include sidewalks, any park, playground, mall, or other place or building open to the public; any cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse; any privately or publicly owned place of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation including parking lots, and other areas adjacent thereto; and any vacant lot or land. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and, provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: (1)  When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; (2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; (3)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the referenced places in subsection (b) of this section during the proscribed period of time; (4)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; (5)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel with interstate and intrastate travel through the city being excepted in all cases from this section; or (6)  When the minor is an emancipated minor as defined in O.C.G.A. § 15-11-200. (c)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any child under the age of 18 years to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places listed in subsection (b) of this section within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day except in circumstances set out in subsections (b)(1) through (5) of this section. A person charged with violation of this section for the first time shall be given a warning citation. Upon subsequent violation, the person shall be charged with such violation and, if found guilty, such person shall be subject to punishment as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1985, § 17-9; Ord. No. 96-338, §§ 1—3, 12-23-1996; Ord. No. 99-103, §§ 1—3, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 38-8. - Same—During school days. (a)  If a minor is suspended or expelled from school, that minor's parent or legal guardian, for the duration of the suspension or expulsion, shall: (1)  Personally supervise the minor or arrange for a responsible adult 21 years of age or older to supervise the minor at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had such minor not been expelled or suspended; and (2)  Prohibit the minor from being in any public place at the times the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had such minor not been suspended or expelled unless: a.  The minor is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian or a responsible adult, 21 years of age or older, selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor; or b.  The minor is employed pursuant to an age or schooling certificate during the actual working hours or traveling directly to or from the job site. (b)  Upon conviction of a violation of subsection (a) of this section, a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable in accordance with sections 1-17 and 1-18. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (c)  Any minor who violates subsection (a) of this section is subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. (d)  It shall be an affirmative defense if the parent or legal guardian has initiated the jurisdiction of the juvenile court against the minor prior to the time that the minor violated subsection (a) of this section. (Code 1985, § 17-10; Ord. No. 96-339, §§ 1—9, 12-23-1996; Ord. No. 99-104, §§ 1—9, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 38-9. - Use of city owned parks at night. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be present in or on any city owned or operated park from the hours of 9:00 p.m. in the evening through 4:00 a.m. the following day except when properly permitted or sanctioned by the recreation department for a specifically staffed park function. (b)  City owned boat ramps are not subject to the time limitation set forth above, provided all watercraft are properly identified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 52-7-4 et seq. and the operation of the vessel otherwise complies with all other laws of the state. Individuals may not fish at the site unless licensed by the state. (Code 1985, § 17-11; Ord. No. 96-221, § 1, 5-28-1996; Ord. No. 11-107, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 38-10. - Prohibiting use of name and seal of city. (a)  It is unlawful for any person, firm, company or corporation (profit or nonprofit) to use the name "City of Albany" or the seal of the city for any fund drive, solicitation of money, or donations without first obtaining permission from the board of commissioners of the city. (b)  Each incident of obtaining money or donations of any type through the use of the name of the "City of Albany" or the seal of the city without first obtaining written permission of the board of commissioners of the city shall be an offense punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1985, § 17-12; Ord. No. 95-167, §§ 1, 2, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 38-11. - Marijuana possession. (a)  It is unlawful and punishable for any person to have in their possession one ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the City of Albany, Georgia. (b)  Violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18. (c)  A bond may be set for violation of this section. The amount of the bond shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1985, § 17-13; Ord. No. 98-150, §§ 1—3, 11-10-1998) State Law reference— Municipalities have jurisdiction to try and dispose of criminal cases of one ounce or less of marijuana, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6. 
Sec. 38-12. - Shoplifting. (a)  It is unlawful and punishable for any person to commit the offense by shoplifting of property valued at $300.00 or less within the corporate limits of the city. (b)  A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when such person alone or in concert with another person, with the intent or appropriating merchandise to his or her own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof, or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: (1)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; (2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; (3)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; (4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or (5)  Wrongfully causes the amount to be paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. The term "value" means the actual retail price of the property at the time and place of the offense. The unaltered price tag or other marking on property or duly identified photographs thereof shall be prima facie evidence of value and ownership of the property. (c)  Violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18. (d)  A bond is hereby required for violation of this section. The amount of the bond shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1985, § 17-78; Ord. No. 98-149, §§ 1—4, 11-10-1998) 
Sec. 38-13. - Drug paraphernalia. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Controlled substance means a drug, substance, or immediate precursor in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-25 through 16-13-29 and schedules I through V of 21 CFR 1308. For the purposes of this article, the term "controlled substance" shall include marijuana as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-13-21(16).     Dangerous drug shall have the same meaning as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-71.     Drug related object means any machine, instrument, tool, equipment, contrivance, or device which an average person would reasonably conclude is intended to be used for one or more of the following purposes: (1)  To introduce into the human body any dangerous drug or controlled substance under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state; (2)  To enhance the effect on the human body of any dangerous drug or controlled substance under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state; (3)  To conceal any quantity of any dangerous drug or controlled substance under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state; or (4)  To test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of any dangerous drug or controlled substance under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state.     Knowingly means having general knowledge that a machine, instrument, tool, item of equipment, contrivance, or device is a drug related object or having reasonable grounds to believe that any such object is or may, to an average person, appear to be a drug related object. If any such object has printed thereon or is accompanied by instructions explaining the purpose and use of such object and if following such instructions would cause a person to commit an act involving the use or possession of a dangerous drug or controlled substance in violation of the laws of this state, then such instructions shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge that the object in question is a drug related object.     Object or material means any Chronic Candy, reefer papers, blunts (for example: Royal Blunts - Flavored EZ Roll Tube), glass tubes, bowls, butane turbo lighters or similar products used for illegal and/or unlawful purposes in violation of this article. (Ord. No. 08-145, § 1(17-14), 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 38-14. - Transactions in drug related objects; evidence as to whether object is drug related. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to sell, rent, lease, give, exchange, otherwise distribute, or possess with intent to distribute any object or materials of any kind which such person or corporation intends to be used for the purpose of planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body marijuana, cocaine, crack, ice, methamphetamine, dangerous drug or other controlled substances. (b)  Unless stated within the body of the advertisement or notice that the object or materials that are advertised or about which information is disseminated are not available for distribution of any sort in this state, it shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to sell, rent, lease, give, exchange, distribute, or possess with the intent to distribute any advertisement of any kind or notice of any kind which gives information, directly or indirectly, on where, how, from whom, or by what means any object or materials may be obtained or made, which object or materials such person or corporation intends to be used for the purpose of planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body marijuana, cocaine, crack, ice, methamphetamine, dangerous drug or other controlled substances. (c)  In determining whether any object or material are intended for any of the purposes listed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, a court or other authority shall consider all logically relevant factors. In a trial under this section, any evidence admissible on this question under the rules of evidence shall be admitted. Subject to the rules of evidence, when they are the object of an offer of proof in a court proceeding, the following factors are among those that should be considered by the court or other authority on this question: (1)  Statements by an owner or anyone in control of the object or materials; (2)  Instructions provided with the object or materials; (3)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object or materials; (4)  National and local advertising or promotional materials concerning the object or materials; (5)  The appearance of, and any writing or other representations appearing on, the object or materials; (6)  The manner in which the object or materials are displayed for sale or other distribution; (7)  Expert testimony concerning the object or materials; and (8)  Any written or pictorial materials which are present in the place where the object or materials are located. (Ord. No. 08-145, § 1(17-14.1), 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 38-15. - Sale or possession of drug mimicking paraphernalia.     It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, use, or possess with the intent to use, any object or material that emits an odor, color, smell, taste or otherwise is designed to have properties similar to illegal drugs and are designed to simulate illegal drugs or substances. (Ord. No. 08-145, § 1(17-14.2), 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 38-16. - Possession and use of drug related objects.     It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or possess with the intent to use, any object or materials of any kind for the purpose of planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body marijuana, cocaine, crack, ice, methamphetamine, dangerous drug or other controlled substance. (Ord. No. 08-145, § 1(17-14.3), 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 38-17. - Objects and materials forfeited.     All objects and/or materials forfeited under this section shall be done in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-49. (Ord. No. 08-145, § 1(17-14.4), 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 38-18. - Mobile (cell) phone usage.     If a person improperly uses a mobile (cell) telephone while driving or being in actual physical control of any moving vehicle to the extent that the driver is distracted and involved in a motor vehicle accident and it is proven that the mobile telephone's improper usage distracted the driver from safe operation of such vehicle and was a contributing factor in any collision resulting in death, physical injury, and/or property damage, then the municipal court is authorized to impose a fine up to $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court for the violation of the underlying traffic offense. The total fine amount shall not exceed the maximum fine amount allowed by section 1-17. (Ord. No. 09-111, § 1(17-79), 2-24-2009) 
Secs. 38-19—38-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 38-43. - Disorderly conduct—Generally.     It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in: (1)  Fighting or quarreling in such manner and in such place as to annoy or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or any dwelling, hotel, or other type residence, or of any persons in the vicinity; (2)  Using any indecent, vulgar, obscene, threatening or abusive language in or near a public place which has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person to whom or of whom the remarks are addressed; (3)  Yelling, shouting, singing, chanting or making any other loud noise by any means whatsoever, whether by voice, handclapping, stomping or by mechanical means, on the public streets or on other public property or in proximity thereto in such manner and to such extent as to annoy or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type residence, or of any person in the vicinity. (Code 1975, § 16-21(a); Code 1985, § 17-16) State Law reference— Fighting in a public place, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-32; use of "fighting words," obscene and vulgar or profane language, etc., O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 38-44. - Same—At sporting events or other games, etc. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person attending or at any baseball or other game at any park or other place in the city to: (1)  Do any act or thing which interferes or is liable to interfere with the progress of the game; (2)  Stand or sit in the aisles or passageways of the grandstand, bleachers or other seating places provided or to go into any seat different from that for which such person has paid and is entitled to; (3)  Go beyond any line, fence or rope or other contrivance established by the authorities at such games as a division line between players and the public and beyond which the public is prohibited; (4)  Place any bottle in any place or position within the park or other public place while such game is in progress, where or when such bottle being so placed causes injury or is likely to cause injury to any person; (5)  Assemble with another or others at any place in such park or other public places while any game is in progress, for the purpose of betting; (6)  Enter any such park or other public place, where the same is enclosed, or peep in or over such enclosure for the purpose of witnessing any game without paying such fee to the proper person as is charged or fixed by the authorities at the game for an admission into the park or other public place or to enter such enclosure at any place other than that designated by the authorities in charge of the park or other public place; aid, abet or encourage any fight, turmoil or other angry disorderly demonstration at or in the park or place while such game is in progress. (b)  It shall also be unlawful for any player or participant in any game specified in this section to refuse to go without the enclosure of the park or other public place when ordered so to do by the proper official of the game. (Code 1975, § 16-22; Code 1985, § 17-17) 
Sec. 38-45. - Disturbing public meetings, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or knowingly commit any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, or gathering. Disorderly conduct is an example of such an act. (Code 1975, § 16-23; Code 1985, § 17-18) 
Sec. 38-46. - Events at civic center. (a)  The provisions of section 38-46 shall apply to all events of every kind and nature at the civic center. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or attempt to occupy any seat at any event in the civic center other than the seat which has been assigned to such person. (Code 1985, § 17-19; Ord. No. 83-112, § 1(16-24), 3-22-1983) 
Secs. 38-47—38-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FALSE ALARMS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Restrictions on operation, installation, maintenance, etc., of electronic security systems by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12. 
Sec. 38-66. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alarm administrator means a person or designee designated by the code enforcement director to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts.     Alarm registration means the alarm registration is the notification by an alarm company or an alarm user to the alarm administrator that an alarm system has been installed and is in use.     Alarm system means an alarm system is a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon the city police department, city fire department or the county EMS, including local alarm system. Alarm system does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle or person unless the vehicle or personal alarm is permanently located at a site.     Code enforcement department means the department responsible for the enforcement of the false alarm ordinance.     False alarm means a false alarm is the activation of a fire, burglary and/or robbery or personal alarm by other than a medical emergency, fire, unintentional smoke, forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no fire has occurred, no emergency medical treatment is needed or no burglary, theft, robbery or forcible entry is being committed or attempted on the premises. False alarms shall include negligently activated alarms, alarms which are the result of equipment which has been improperly installed or maintained, and alarms which are purposefully activated to summon the police, firemen or EMTs in nonemergency situations, but does not include an alarm caused by violent weather conditions, acts of God.     Key holder means the key holder is an individual, designated by the alarm user, as the person who will be able to and has agreed to receive notification of an alarm activation at any time; respond to the alarm site; and deactivate the alarm system if such becomes necessary.     Multiple alarm sites means more than one alarm system on the premises.     Panic or personal alarm means an alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring EMS, fire, or law enforcement response. (Code 1985, § 17-46; Ord. No. 00-131, § 2, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 38-67. - Responsibility of the alarm administrator. (a)  The alarm administrator monitors the provisions of this division, and will make notification of a violation to any owner or occupier of the premises where the offending alarm or burglar system is installed. (b)  The alarm administrator will issue a written notice of all false alarms to alarm users. This notice is in addition to the notice issued to the key holder answering the false alarm. (Code 1985, § 17-49; Ord. No. 00-131, § 5, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 38-68. - Registration (or permit). (a)  Registration required. It shall be unlawful to maintain within the city, an alarm system on commercial or residential premises unless the person owning or operating the business or residential location, where such alarm system is maintained, shall file with the alarm administrator, a valid alarm registration issued by the alarm administrator or designee. A separate registration is required for each alarm site (multiple alarm sites). Fire alarms, burglary or robbery alarms, or panic alarms (any combination) on one site will be considered as one registration. (b)  Completed application. Upon receipt of a completed application form, the alarm administrator shall register the applicant and assign an alarm index number unless the applicant has failed to pay a prior fi. fa. assessment or, had an alarm registration for the alarm site suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected. (c)  Alarm registration application. Each alarm registration must include the following information: (1)  The name, complete address, and telephone numbers of the person who will be the registration holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this division; (2)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential, commercial, government entity or apartment; (3)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the classification of the alarm system, i.e., fire, burglary, holdup, panic or other, for each purpose whether audible or silent; (4)  Mailing address if different from the alarm site; (5)  Any dangerous or special conditions present, i.e., attack dog, at the alarm site; (6)  Name and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who will be designated as key holders; both of whom are able and have agreed to receive notification of an alarm activation at any time, respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes, and will deactivate the alarm system if such becomes necessary; (7)  Type of business conducted at the alarm site; and (8)  That law enforcement, fire, or EMS response may be based on factors such as: availability of police units, fire or EMTs, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, etc. (d)  False application. Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a registration. (e)  Transferability. An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that alters any information listed on the registration application within five business days. (Code 1985, § 17-47; Ord. No. 00-131, § 3, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 38-69. - Responsibility of alarm installers, monitoring companies and alarm users. (a)  Any commercial premises employing an alarm or system shall post in a prominent or conspicuous place notice of an alarm control company and alarm index number sticker. This index number, which is assigned by the alarm administrator, will correspond with a named representative who can be notified at all times and who is authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the alarm system or who can contact a person who can deactivate the system if there are no means of access to the premises. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to activate any alarm system for the purpose of summoning the police, except in the event of an actual or attempted robbery or burglary. It shall also be unlawful for anyone to notify the police of an activated alarm and fail to disclose to the police their knowledge or apparent knowledge that the alarm system has been activated due to some electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system. (c)  All alarm users shall be required to respond to the location where the alarm is activated or when requested by the police department, fire department or public safety communications center (911 communications center). The key holder will be given 30 minutes from the time the officer or firemen arrive at the premises to respond to the alarm, unless other arrangements are made through public safety communications center (911 communications center). Upon activation, the alarm shall not sound any longer than 15 minutes. (d)  Alarm installers, monitoring companies, business owners and residents shall register the alarm system within three business days of installation or acquiring the alarm systems in any business, residence and/or buildings having an alarm system installed. Alarm installers, monitoring companies, alarm companies, business owners, and residents will ensure that anytime their registration information has changed that they will notify their alarm installer, monitoring alarm company, and the false alarm administrator of the changes within five business days. (e)  All burglar alarm companies who install, monitor or acquire alarm systems for commercial, government or residential alarm systems will register their burglar alarm companies with the city false alarm administration using the registration form furnished by the city. (Code 1985, § 17-48; Ord. No. 00-131, § 4, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 04-116, §§ 1, 2, 5-25-2004; Ord. No. 09-141, § 6, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 38-70. - Exemptions. (a)  There shall be a 30-day grace period following the installation of any new alarm system during which period false alarms shall not be counted. This grace period is provided to allow the installing company or other installer and the user to take necessary corrective action with regard to the operation of the alarm system. A responsible person at the premises where the alarm or burglary system is installed must maintain written proof, in the form of an invoice, of the date of installation of an alarm system for exemption under this section. (b)  An alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the user's alarm company, or designee, or public safety communications center (911 communications center) to test the system. (c)  All United States, State of Georgia, Dougherty County and City of Albany governmental buildings within the City of Albany, Georgia, shall be exempt from assessments for false alarms. Notices will be sent to the responsible director for each and every false alarm. Directors will make every effort to reduce false alarms at the facilities for which they are responsible. (d)  False alarms caused by beam alarms on business owners fenced-in equipment areas that the law enforcement officer is unable to determine the alarm activation will be cleared as alarm undetermined and no false alarm assessment will be charged. Notices of fence alarm activations will be sent to the responsible business owner for all fence alarm false alarms. (Code 1985, § 17-50; Ord. No. 00-131, § 6, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 38-71. - Offenses. (a)  Upon the police, fire, or EMS responding to the fifth false alarm, the owner or occupier of the premises where said alarm or burglary system is maintained shall be given a written notice that a response to a false alarm has occurred. The first one to five false alarms in a calendar year will have no assessments charged. Any additional false alarms would result in the alarms administrator assessing a service fee due and payable within 30 days following the notice thereof. The violation would result in fees being imposed in increments of six to ten, 11 to 15 and 16 or more. The amounts of the fees shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk and the office of the code enforcement director. (b)  Upon the police or fire department responding to each false alarm, the responding key holder will be advised of the false alarm. If the key holder fails to respond to any false alarm, the responding officer or fireman will notify the public safety communications center (911 communications center), and the alarm administrator will assess a fee to the owner or occupier for violation of this division. If the key holder fails to respond to any false alarm after the fifth false alarm, the alarm administrator will issue an additional assessment. One assessment will be for the owner or occupier for violation of this subsection (b) of this section, and one assessment will be issued for the owner or occupier for violation of subsection (a) of this section. The violation of this section would result in an assessment the same as for the number of false alarms six through ten. (c)  In the event that an owner or occupier fails to register their alarm system, the alarm administrator will assess a fee to the owner or occupier for violation of this division. The violation of this section would result in an assessment the same as the number of false alarms 16 or more. (d)  In the event that an owner or occupier fails to comply with this division, they may be summoned to city municipal court. In the event that an owner or occupier is a corporation or government entity, the summons will be addressed to the corporation or government entity and made to the attention of a designated individual. It will be the corporation's or government entity's responsibility to inform the alarm administrator who the designated individual will be. (Code 1985, § 17-50.1; Ord. No. 00-131, § 7, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 02-111, § 1, 4-23-2002; Ord. No. 04-116, §§ 3, 4, 5-25-2004; Ord. No. 05-126, § 1, 10-25-2005) 
Sec. 38-72. - Appeals. (a)  In the event that a location is assessed a false alarm fee, and the owner, business or legal entity does not agree that the alarm activation should be classified as a false alarm, the owner, business or legal entity to appeal the ruling through the proper process as follows: (1)  The proper representative of the owner, business, or legal entity having or maintaining the alarm system may appeal the ruling in writing within ten days of the notice to the false alarm administrator. (2)  The false alarm administrator will contact the head of the agency that responded to the alarm (fire, police, or EMS) and schedule an appeal hearing, sending by certified mail, a written notice to the aggrieved party. (3)  Should the aggrieved party fail to respond or does not attend the appeal meeting then all fees will be considered valid and no further appeals will be considered on the appeal presented. (b)  The alarm administrator may adjust the count of false alarms based on written request and evidence that the false alarm was caused by: (1)  Evidence that a false alarm was caused by an act of God; (2)  Evidence that a false alarm was caused by the action of the telephone company; (3)  Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage lasting longer than four hours; (4)  Evidence that the alarm dispatch was not a false alarm; (5)  Evidence that the law enforcement officer response was not completed in a timely manner; or (6)  Evidence that the false alarm was a result of inadvertent pull of the fire alarm activation pull station by person other than the owner/owner employees or resident. (c)  In determining the number of false alarms, multiple alarms occurring in any 24-hour period shall be counted as one false alarm; to allow the alarm user time to take corrective action unless the false alarms are directly caused by the alarm user. (d)  In the event that the owner, business or legal entity (proper representative) and the chief of police, fire chief or director of EMS are not able to resolve and agree on the alarm classification, the proper representative may request a meeting with the city commission public safety committee or committee of the whole to appeal the ruling. The alarm administrator will present any documentation on behalf of the city or county. (e)  The ruling of the public safety committee or committee of the whole will be final. (Code 1985, § 17-50.1; Ord. No. 00-131, § 8, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 04-116, §§ 5, 6, 5-25-2004) 
Sec. 38-73. - Alarm response disclaimer.     Registration of an alarm system by an alarm user under the requirements of this division is not intended to and does not create a contract, duty, or obligation, either express or implied, of response by members of law enforcement, public safety communications center employees, city officials, or city employees. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from a failure to respond to notification is disclaimed by the city, and the city retains governmental immunity as provided under state law. 
Secs. 38-74—38-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISON 3. - OPERATION OF MODEL AIRPLANES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-105, § 1, adopted April 22, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 38-14—38-17. For purposes preserving the existing code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as division 3, §§ 38-81—38-84. 
Sec. 38-81. - Regulation of model airplanes. (a)  Model airplanes (including what is sometimes called radio controlled model airplanes) powered by engines requiring liquid fuel (either glow fuel or gasoline) may not be operated or flown in the City of Albany. (b)  Model airplanes that are electric powered or rubber band powered may be operated at Hillsman Park (3rd Ave./N. Van Buren) or Festival Park (500 Block of S. Washington), provided the regulations in section 38-82 are strictly adhered to. (Ord. No. 14-105, § 1, 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 38-82. - Operational regulations. (a)  The model airplanes may not weigh more than two pounds. (b)  The model airplanes shall not be capable of reaching speeds greater than 60 miles per hour. (c)  The model airplanes shall be operated by remote control or flown with a control line, while remaining within the operator's line of sight at all times. (d)  The model airplane shall be kept within the established flight boundaries of the park. (e)  The model airplanes shall be operated safely at all times. (Ord. No. 14-105, § 1, 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 38-83. - Liability.     Nothing in this division shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the City of Albany for any injuries to persons or property, which may result from the operation of a model airplane. (Ord. No. 14-105, § 1, 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 38-84. - Penalties.     Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be punished as follows: (a)  For the first offense, written warning. (b)  For the second offense, a fine of not less than $50.00, (c)  For the third offense, a fine of not less than $250.00, and loss of the privilege to operate a model airplane for a period of 12 months from the date of such offense. (Ord. No. 14-105, § 1, 4-22-2014) 
Secs. 38-85—38-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
Sec. 38-121. - Malicious mischief.     It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, mischievously or maliciously destroy, disfigure or injure any real or personal property of the city. (Code 1975, §§ 16-2, 16-41; Code 1985, § 17-51) State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21; criminal damage to property in the second degree, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-23. 
Sec. 38-122. - Camping on streets, etc. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to camp upon any street, alley or public property within the city. (b)  As used in this section, the term "to camp" shall mean and be evidenced by sleeping, lighting or maintaining fires or use of public property as living quarters. (Code 1975, § 16-42; Code 1985, § 17-52) 
Sec. 38-123. - Loitering, obstruction free passage.     It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a police officer, to loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk, street, area, mall or other public property, or upon any portion of private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon; nor shall any person block or obstruct, or prevent the free access to the entrance to any building open to the public, in violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. (Code 1975, §§ 16-43, 26-2, 26-5; Code 1985, § 17-53) State Law reference— Municipal authority to prohibit loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 38-124. - Blocking ingress and egress.     It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to block or interfere with the free ingress and egress to private or public property. (Code 1975, § 16-45; Code 1985, § 17-54) 
Sec. 38-125. - Remaining on business property after closing.     It shall be unlawful for any person to remain upon the premises or parking areas of any business while such business is closed, without the consent of the owner of the business; provided, however, that in parking areas which are common to more than one business, such conduct shall be unlawful only while all of the businesses are closed. (Code 1975, § 16-46; Code 1985, § 17-55) State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 38-126. - Scalping tickets prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any ticket of admission or other evidence of the right of entry to any event at the civic center for a price in excess of the price printed on the ticket. (Code 1985, § 17-56; Ord. No. 83-123, § 1, 4-26-1983) 
Sec. 38-127. - Graffiti. (a)  Purpose and intent. The board of commissioners of the city finds and determines that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. Graffiti promotes blight in the neighborhoods in which it occurs and encourages similar acts of vandalism. Without prompt and immediate removal of graffiti, other properties become the target of graffiti and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the city and its citizens. The board of commissioners of the city, in the interest of public health, safety and welfare further finds and declares that to be truly effective in the deterrence, eradication and removal of graffiti, it is necessary to implement a comprehensive anti-graffiti ordinance. (b)  The definition of "graffiti" in O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2, as may be hereinafter amended is adopted and specifically incorporated: Any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface. (c)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to deface, destroy or otherwise damage private or public property without the owner's consent by or through the application of "graffiti". (d)  Graffiti penalty. Any person who is convicted of violating subsection (c) above shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. In addition to such punishment, the court may, in imposing sentence, order the defendant to restore the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed. (e)  Notice of removal. The property owner, manager or agent, whether the property is privately or publicly owned, is obligated to remove any graffiti from the property within a five-day of notice. Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti on any property, including structures or improvements, a police officer or code enforcement officer shall give or cause to be given, a five-day notice to the property owner and/or owner's agent or manager to remove such graffiti. Such notice shall be in writing and have substantially the following form: NOTICE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI To the Owner, Agent of the Owner, or Person managing the property hereinafter described: [insert address] Reference is made to the City's graffiti removal program — City Ordinance #11-_____ It has been determined that the improvements/structures at this property contain graffiti which injures neighboring property and the public health, safety and welfare. You are directed to remove the graffiti within _____ days of this notice. In the event you fail to remove the graffiti within the requested _____ days, you will leave the City no alternative but to cause the graffiti to be removed. Dated at Albany, Georgia this day of _____, ________, 20_____. Officer ___________ The notice required by this section may be served in any one of the following manners: (1)  By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property. (2)  By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner as depicted on the county tax digest. (Ord. No. 11-105, § 2, 4-26-2011) Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-105, §§ 1, 2, adopted Apr. 26, 2011, repealed the former § 38-127, and enacted a new § 38-127 as set out herein. The former § 38-127 pertained to graffiti and derived from the Code of 1985, § 17-57; Ord. No. 98-140, §§ 1—6, 9-8-1998. 
Secs. 38-128—38-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY AND HEALTH 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 38-144. - Discharging firearms; dangerous weapons. (a)  Firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person to fire a gun, pistol or any other firearm within the city or its police jurisdiction, except by military companies when on drill or parade or at a funeral in honor of the dead, or by police officers in the line of duty provided, however, that the firing of shotguns within the city limits while hunting upon lands with the permission of the owner thereof shall be lawful provided no such shooting shall take place within 1,000 feet of any dwelling or public road. Firearms may be discharged within designated small arms firing ranges. It shall be unlawful for any firearms to be discharged in the city or its police jurisdiction in violation of O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-103 through 16-11-104. (b)  Other dangerous instruments. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot an air gun, bow and arrow, slingshot or any other like instrument that is dangerous within the city or its police jurisdiction, except that such instrument may be discharged within approved and supervised areas of private property for such purposes. (Code 1975, §§ 16-61, 16-62; Code 1985, § 17-72) 
Sec. 38-145. - Swimming, wading in vicinity of boat launching sites.     It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or wade within a radius of 100 yards of any boat launching site within the city limits except to the extent that may be necessary to launch or recover boats. (Code 1975, § 16-64; Code 1985, § 17-73) 
Sec. 38-146. - Violations of emergency telephone use.     It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally use the emergency telephone service maintained by the city, being telephone number "911," for any purpose other than to summon assistance in a bona fide and genuine emergency. (Code 1975, § 16-66; Code 1985, § 17-74) 
Sec. 38-147. - Public indecency prohibited. (a)  A person commits the offense of public indecency when he or she performs any of the following acts in a place where a person should reasonably expect to be in view of the public: (1)  An actual or simulated act of sexual intercourse or masturbation; (2)  Exposure of the genitals; (3)  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; (4)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person; (5)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the sexual organs of any person, including oneself; (6)  Urination or defecation; or (7)  Appears wearing pants or skirts more than three inches below the top of the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing the skin or undergarments. (b)  Fines and penalties. A citation shall be issued to the offender and the person shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $25.00 on the first offense and not more than $200.00 for each subsequent offense. In addition to or in lieu of a fine, the court may order such person to participate in up to 40 hours of court approved community service activities. Violators shall not be subject to arrest or imprisonment for violation of the section, however, the municipal court shall have the same authority as the superior court to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences. (c)  Defenses. It is a defense under the subchapter if it is determined, after a hearing or trial, that the person was exercising rights protected by the federal or state constitution. Any defense under this subsection must be asserted prior to any hearing or trial in the matter. (Ord. No. 10-136, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2010) Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-136, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 23, 2010, repealed the former § 38-147, and enacted a new § 38-147 set out herein. The former § 38-147 pertained to defecation in public and derived from Code 1975, § 13-8; Code 1985, § 17-75. 
Secs. 38-148—38-172. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LITTER ABATEMENT 
Sec. 38-173. - Definitions.     The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 ("Littering Public and Private Property- Definitions"), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42. (Ord. No. 06-120, § 1(17-76.1), 6-28-2006) 
Sec. 38-174. - Unlawful activities; enforcement; penalties for violation. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this state or any waters in this state, unless: (1)  The area is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use such area; (2)  The litter is placed into a nondisposable litter receptacle or container designed for the temporary storage of litter and located in an area designated by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property; or (3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. (b)  Any person who violates this section shall be punished as follows: (1)  By a fine not to exceed that allowed in sections 1-17 and 1-18; and (2)  Abate the litter that the person deposited. a.  In the sound discretion of the municipal court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or b.  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. (c)  Published a notice of conviction. (1)  The municipal court may cause to be published a notice of conviction for each person convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section. Such notices of conviction shall be published in the manner of legal notices in the legal organ of the county in which such person resides or, in the case of a nonresident, in the legal organ of the county in which the person was convicted. Such notice of conviction shall contain the name and address of the convicted person; date, time, and place of arrest; and disposition of the case and shall be published once in the legal organ of the appropriate county in the second week following such conviction or as soon thereafter as publication may be made. (2)  The convicted person for which a notice of conviction is published pursuant to this section shall be assessed for the cost of publication of such notice, and such assessment shall be imposed at the time of conviction in addition to any other fine imposed pursuant to this section. (3)  The clerk of the municipal court, the publisher of any legal organ which publishes a notice of conviction, and any other person involved in the publication of an erroneous notice of conviction shall be immune from civil or criminal liability for such erroneous publication, provided such publication was made in good faith. (d)  The city may, in its discretion, appoint any person who is a citizen of the United States, is of good moral character, and has not previously been convicted of a felony to enforce the provisions of this section within the corporate limits of the city. Each person appointed pursuant to this subsection shall take and subscribe an oath of office as prescribed by the city. Any person appointed and sworn pursuant to this subsection shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this section in the same manner as any employee or law enforcement officer of the city subject to the limitations provided in subsections (e) and (f) of this section. (e)  No person appointed pursuant to subsection (d) of this section shall be deemed a peace officer under the laws of this state or: (1)  Be deemed to be an employee of or receive any compensation from the city; (2)  Be required to complete any training or be certified pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; (3)  Have the power or duty to enforce any traffic or other criminal laws of the city; (4)  Have the power to possess and carry firearms and other weapons for the purpose of enforcing the littering laws; or (5)  Be entitled to any indemnification from the city for any injury or property damage sustained by such person as a result of attempting to enforce the provisions of this section. (f)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, neither the city, or mayor or member of the board of commissioners or any officer of the city shall be liable or accountable for or on account of any act or omission of any person appointed pursuant to this division in connection with such persons enforcement of the provisions of the provisions of this section. (g)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, resist, impede, or interfere with any person appointed pursuant to this section in connection with such persons enforcement of the provisions of this section or to retaliate or discriminate in any manner against such person as a reprisal for any act or omission of such person. Any violation of this subsection shall be punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1985, § 17-76; Ord. No. 97-119, § 1, 5-28-1997; Ord. No. 02-110, § 1, 4-23-2002; Ord. No. 05-132, §§ 1, 2, 12-20-2005; Ord. No. 06-120, § 1(17-76.2), 6-28-2006) 
Sec. 38-175. - Inference permitted. (a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this division, the trier of fact may in its discretion infer that the operator of the conveyance has violated this division. (b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the provisions of this section is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, the trier of fact may in its discretion infer that such person has violated this section. (Ord. No. 06-120, § 1(17-76.3), 6-28-2006) 
Sec. 38-176. - Vandalizing trash containers and garbage containers. (a)  As used in this section, the term "household garbage" means animal, vegetable, and fruit refuse matter and other refuse matter ordinarily generated as by-products of a household or restaurant, such as tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics, and wrapping or packaging materials. (b)  If a container is clearly marked "household garbage only," it shall be unlawful for any person to dump any refuse or other material into the container other than household garbage. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any containers provided by the city for the dumping of trash or garbage. (d)  Any person who violates subsection (b) or (c) of this section shall be punished within the limits of sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Ord. No. 06-120, § 1(17-76.4), 6-28-2006) 
Sec. 38-177. - Items removed from any residential or commercial structure during a lawful eviction.     All property and debris removed from any residential or commercial structure during the lawful eviction of a tenant including all property and debris that is being discarded by a tenant vacating any residential or commercial structure shall be immediately considered abandoned. Such property or debris shall be immediately removed by the person or persons affecting the eviction/cleanout or placed in a container that is adequate to prevent the disbursement/scattering of such property or debris provided the container is removed no later than the second business day following the eviction/cleanout. Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1985, § 17-76; Ord. No. 97-119, § 1, 5-28-1997; Ord. No. 02-110, § 1, 4-23-2002; Ord. No. 05-132, §§ 1, 2, 12-20-2005; Ord. No. 06-120, § 1(17-76.5), 6-28-2006) 
Secs. 38-178—38-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ABUSE OF ALCOHOL 
Sec. 38-186. - Policy of city not to prosecute persons solely for consumption of alcoholic beverages.     It is the policy of this city that alcoholics may not be subject to criminal prosecution because of their consumption of alcoholic beverages but rather should be afforded a continuum of treatment in order that they may lead normal lives as productive members of society. It is the intent of this division to provide for the identification and referral to treatment of persons who are alcoholic and who may be charged with violations of this division. A person who appears to be incapacitated by alcohol shall be taken into protective custody by the police of other law enforcement officer and forthwith brought to an approved treatment facility for emergency treatment. If no approved treatment facility is available, such person shall be taken to an emergency medical service facility customarily used for incapacitated persons. A person incapacitated by alcohol who does not require emergency treatment may be taken home or, if the person will not go home, may be taken into protective custody and held in the jail until such person is no longer incapacitated by alcohol, but for no longer than a period of 12 hours. (Code 1975, § 13-70; Code 1985, § 17-86; Ord. No. 81-190, § 1(d), 9-8-1981) 
Secs. 38-187—38-197. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INHALATION OF DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Drug Abuse Treatment and Education Act, O.C.G.A. § 26-5-1. 
Sec. 38-198. - Inhaling or smelling certain substances prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to inhale or smell of fumes from automobile transmission fluids, automobile transmission stop leak fluids, automobile brake fluids, or similar automobile fluids or to inhale or smell the fumes of model glue, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-90, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, stupefication, hallucination, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration or dulling of the senses or nervous system. (Code 1975, § 16-127; Code 1985, § 17-106) 
Sec. 38-199. - Sales of certain substances limited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or transfer possession of any automobile transmission fluids, automobile transmission stop leak fluids, automobile brake fluids, or similar automobile fluids or model glue as defined under O.C.G.A. § 16-13-90, to any person under 18 years of age, unless such person under 18 years shall have in possession and shall exhibit upon request the written consent of the parent or legal guardian of such person to make such purchase or to have possession of such substance. (Code 1975, § 16-128; Code 1985, § 17-107) 
Sec. 38-200. - Purchase or possession of certain substances by minors restricted.     It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to buy or to possess any automobile transmission fluids, automobile transmissions stop leak fluids, automobile brake fluids or similar automobile fluids not included in the definition of model glue found in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-90, unless the purchase or possession of such substance is for lawful use, and the person under 18 years of age buying or possessing such substance shall have in possession the written consent of the parent or legal guardian of such person to make such purchase or have possession of such substance. (Code 1975, § 16-129; Code 1985, § 17-108) 
Secs. 38-201—38-219. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR 
Sec. 38-220. - Title.     This title may also be known as the "City of Albany Clean Indoor Air Ordinance." (Code 1985, § 17-111; Ord. No. 95-155, § 1, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 38-221. - Findings and purpose. (a)  Numerous studies, including those published by the Surgeon General of the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency, the American Lung Association, World Health Organization, the National Research Council, and other organizations, have established that the breathing of secondhand tobacco smoke or environmental tobacco smoke by nonsmokers is: (1)  A cause of disease, including lung cancer, in healthy nonsmokers; (2)  A major contributor to indoor air pollution; and (3)  Particularly harmful to children, elderly people, and allergic individuals. (b)  Accordingly, the board of commissioners of the city finds and declares that the purpose of this division is to protect the public health and welfare by regulating smoking in public places and places of employment. (Code 1985, § 17-112; Ord. No. 95-155, § 2, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 38-222. - Definitions. (a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Child care facility includes any facility used to care for or teach children.     Designated smoking area : (1)  In a restaurant means an area of continuous seating where smoking is permitted and which is either: a.  Situated in an area exterior to the building; or b.  If indoors, is situated in an enclosed area which is separately ventilated. Such "designated smoking area" shall be marked by appropriate signs, and shall not include service lines, cashier areas, restrooms, waiting areas, entranceways, or exits. (2)  In a place of employment means either an area exterior to the place of employment, or an enclosed separately ventilated room where smoking is permitted and which: a.  Is not frequented by the public or non-smoking employees; b.  Is not a work area, restroom or meeting room; and c.  Is not the only employee lounge or cafeteria. A "designated smoking area" exterior to the place of employment shall not consist of hallways, walkways or doorways frequented by the public.     Dining area means any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which food is served. (b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-2 ("Smokefree Air—Definitions"), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-2, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-2. (Code 1985, § 17-113; Ord. No. 95-155, § 3, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 38-223. - Regulation of smoking.     Except as otherwise provided in this division, smoking is prohibited in all public places and places of employment within the city existing, built, converted or occupied in the future as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division was derived. (Code 1985, § 17-114; Ord. No. 95-155, § 4, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 98-105, § 1, 1-27-1998) Editor's note— The effective date of the city Clean Indoor Air Ordinance was January 27, 1998. 
Sec. 38-224. - Exceptions.     The regulation of smoking pursuant to this division shall not apply to the same areas determined to be exempt from the application of the Georgia Smokefree Air Act of 2005 (O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 et seq.). (Code 1985, § 17-115; Ord. No. 95-155, § 5, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 38-225. - Declaration of smoke-free environment.     Nothing in this division shall be deemed, interpreted or construed to restrict or prohibit any person in charge of any public place or place of employment from designating that place a smoke-free facility and prohibiting smoking in areas which otherwise would be permitted by this division. (Code 1985, § 17-116; Ord. No. 95-155, § 6, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 38-226. - Posting of signs. (a)  "Smoking" or "No smoking" signs, whichever are appropriate, shall be conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is regulated by this ordinance by the person in charge of such facility. Such signs shall contain letters of not less than two inches in height or the international symbol for "No smoking," consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle, with a red bar across it. (b)  Every restaurant shall have posted, at each entrance, a conspicuous sign clearly stating either that smoking is prohibited, or that a nonsmoking section is available, with smoking permitted only in the designated smoking area. (Code 1985, § 17-117; Ord. No. 95-155, § 7, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 38-227. - Enforcement. (a)  The code enforcement director or the chief building official may take appropriate action to enforce this division. (b)  Any owner, operator or manager of any establishment regulated by this division shall inform persons violating this article of its provisions. (Code 1985, § 17-118; Ord. No. 95-155, § 8, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 38-228. - Other applicable laws.     This division shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is not otherwise restricted or prohibited by other applicable laws, regulations or policies. (Code 1985, § 17-119; Ord. No. 95-155, § 9, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 38-229. - Penalty.     Violation of the provisions of this division by any person shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1985, § 17-120; Ord. No. 95-155, § 10, 11-14-1995) 
Secs. 38-230—38-249. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FLOOD CONTAMINANT POLLUTANTS 
Sec. 38-250. - Title.     This title may also be known as the "City of Albany Flood Pollutant Contaminant Elimination Ordinance." (Code 1985, § 17-120.1; Ord. No. 95-156, § 1, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 38-251. - Findings and purpose. (a)  Numerous studies have established that the breathing of flood contaminants is a cause of disease and allergic reactions particularly harmful to children and elderly individuals. (b)  Accordingly, the board of commissioners of the city finds and declares that the purpose of this division is to protect the public health and welfare by regulating the inhabitation of flood damaged structures containing flood contaminants or pollutants. (Code 1985, § 17-120.2; Ord. No. 95-156, § 2, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 38-252. - Regulation of flood contaminants.     Except as otherwise provided in this division, the presence of flood contaminants and/or pollutants is prohibited in all public places and places of employment within the city. (Code 1985, § 17-120.3; Ord. No. 95-156, § 3, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 38-253. - Enforcement. (a)  The code enforcement director or the chief building official may take appropriate action to enforce this division. (b)  Any owner, operator or manager of any establishment regulated by this division shall inform persons bringing flood contaminants and/or pollutants into their establishment of the provisions of this division. (Code 1985, § 17-120.4; Ord. No. 95-156, § 4, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 38-254. - Penalty.     Violation of the provisions of this division by any person shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18. (Code 1985, § 17-120.5; Ord. No. 95-156, § 5, 11-14-1995) 