THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA ____________ Published by Order of the Board of City Commissioners 2009 ____________ > OFFICIALS of the CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Willie Adams, Jr., M.D. Mayor ____________ Jon Howard Dorothy Hubbard Morris Gurr Roger Marietta Bob Langstaff, Jr. Tommie Postell City Commissioners ____________ Alfred D. Lott City Manager ____________ C. Nathan Davis City Attorney ____________ Sonja Tolbert City Clerk PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented through Ord. No. 07-111, adopted April 24, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of city commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Shelly Hayes, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Alfred D. Lott and city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. © Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. 2009. AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED 09-141 AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Albany, Georgia and it is hereby ordained by authority of same:     Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 64, each inclusive, is adopted.     Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 22, 2009 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.     Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.     Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of City Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.     Section 5. Ordinances adopted after September 22, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.     Section 6. The last sentence of Section 38-69(d) of the Code is changed to read "within five business days."     Section 7. The reference at lines 2 and 3 of Section 52-33 of the Code "but not less than semiannually" is deleted.     Section 8. There is added in alphabetical order to Section 60-127 of the Code "PTP means Pilot Testing Program."     Section 9. To the list of priority pollutants at Section 60-196(c) of the Code, there is added "Bis (2-chloroisopropyl) ether" and "1, 12-Benzofluoranthene" is deleted and in its place is "11, 12-Benzofluoranthene."     Section 10. The penultimate sentence of Section 60-131 (f) of the Code is changed to read "If no building permit is required, the appropriate charge shall be paid to the city at the time the water meter is installed or the size changed."     Section 11. The last sentence of Section 60-949(1) of the Code is changed to read "For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utility facilities is defined as a strip of land at least four (4) feet wide, but not wider than the width of the utility facility plus two (2) feet on either side thereof."     Section 12. This ordinance in no way changes any provisions of the City Charter and shall become effective upon its adoption. /s/         Dorothy B. Hubbard       Mayor Pro Tem   ATTEST: /s/         Sonja Tolbert       City Clerk   Adopted: December 15, 2009 Introduced by Commissioner:  Postell                       Date(s) read:  Dec. 15, 2009       
Chapter 50 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-117, §§ I—X, adopted Nov. 14, 2017, amended chapter 50 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 50, §§ 50-1—50-10, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 17-105, §§ I—X, adopted May, 9 2017. 
Sec. 50-1. - Title.     This chapter will be known as "Albany Georgia's Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." (Ord. No. 17-117, § I, 11-14-2017) 
Sec. 50-2. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated:     Best management practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted.     Board: The board of natural resources.     Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.     Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.     Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282.     Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC).     CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc.     Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation.     Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR).     Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure.     Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative.     District: The Flint River Soil and Water Conservation District.     Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources.     Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.     Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.     Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 50-4(c) of this chapter.     Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation.     Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction.     Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design.     Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.     Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.     Land disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 50-3(5).     Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot.     Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a).     Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins.     Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.     Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present.     NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit.     NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit.     Operator: The party or parties that have: (1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions.     Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water.     Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter.     Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site.     Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.     Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal.     Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.     Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.     Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity.     Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Flint River Soil and Water Conservation District.     Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.     State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f).     State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation.     Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.     Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs.     Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: (1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or (2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or (3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.     Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.     Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.     Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. (Ord. No. 17-117, § II, 11-14-2017) 
Sec. 50-3. - Exemptions.     This chapter shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: (1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". (2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; (3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; (4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; (5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; (6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 50-4(15) and (16) of this chapter, no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; (7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; (8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1)—(10) of this section; (9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; (10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and (11)  Any public water system reservoir. (Ord. No. 17-117, § III, 11-14-2017) 
Sec. 50-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. (a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 50-4(b) and (c) of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. (b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. (1)  Best management practices as set forth in section 50-4(b) and (c) of this chapter shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). (2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. (3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. (4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. (5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15)—(17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). (c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: (1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; (2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; (3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; (4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; (5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; (6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; (7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; (8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; (9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; (10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; (11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; (12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; (13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; (14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 50-4(b)(2) of this chapter; (15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and (16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and (17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to [O.C.G.A] § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to [O.C.G.A.] § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015, if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. (18)  All waste from construction activities at the construction site shall be controlled and properly disposed of in a manner which prevents adverse impacts to water quality. Waste includes, but is not limited to: discarded building materials, chemicals, litter, sanitary waste, and concrete truck washout. A designated area for concrete washdown of tools, concrete mixer chutes, hoppers and the rear of vehicles shall be provided in a location convenient to construction activities and readily accessible by concrete trucks. The designated area shall be a zero discharge containment facility which completely prevents concrete wash water from infiltrating into the ground or discharging to any natural or structural stormwater drainage conveyance or to any waters of the state. Washout of the drum of a concrete truck at a construction site, unless in a designated washdown facility, is prohibited. (d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 50-4(b) and (c) of this chapter. (e)  The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. (Ord. No. 17-117, § IV, 11-14-2017) 
Sec. 50-5. - Application/permit process. (a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. (b)  Application requirements. (1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Albany, Georgia without first obtaining a permit from the City of Albany Engineering Director to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. (2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Albany Engineering Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 50-5(c) of this chapter. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 50-4(b) and (c) of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. (3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. (4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 50-4(c)(15)—(17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 50-5(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. (5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. (6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. (c)  Plan requirements. (1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 50-4(b) of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. (d)  Permits. (1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. (2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by section 50-4(c)(15)—(17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 50-5(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. (3)  Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. (4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. (5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. (6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 (f) (1). (Ord. No. 17-117, § V, 11-14-2017) 
Sec. 50-6. - Inspection and enforcement. (a)  The City of Albany Engineering Department will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. (b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. (c)  The City of Albany Engineering Department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. (d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. (e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. (f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to [O.C.G.A] § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. (Ord. No. 17-117, § VI, 11-14-2017) 
Sec. 50-7. - Penalties and incentives. (a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. (b)  Stop work orders. (1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; (2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and (3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. (4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. (c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 50-4(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. (d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. (Ord. No. 17-117, § VII, 11-14-2017) 
Sec. 50-8. - Education and certification. (a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (b)  For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. (c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. (d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. (Ord. No. 17-117, § VIII, 11-14-2017) 
Sec. 50-9. - Administrative appeal judicial review. (a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the City of Albany engineering director within 14 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. (b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Dougherty County. (Ord. No. 17-117, § IX, 11-14-2017) 
Sec. 50-10. - Effectivity, validity and liability. (a)  Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective immediately upon adoption. (b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. (c)  Liability. (1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. (2)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. (3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. (Ord. No. 17-117, § X, 11-14-2017) 
Chapter 52 - SOLID WASTE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Home rule powers of municipality to regulate sewage collection and disposal systems and water treatment systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6)-(7); the state Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; unlawful to damage, injure or interfere with property of public utility companies, municipalities or political subdivisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; municipalities authorized to acquire, construct, operate and maintain water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 52-1. - Title; application of article.     This chapter may also be known as the city's Comprehensive Solid Waste Ordinance. (Code 1985, § 14-50; Ord. No. 05-111, §§ 1, 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 52-2. - Definitions.     For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning indicated herein:     Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials.     Building materials means any material defined as, but not limited to, lumber, brick, block, stone, carpet, plumbing materials, plaster, concrete, roofing, floor tile, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of the construction of or repairs or additions to structures or accessory structures or the demolition of such.     Business trash means any accumulation of paper, cardboard, packaging materials, rags, or accumulations other than garbage or household trash, which result from the operation of stores, offices, and similar business or commercial enterprises.     City manager means the city manager of the City of Albany or the city manager's duly authorized representative.     Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, restaurant, business, public or semipublic establishment of any kind, and any master-metered apartment. An operation conducted from a residence requiring a business license is a commercial establishment for purposes of this chapter.     Container means a refuse receptacle.     Disposal site means an area, location, tract of land or facility used or intended to be used for the disposal of solid waste, putrescible waste, or other waste.     Garbage means the by-product resulting from the growing, harvesting, processing, handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of animal or vegetable food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction for the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding areas or feeding material for flies, insects, or animals.     Hazardous refuse means the materials which constitute a hazard to health or safety, such as poison, acids, caustic matter or solutions, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, explosives, radioactive materials, and highly flammable substances. This includes any substance listed as a hazardous constituent in regulations promulgated pursuant to the federal act by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency which are in force and effect on February 1, 2004, codified as app. VIII to 40 CFR 261—Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste.     Household trash means the waste accumulation usually attendant upon housekeeping, such as paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage.     Industrial establishment means any establishment involved in the manufacture or assembly of a product or any part thereof.     Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges, and liquids, created by or resulting from the operation of factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises.     Litter means all discarded manmade materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, household trash, industrial waste, building materials, appliances, or portions thereof, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.     Loading and unloading area means a space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons.     Master-metered apartments means those complexes where the solid waste billing is paid by the owner or owners of the complex.     Multiple-family dwelling (multifamily) means a building designed for or occupied by two or more families, such as apartments, duplexes, and triplexes.     Person means any natural person, whether owner, agent, or tenant; any corporation, partnership, association, firm, receiver, guardian, trustee, executor, administrator, fiduciary, occupant, lessee, tenant, or representative of any of same.     Refuse means the solid waste accumulations consisting of any combination of ashes, building material, garbage, hazardous refuse, household trash, and other waste or discarded materials of all kinds.     Refuse receptacle means a container approved by the director as acceptable for the temporary reception and storage of refuse pending transportation to a permanent disposal site. The term shall include plastic bags where approved by the director.     Scavenge or scavenging means the unauthorized and uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials.     Stormwater maintenance means a basic purpose of stormwater maintenance is removal of debris not only from holding ponds and ditches but also street sweeping so as to remove debris from street gutters/catchbasins. The flat topography of the city strongly favors regular street sweeping. The city's effort to meet this challenge includes a fleet of jet vacs, street sweepers, heavy equipment and personnel. Further, the city must operate and maintain a large number of pumping stations.     Tree and shrubbery trimmings means the waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery cuttings or clippings, discarded Christmas trees, grass clippings or other natural waste.     Yard trimmings means the leaves, brush, grass clippings, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance. (Code 1985, § 14-51; Ord. No. 05-111, §§ 1, 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 52-3. - Administration. (a)  Authority of city manager. The city manager shall have charge of the administration of this chapter. The collection, transportation, and disposal by the city's solid waste division, public works department, of all materials regulated by this chapter shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager. The city manager is authorized, with the approval of the governing body, to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to carryout this chapter. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the city manager may set the fees for all services performed by the city as well as rules regarding conveyance and disposal, including but not limited to the size, type, specifications, number and location of all containers. Such rules and regulations shall have the force of law, but shall not be contrary to anything in this chapter, but supplementary thereto. This chapter and the rules and regulations of the city manager promulgated hereunder, shall apply to the storage, collection, transportation and disposition of refuse in the city by private collectors, as well as by the city solid waste collection service. No solid waste collection of any kind shall be collected in a residential area before 6:00 a.m. by any public or private collection service. The city manager shall ensure that all fees collected under this chapter are maintained in a separate enterprise account and used exclusively for the carrying out of this solid waste disposal/maintenance system. (b)  Residential and commercial service. All single-family residential units in the city are required to utilize the solid waste collection service of the city for the disposition of refuse. Garbage shall be collected once-a-week and yard, shrubbery and tree trimmings shall be collected twice per month. (1)  All commercial units are required to utilize the solid waste collection service provided by the city or a service provided by an approved state certified hauler operating under permit from the city manager. (2)  Nothing in this subsection or anywhere in this chapter shall be construed as a surrender by the city of its legal authority to franchise commercial collectors of refuse, or to become the sole and exclusive hauler of all refuse, including commercial and industrial, in the city. (c)  Receptacles and containers required. Every person in possession, charge or control of any building or premises upon which refuse is accumulated or produced shall be required by this chapter to obtain and keep in a suitable place readily accessible to the solid waste collection crews of the city, or to the private collectors, as the case may be, receptacles and containers approved by the city manager as suitable for the storage of all such refuse which will normally accumulate between the established collection dates. The city manager shall determine the type, size, specifications, number and location of said receptacles and shall determine whether said receptacles and containers are in a serviceable condition. (d)  Receptacles and containers to be safe. All receptacles and containers shall be maintained in good serviceable condition at all times. The user is responsible for notifying the hauler of any receptacle or container which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter or to the rules and regulations of the city manager, or that needs to be replaced due to ragged or sharp edges or other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents therefrom or the public generally. (Code 1985, § 14-52; Ord. No. 05-111, §§ 1, 2, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 52-4—52-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FEES 
Sec. 52-31. - Classifications. (a)  For purposes of payment of fees to the city for its services in collecting garbage and refuse under the provisions of this chapter, the following classifications of users of such services are hereby established: (1)  Class 1. Residents and apartment users, and offices receiving residential class garbage and refuse collection service; (2)  Class 2. Business, commercial and industrial establishments accumulating less than five cubic yards of garbage and refuse per month; (3)  Class 3. Business, commercial and industrial establishments accumulating five cubic yards or more of garbage and refuse per month, but less than 12 cubic yards per month; (4)  Class 4. Business, commercial and industrial establishments accumulating 12 cubic yards of garbage and refuse per month or more. (b)  As used in this section, the term "business, commercial and industrial establishments" shall and does include all governmental and public agencies, public institutions, churches, nonprofit organizations, charitable institutions, and every other person or entity not falling within the scope of class 1 of this section. (Code 1975, § 12-10; Code 1985, § 14-26) 
Sec. 52-32. - Initial classification.     For the purpose of determining the initial classification of business, commercial and industrial establishments under this chapter, the solid waste superintendent shall conduct a volume survey of all such establishments in the city, which survey shall run for one week, and from the result of such survey such business, commercial and industrial establishments shall be classified. Written notice of the result of such survey and of the classification established shall be given to each business, commercial, and industrial establishment. (Code 1975, § 12-11; Code 1985, § 14-27) 
Sec. 52-33. - Reclassification.     As often as the solid waste superintendent shall deem it necessary, he or she shall conduct volume surveys for the purpose of determining whether business, commercial, and industrial establishments remain in the proper classification. The solid waste superintendent shall conduct a volume survey with respect to any business, commercial, or industrial establishment at any time at the request of the owner or operator of such establishment and upon the solid waste superintendent's complaint that the establishment is not in the proper category. In such event, the volume survey shall be conducted for not less than one week, the survey week to be determined by the solid waste superintendent; provided, however, that no business establishment shall be entitled to have a volume survey conducted more often than quarterly. (Code 1975, § 12-12; Code 1985, § 14-28; Ord. No. 09-141, § 7, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 52-34. - Determination. (a)  Every person using the facilities of the city for the collection of garbage and refuse shall pay to the city the fees and charges determined by the board of city commissioners. All fees are on file in the office of the public works department, according to the classification into which they fall. (b)  The fees and charges shall, from and after the date the same become due, be a lien upon all the real and personal property of the debtor equal in rank to liens for city ad valorem taxes. The issuance, recording and enforcement of the liens and executions therefor shall be in the manner provided for the issuance, recording and enforcement of liens and executions for city ad valorem taxes. (Code 1975, § 12-13; Code 1985, § 14-29; Ord. No. 81-228, § 1, 12-22-1981) 
Sec. 52-35. - Billing, payment.     Fees chargeable for the collection of garbage, trash and rubbish shall be billed and collected by the board of water, gas and light commissioners for the city. Special collection fees charged for special services will be collected by the city's treasury division. (Code 1975, § 12-14; Code 1985, § 14-30; Ord. No. 81-148, § 1, 4-28-1981) 
Sec. 52-36. - Exclusions.     The provisions of this article relative to fees chargeable for garbage collection shall not apply to commercial and industrial locations not using city garbage collection services. Residential locations are required to use city garbage collection services. (Code 1975, § 12-15; Code 1985, § 14-31; Ord. No. 81-148, § 2, 4-28-1981) 
Sec. 52-37. - Fees established. (a)  The fees established for solid waste collection and disposal are on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city. (b)  A franchise fee of five percent of gross revenue shall be charged to all private collectors of solid waste within the city. (c)  Solid waste fee schedule. The fees for the collection and disposal of solid waste are on file in the public works office and are subject to annual CPI increase and/or cost of living adjustment. The rates are subject to an annual increase, effective July 1 of every year, in accordance with the most recent annual Consumer Price Index for the South Urban, Size C region. (Code 1985, §§ 14-32, 14-58; Ord. No. 88-152, 8-23-1988; Code 1985, § 14-32; Ord. No. 91-189, §§ 1, 2, 12-31-1991; Ord. No. 05-111, §§ 1, 2, 6-29-2005; Res. 06-R130, 4-25-2006) 
Secs. 52-38—52-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PREPARATION, STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sec. 52-71. - Pre-collection practices.     The following practices and procedures shall be followed by persons within the corporate limits of the city in order to facilitate the collection of solid waste: (1)  Refuse. All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers satisfying the requirements of this chapter and of the rules and regulations of the city manager. Containers shall be maintained at all times with tightfitting lids or covers, and secured in such manner as to prevent the overturning by the elements or by dogs or other animals. (2)  Garbage. Garbage placed in containers for collection shall be enclosed in paper or plastic bags. Household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its being placed in refuse receptacles. Household trash shall be combined with garbage. All paper boxes shall be flattened and placed by the container to be picked up once per week along with regular garbage service. (3)  Injurious trash items. Waste material with potential for inflicting injury, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes, and television tubes, shall be securely packaged or wrapped in such a manner as will prevent injury to the collection crews or other persons. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to material placed in mechanically handled containers. (4)  Hazardous refuse. Hazardous refuse as defined in this chapter will not be collected by the solid waste collection service of the city. No person shall place any items of hazardous refuse in any refuse receptacle or other container for collection by the city. Federal and state hazardous waste laws shall be observed by all persons, and any violations will be reported to the applicable state or federal authorities. (5)  Building materials. Building materials left by a paid professional will not be collected by the city collection service. The owner of the premises or contractor, builder or person, doing the repairs, remodeling construction or demolition shall be required to haul away and legally dispose of all such debris. If the remodeling is done by the property owner/tenant living in the structure, three cubic yards of debris will be picked up at no cost to the citizen; however, accumulated debris over three cubic yards will be picked up in its entirety upon the special collection fee being paid. (6)  Tree and vegetation removal-home occupants. The city will remove trees cut by the owner or occupant upon the required fee being paid. The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling trees and stumps left by or resulting from the operation of commercial tree trimmers, landscapers, grading contractors, building contractors, lawn services, or other commercial workmen. (7)  Shrubbery and tree trimmings, and cuttings removal. Tree trimmings and shrubbery cuttings must be cut in lengths of ten feet or less, and shall be placed in an orderly manner adjacent to the alley or curb of the property where alleys are not available from which the materials originate or wherever designated by the solid waste superintendent. (8)  Yard trimmings. Yard trimmings shall not be mixed with any other debris. Yard trimmings shall be placed adjacent to the alley or curb of the property where alleys are not available from which the materials originate or wherever designated by the solid waste superintendent. It shall be the owner/occupant/tenant responsibility to separate all debris and place in separate piles for collection. (9)  Ashes. It shall be unlawful to deposit hot ashes in garbage containers. Ashes or clinkers shall not be placed or deposited upon streets, sidewalks or sideparks. (10)  Pet litter. Pet litter must be placed in securely tied plastic bags not to exceed ten pounds in weight and placed in the container. (11)  Household furniture and furnishings. Upon request, the city shall collect discarded or junked household items such as: sofas, chairs, beds, yard furniture, clothing, swings, and other such items. The date of pick up will be scheduled upon request. (12)  Appliances. The city will pick up household appliances at no charge such as: stoves, refrigerators, washers, dryers, etc. The date of pick up will be scheduled upon request. (13)  Disposable diapers. Disposable diapers must be placed and tied securely in plastic bags and placed in your regular container. (14)  Litter. Every owner, occupant or tenant of any building shall be required to maintain garbage/litter storage areas in a clean condition and to insure that all garbage/litter is properly containerized. (Code 1985, § 14-53; Ord. No. 05-111, §§ 1, 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 52-72. - Collection practices. (a)  Residential. Garbage and household trash accumulated by residences shall be stored in refuse receptacles complying with the requirements of the city manager as to size, shape, and materials, and shall be placed at such locations convenient for servicing by the solid waste collection service of the city as shall be designated by the city manager for weekly pick up. Service for disabled citizens will be handled on a case-by-case basis, once disability is certified by a licensed physician, and the certification is submitted to the solid waste division for approval. (b)  Commercial. Refuse accumulated by commercial establishments shall be stored in containers meeting the requirements of the solid waste superintendent as to size, shape, and materials, and such receptacles compatible with the collection equipment and methods of the city's solid waste collection service designated by the superintendent. The provisions of this subsection apply to private solid waste collection as well as to city. (c)  Issuance of permits. The building inspector of the city shall not issue a building permit for industrial, commercial or multifamily dwellings until the solid waste superintendent gives his or her approval to proposed plans for the storage and collection of solid waste. (d)  Location of containers. The city will not collect solid waste from industrial, commercial, or multifamily dwellings unless the solid waste is placed in approved containers and located at a place approved by the solid waste superintendent. (e)  Multifamily units. All multifamily units of six or more units serviced by the city shall be containerized with plastic or metal containers furnished by the city. (f)  Construction site. The property owner or prime contractors in charge of a construction site are required to furnish suitable construction debris containers for construction waste. All litter from construction or related activities shall be containerized and shall be picked up and placed in containers at the end of each workday. (g)  Tires. See section 52-101. (Code 1985, § 14-54; Ord. No. 05-111, §§ 1, 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 52-73. - Wheeled garbage containers. (a)  Inspections. Where a wheeled garbage container is furnished by the city, it shall be the only container authorized for garbage collection and shall be subject to inspection by the solid waste division. Should additional containers be needed, they may be obtained for a fee by contacting the solid waste division of the public works department. (b)  Placing for collection. The owner, occupant, tenant or other person occupying any building, house or structure within the city as a residence or business using a wheeled garbage container shall have said container at the curb or designated location not earlier than 5:00 p.m. of the day before, and not later than 7:00 a.m. on the designated garbage pick up days. (c)  Removal after collection. The owner, occupant, tenant or other person occupying any building, house or structure within the city as a residence or business using a wheeled garbage container for curbside service shall return said container to the side or rear of building no later than 7:00 p.m. on designated garbage pick up days. (d)  Lost, damaged, or stolen container. In the event the wheeled garbage container furnished by the city is lost, damaged, stolen, or destroyed through negligence of the person to whom the container was assigned, the person shall reimburse the city for the cost of a replacement container. (e)  Roll-off containers. All requests for a roll-off container requires a minimum of 24 hours notification for having a container pulled and dumped. Hot and hazardous materials and car parts are prohibited inside the container. Any damage to container will result in customer being charged for repairs up to and including replacement of container. (1)  One time set out fee. This fee is charged once for setting the container on site for each request. (2)  Pull fee. The fee is charged each time the container is pulled and dumped. (3)  Tipping fee. This fee is charged by the ton. (4)  Daily rental fee. This fee is charged per day for use of the container beyond 24 hours. (5)  Special handling fee. This fee is charged when the container is not loaded properly, overfilled, or has debris protruding outside of the container. (Code 1985, § 14-55; Ord. No. 05-111, §§ 1, 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 52-74. - Commercial establishments. (a)  General. Commercial establishments shall store refuse in containers meeting the requirements of this chapter and of the rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager so as to eliminate wind driven debris and unsightly litter in and about the establishment. Any spillage or overflow shall be cleaned up immediately by said establishment. (b)  Loading and unloading areas. All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash and refuse. The owner or occupant of the commercial establishment shall place a sufficient number of containers, not less than the number required by the city manager for that establishment, in said area to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. The occupant of the premise shall maintain surveillance to ensure that all refuse is placed in the proper container and that the area is kept clean and free of litter. (Code 1985, § 14-56; Ord. No. 05-111, §§ 1, 2, 6-29-2005) 
Sec. 52-75. - Prohibited activities.     The following activities are hereby declared to be unlawful and in violation of this chapter: (1)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any litter, refuse, garbage or trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any other public property, nor upon any private property. (2)  Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any litter, refuse, trash, trees, grass, refuse receptacles, containers, or garbage on, over or near any storm drain or drainage ditch, street gutter, manhole, catch basin, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. (3)  Appliances. No person shall leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing therefrom the door. This section shall not apply to any appliance, refrigerator or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and which has been crated, strapped or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. (4)  Vacant units, lots and rental units. The city will not remove garbage, trash, building material, household trash, tires, appliances, or tree shrubbery or lawn trimmings or any other debris that is accumulated. Once advised of a violation of the above in writing, the owner/manager shall have seven calendar days to remove or have removed all debris. If not accomplished in allotted time, the city shall dispose of the debris and charge the owner/manager the amount necessary to pay for such removal. (5)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, or remove any contents therefrom or remove such container from its location. (6)  Scattering of refuse and littering prohibited. No person shall: a.  Throw or deposit any refuse on any public or private street or to scatter such refuse or litter on any public or private property. b.  Throw or deposit any refuse, trash or debris in any marsh area, stream, drainage ditch, body of water, beach area or catchbasin. (7)  Use of streets. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any of the streets of the city to transport same without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle in such manner as to prevent said loose material from being deposited on the streets or adjoining areas. (8)  Accumulation of litter. No owner or occupant of any property in the city shall allow litter, garbage, refuse, rubbish, filth, carrion, and debris to accumulate thereon. If any owner, occupant, or other person responsible for the existence of any of said conditions shall fail to remedy said conditions within seven calendar days, after notice to remedy the same from the city manager, solid waste division of the public works department, inspection department or the police department, said condition shall be a violation of this chapter and punishable hereunder, and abatable as a nuisance. (9)  Unlawful dumping. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, drop, dump, or otherwise leave any litter on the premises of any private or public property, and without complying with the other provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations of the city manager adopted pursuant hereto. (10)  Ownership of refuse. All refuse, including refuse deposited in refuse containers provided by the city, shall be and shall remain the property of the owner or occupant until the same has been placed in city vehicles. The city has no responsibility or liability for any injuries or damage resulting from said refuse. (11)  Raking and blowing. It shall be unlawful to rake, blow or let accumulate, any grass clippings, leaves, or any other debris on or in any street, sidewalk or catchbasin. (12)  Solid waste not generated on property. It shall be unlawful for any person to place solid waste of any kind in or on any private or public commercial container or on any property or location different from where the solid waste was generated. (13)  Container location. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or tenant to remove wheeled garbage containers from the property or premises to where said container was delivered. (Code 1985, § 14-57; Ord. No. 05-111, §§ 1, 2, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 52-76—52-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WASTE TIRES 
Sec. 52-101. - Disposal of tires and solid waste schedule of fees. (a)  No passenger tires (cars and pickup trucks), or truck tires, or farm tractor tires shall be mixed or mingled with other garbage, trash, litter or waste. (b)  Four passenger tires per calendar year will be picked up by city forces of said for residential owner, occupant or tenant. All other tires shall be picked up only in accordance with the city's special pickup policy. Persons desiring the city to pick up tires shall place said tires for pickup by city forces, separating passenger tires (cars and pickup trucks), other truck tires, and farm tractor tires into three separate piles. Such persons shall then call the solid waste division of the city and make arrangements for pickup by city forces. (c)  A fee shall be collected by the city for picking up tires for disposal. The amount of the fee shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (d)  Disposal of waste tires. (1)  As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: a.  Waste tire generator. Any dealer in automobile, motorcycle, heavy equipment or truck tires, filling station, garage or other business that sells new or used tires and which retains the customer's used tire after replacement. No more than 500 waste or used tires may be retained at such dealer's place of business. b.  Waste tire. Any automobile, motorcycle, heavy equipment or truck tire retained by a waste tire generator after having replaced a customer's tire with a new or used tire. c.  Permitted disposal facility. Any facility which is permitted by the state department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division for the treatment, utilization, processing or deposition of solid waste. d.  Recapping facility. Any facility which remanufactures waste tires for reuse. e.  Waste tire hauler. Any person, firm or corporation which transports waste tires for hire. f.  Scrap tire sorter. Any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. (2)  All waste tire generators and waste tire haulers shall dispose of all waste tires at a permitted disposal facility or recapping facility. All waste tire generators shall remove, or cause to be removed, all waste tires from their business premises at least once each month. (3)  Each waste tire generator and waste tire hauler shall be required to keep adequate records to document their company or person removing the tires, the date removed, the number of tires removed, and the final disposal site of said tires. The business premises of each waste tire generator and the records required above shall be subject to inspection by the public works solid waste division inspectors at any time said business is open to the public. (4)  Persons engaged in sorting mixed tires shall obtain a scrap tire generator identification number issued by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division and shall insure that the scrap tires are transported to a scrap tire end user or recycler, processor or disposal facility approved by the environmental protection division. Said sorter shall have no more then 3,000 tires at his or her business at any time. (5)  The scrap tire portion of the state's Rules for Solid Waste Management (Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Scrap Tire Management, Chapter 391-3-4-.19), as such law presently exists is hereby adopted in its entirety. In the event of a conflict with the Code of Ordinances of the city, the more stringent regulations shall take precedence. (6)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any of the requirements of this section. Every person, firm or corporation convicted in municipal court of the city for violation of this section shall be subject to a fine up to the maximum fine as provided by law. (7)  All waste tires shall be enclosed or covered as to prevent waste tires from holding rainwater. (Code 1985, § 14-58; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Secs. 52-102—52-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENFORCEMENT 
Sec. 52-121. - Enforcement of this article. (a)  General. It is the principal objective of this chapter to attain a clean and litter-free community and encourage recycling of selected material through education and voluntary compliance. Enforcement procedures shall be utilized only where other means fail. (b)  Solid waste management plans. A solid waste management plan must be submitted with every application for a building permit. The code enforcement department shall obtain the approval of the city manager of said solid waste management plan. (c)  Monitoring by employees. Solid waste collection employees, code enforcement department employees, city policemen, and other city employees shall be alert to observe violations of the provisions of this chapter, including, but without limitation, loose trash and garbage, waste, litter, containers not in compliance, or any other thing or matter which may be in violation of this chapter or of the rules and regulations of the director. An employee observing such violations shall report the same to such employee's supervisor, who in turn shall cause the information to be conveyed to the solid waste division of the public works department for required action. (d)  Penalty for violation. The violation of any provision of this chapter, or of the rules and regulations of the city manager promulgated hereunder, or the failure to do any act or meet any standard required thereby, or the failure to comply in any way with any requirement of this chapter or said rules and regulations, shall constitute an offense triable in the municipal court of the city, and punishable as provided in sections 1-17 and 1-18 of the city. (e)  Prima facie case. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, wagon, wheelbarrow, or other conveyance in violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations promulgated by the director hereunder, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. (f)  Presumption. Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter or of the rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager hereunder is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttal presumption that such person has violated this chapter. (g)  Specific penalties cumulative. Where any subsection of this chapter contains specific remedies or punishments, said specific remedies or punishments shall not be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other remedies and punishments provided herein or otherwise provided by law for the violation of or noncompliance with this chapter or the rules and regulations of the director. (h)  Additional penalties. In addition to all punishments and penalties provided anywhere in this chapter, otherwise by law, the municipal court judge of the city may impose the following additional or alternative sentences, either as a direct sentence, or as a condition to probation: (1)  The municipal court judge may direct the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter such person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of the execution of the sentence; (2)  The municipal court judge may direct the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of the execution of the sentence; or (3)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this chapter. (i)  Action in emergencies. Nothing contained in the foregoing subsections or elsewhere in this chapter shall require intermediate measures where the violation is of such nature or degree as to constitute an immediate, clear and present danger to the health and safety of the public. The failure to take the steps provided herein shall not constitute a defense to any proceeding to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (j)  Nonrepealer. This section is not intended to repeal or modify in any way any other ordinance of the city relating to the abatement of or punishment for nuisances, junk, weeds, or other matters affecting the health and safety of the public. All remedies provided herein are supplemental to and in addition to all other remedies provided by the codes and ordinances of the city and by state laws. (Code 1985, § 14-59; Ord. No. 05-111, § 2, 6-29-2005) 
Chapter 54 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - STORMWATER UTILITY 
Sec. 54-1. - Findings of fact.     In support of establishment of a stormwater utility, the mayor and board of commissioners makes the following findings of fact: (a)  The City of Albany is authorized by the Georgia Constitution of 1983, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I and III thereof and O.C.G.A. § 36-82-62 to provide stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout the corporate boundaries of the City of Albany (hereinafter "the city" or "Albany"). (b)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this section, Albany is acting pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and its city charter to provide for stormwater collection and disposal, a system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater services to all properties within the city and surrounding areas. (c)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater runoff may: (1)  Cause erosion of lands; threaten businesses, residences, and other facilities with water damage; and may environmentally impair the rivers, streams, and other bodies of water within, and downstream of, the city. (2)  Adversely affect the operations of the sanitary sewer system operated by the City of Albany thereby increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. (3)  Contribute to the potential degradation of the quality of both surface water and groundwater resources. (d)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities, which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness and operational function of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and the additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities within the city in concert with the management of other water resources within the city. In order to do so, the city must have both a comprehensive stormwater management program as well as an adequate and stable funding source for implementation of its comprehensive stormwater management program and drainage-related capital improvement needs. (e)  The city is required under federal and state regulations [i.e. the Federal Clean Water Act, the city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter "NPDES") Phase II Stormwater Permit] to provide enhanced management of stormwater runoff quality to mitigate the impacts of pollutants which may be discharged from the public municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) into State of Georgia or United States' waters. Therefore, it is appropriate for the city to establish a stormwater utility and impose a stormwater user fee charge upon improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public MS4, or receive stormwater services from the city, either directly or indirectly, whether or not the property is private or public in nature. (f)  Compliance with the regulatory obligations of the city's NPDES phase II stormwater permit, the city's wastewater treatment permits, the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), and the other applicable regulatory programs will affect the cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities above what is currently being spent for stormwater management program implementation, water quality management, drainage system maintenance, floodplain management, capital construction and other program activities. (g)  The cost of operating and maintaining the city's stormwater management system and the funding of necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the city's stormwater management program. (h)  The due diligence work, financial analysis and related documents prepared by the city's stormwater consultant properly assesses and defines the city's stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities and operational costs as well as the stormwater management program funding strategy. (i)  Given the stormwater management program's needs, goals, priorities and funding strategy identified in the aforementioned professional engineering and financing analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management services, systems and facilities within the city in concert with other water resource management programs. (j)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the incorporated areas of the city. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management system and service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the incorporated areas of the City of Albany is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. (k)  The stormwater management services rendered may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to, location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management systems and programs, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management to improved properties in proportion to the demands the properties impose on the city's stormwater management program which results in services being provided to such properties. The fair and equitable apportionment of costs via the user fee charge correlates to the stormwater management services provided to that property and the runoff demand that the property imposes on the public drainage system and the city's stormwater management program. (l)  The stormwater management needs in the city include, but are not limited to, protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. Provision of stormwater management services renders and/or results in both a service and a benefit to all properties, property owners, businesses, citizens, and residents of the city in a variety of ways even though the benefits may be indirect or immeasurable. (m)  A stormwater management program provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services throughout the city, and the most equitable means to implement an enhanced level of service for stormwater management service delivery within the city through stormwater user fee charges, user fees and other mechanisms. (n)  The amount of impervious surface on each improved property is the most important factor influencing stormwater runoff characteristics and these characteristics bear a rational nexus to the cost of the stormwater management services provided by the city, or to be provided by the city in the future, to that property. As a result, the amount of impervious surface on each property is therefore the most appropriate parameter for calculating a periodic stormwater user fee charge. (o)  A schedule of stormwater utility user fee charges based in part on the area of impervious surface located on each improved property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services throughout the city. Stormwater utility user fee charges may be designed with specific modifiers to further enhance customer equity, as well as customer understanding of the user fee charge rate structure, while at the same time minimizing the city's customer account management and maintenance efforts. (p)  Stormwater utility user fee charges may be supplemented by other types of fees and charges which address specific needs, including, but not limited to, special service fees, special assessments, revenue bonds, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes (SPLOST) and other forms of revenue, as deemed appropriate by the mayor and city commission. (q)  The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site stormwater control facilities, activities or assets which reduce, or otherwise mitigate, the impact of a particular property on the city's stormwater management program, and the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities, should be taken into account to reduce the user fee charge on that property either in the form of a direct reduction or a credit, and such reduction or credit should be conditioned upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the stormwater utility. Credits for privately owned and maintained stormwater management systems, facilities, activities or assets shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the reduction and mitigation of the stormwater runoff impacts from the property. (r)  It is imperative that the proceeds from all user fee charges for stormwater management services, systems or facilities, together with any other supplemental revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, systems or facilities, be dedicated solely to those purposes, and such proceeds of user fee charges and supplemental revenues shall therefore be deposited into the City of Albany Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund and shall remain in that fund and be dispersed only for stormwater management capital, operating and non-operating costs, lease payments and debt service of bonds or other indebtedness for stormwater management purposes in accordance with applicable sections of the aforementioned master trust indenture. (s)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the governing authority of the City of Albany hereby exercises its authority to establish stormwater utility user fee charge rates for the provision of stormwater management services. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-2. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Act means and refers to the Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant thereto.     Credit means a reduction in the amount of a customer's stormwater user fee charge in recognition of a customer's efforts to mitigate the stormwater runoff impact that developed property has on the City stormwater management services and systems, and/or the efforts of a customer to offset the City's cost for implementation of stormwater management program activities such as public education, watershed stewardship, etc.     Customers of the stormwater utility shall include all persons, properties, and entities serviced by and/or benefiting from the services provided by the city's stormwater management program and the stormwater utility. These services include, but are not necessarily limited to, the stormwater utility's administration, management, maintenance, expansion, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems for the handling of stormwater runoff of private and public properties, and the regulation of the public and private stormwater management systems, controls, facilities, and activities.     Dwelling unit means a structure, regardless of the type or method of construction, which contains one or more bedrooms, a bathroom, and cooking facilities, designed for occupancy by a one or more person(s) regardless of relationship, living as a single-family unit.     Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means the stormwater user fee charge billing unit increment related to the median horizontal impervious surface area footprint of 2,700 square feet for a single family residential (SFR) residential parcel within the city as defined herein.     Hydrologic response defines the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. Hydrologic Response is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious surface, the parcel's size, the parcel's shape, the parcel's topography, the parcel's vegetative canopy, the parcel's groundwater characteristics, the parcel's on-site operations, the parcel's stormwater controls, the parcel's antecedent moisture as well as the parcel's geologic and hydro-geologic characteristics.     Impervious area shall mean and have the same definition as impervious surface.     Impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil in the manner in which it entered the soil, in natural conditions, prior to development and causes stormwater runoff to collect, concentrate or flow in a manner materially different from what would occur if the land were in an unaltered natural condition. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings or structures, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of rainfall, or stormwater runoff, which existed prior to development.     Improved property (or developed property) means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than 500 square feet of impervious surfaces.     Non-single family residential (NSFR) property shall mean a developed parcel of land that consists of various land uses including, but not limited to: (1) multi-family, commercial (including mixed commercial & residential), office/institutional, public, transportation, industrial, manufacturing and storage buildings and facilities; (2) parking lots, parks, public and private schools, universities and hospitals; (3) streets, roads, water and wastewater treatment plants; and (4) any other form of use not specifically defined as a detached single family residential property (DSFR).     Parcel shall mean a designated parcel or tract, established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon.     Partial impervious surface means those areas which allow for limited infiltration of rainfall and surface water runoff into the soil in the manner that is more similar to natural conditions than "impervious surface" as defined above. Partial impervious surfaces influence and affect stormwater runoff such that the runoff is collected, concentrated and/or flows in a manner that is materially different from what would occur if the land were in an unaltered natural condition. Common partial impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, compacted gravel and/or compacted soils.     Private stormwater management systems and facilities shall mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality, which are not public.     Public stormwater management systems and facilities (or the city's municipal separate storm sewer system) shall mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, public streets, curbs and gutters, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence either the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality, which are owned by the city, where the city has exercised dominion and control, or over which the city has accepted dedication of an easement or other legally binding permanent right of use for stormwater drainage and for which the city has the obligation of maintenance for stormwater drainage purposes.     Service area means the entire land area within the corporate limits of the City of Albany.     Single-family residential property (or SFR) means developed property containing one residential structure with no more than two dwelling units in or attached thereto, situated upon a single lot of record. Improved property may be classified as SFR even if supplemental accessory structures are present such as garages, carports, storage buildings, guesthouses, servants or caretaker's quarters, cottages or barns, or the presence of a commercial use within the residence, as long as such use does not result in significant additional amounts of impervious surfaces. SFR properties shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for non-residential purposes; manufactured homes located within manufactured home parks where the land is owned by someone other than the owners of the manufactured homes; residential condominium developments with more than two units; or vacant/undeveloped property.     Stormwater management services mean all water quality and water quantity related services provided by the city which relate to the: (1)  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the incorporated areas of the city; (2)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing stormwater management systems and facilities; (3)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; (4)  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems and facilities; (5)  Compliance with applicable state and federal stormwater management regulations and permit requirements; and (6)  Other services as deemed appropriate by the city.     Stormwater utility manager means the person appointed by the mayor and city commission to administer the provisions of this article.     Stormwater user fee charge means the periodic user fee charge imposed pursuant to this article and other applicable articles related to the City of Albany Stormwater Utility, for providing stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities. This term shall exclude special charges to the owners of particular properties for services, systems or facilities related to stormwater management, including, but not limited to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects, on-site stormwater control systems and other stormwater management related services provided by the city for which a corresponding fee is collected for the service rendered.     Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural condition or which is modified to such a minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural condition shall be deemed undeveloped. For purposes of this article, undeveloped land includes property altered from its natural condition by the creation or installation of 500 square feet or less of impervious surface.     User is defined as any person who uses property, which maintains connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the city for stormwater management. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-3. - Stormwater utility and enterprise fund established. (a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility to be known as the City of Albany Stormwater Utility, which shall be responsible for stormwater management services throughout the incorporated areas of the city, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of the city's stormwater management systems and facilities and stormwater management services. (b)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility enterprise fund in the city budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the city stormwater management program and stormwater utility, including, but not limited to, rates, charges, and fees as may be established by the mayor and city commission from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the stormwater utility. (c)  All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater utility enterprise fund in trust and shall be utilized in accordance with applicable provisions of the master trust indenture dated August 1, 2013. However, other forms of revenue and/or financial resources, not accounted for in the stormwater utility revenue, may be allocated as deemed appropriate by the mayor and city commission to provide supplemental funding to the stormwater management program and for the provision of stormwater management services. (d)  The overall responsibility for the operation, maintenance and regulation of the Stormwater Utility and stormwater management program services performed, owned and operated or maintained by the city, and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties, other than road rights-of-way, upon which such stormwater management systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management shall rest with the city manager. The city manager may designate the stormwater utility manager to participate in this responsibility. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-4. - Stormwater utility service area.     There shall be one stormwater utility service area in the city which shall encompass the municipal boundaries of the City of Albany. the city has established that all developed parcels within the municipal boundaries receive stormwater management services from the city. improved parcels within the defined service area will receive a stormwater user fee charge bill because they contribute stormwater runoff to the public drainage system; they are directly or indirectly connected to the city's drainage system; and they receive stormwater management services from the city to varying service levels from which they derive some degree of benefit even though the benefit may be indirect or immeasurable. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-5. - Scope of responsibility for stormwater management systems and facilities. (a)  The stormwater utility shall provide stormwater management services for existing and proposed public stormwater management systems and facilities as defined in this article, subject to funding availability and to policy determinations made in the best interest of the public health, welfare and safety and the environment. Additionally, the stormwater utility may accept the responsibility for providing stormwater management services to private stormwater management systems and facilities, acceptance of which conforms to policies established by the mayor and city commission, or those persons or entities designated by the mayor and city commission to set such policies. (b)  The city owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: (1)  Within public road rights-of-way; (2)  On private property but within legally dedicated easements granted to, and accepted by, the city; (3)  On private property where the city has been granted, by written agreements, for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system facilities located thereon; (4)  On land dedicated to, and accepted by, the city solely for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon; or (5)  On public land which is owned by the city and/or land of another governmental entity upon which the city has agreements providing for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon. (c)  Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private or public property not owned by the city, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the city for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the state and federal laws and regulations. (d)  The stormwater utility may provide stormwater management services to privately owned stormwater management systems and facilities to ascertain that said facilities are functioning as designed and approved. The stormwater utility may provide for remedial maintenance of said private facilities based upon the severity of stormwater problems and potential hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare and the environment, and in cases where such remedial maintenance is required the city reserves the right to bill the owner or owners of said private facility for the costs of such maintenance. (e)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the municipal boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. (f)  If any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the city pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city, or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit, negligent issuance of a permit, negligent plan approval, or negligent maintenance of any permitted stormwater management system or facility not expressly dedicated to and accepted by the city for further maintenance in an action seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the city, its commission members, mayor, officers, employees or agents. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-6. - Stormwater user fee charges. (a)  It shall be the policy of the city that user fee charges for stormwater management services to be provided by the stormwater utility in the designated service area shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management services by individual properties and/or the level of service rendered by, or resulting from, the provision of stormwater management services by the city. (b)  The basis for calculation of the stormwater user fee charge to developed property within the city is established in this article. The city shall assign or determine the customer class, amount of impervious area and other pertinent factors as may be needed for the fair, reasonable and equitable allocation of the costs to deliver stormwater management services and to calculate the stormwater user fee charges for developed properties in the city. (c)  Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be structured so as to be uniform within the customer class, and the resultant user fee charges shall bear a reasonable connection, or rational nexus, to the cost of providing stormwater management services. User fee charge rates shall be in addition to other rates, charges, or fees employed for stormwater management within the incorporated areas of the city as defined herein. (d)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater user fee charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by public and private property owners which mitigate, or compensate for, the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities, or to private stormwater management systems and facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems and facilities. (e)  The stormwater user fee charges shall accrue beginning April 1, 2014. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-7. - Stormwater utility customer classes. (a)  The stormwater utility shall establish specified customer classes within the service area to reflect differences in impervious surface and stormwater runoff characteristics; stormwater management program services provided by the city to the customers; and the respective demand that those customers' properties place on the city stormwater management program and drainage system components. Publically owned, developed properties are subject to the user fee charges on the same basis as private properties, unless otherwise exempted. The stormwater utility classes will encompass developed and undeveloped properties within the city and are defined as follows: (1)  Single family residential (SFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as SFR customers per the applicable definition. (2)  The non-single family residential (NSFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as NSFR customers per the applicable definition. (3)  The undeveloped class shall consist of properties classified as undeveloped per the applicable definition. (b)  Documentation pertaining to the stormwater utility customer classes shall be kept on file in the office of the stormwater utility manager for public inspection. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-8. - Stormwater utility user fee charge rates. (a)  The stormwater utility shall impose a stormwater user fee on developed properties within the service area in a fair and equitable manner. The stormwater utility shall apportion the cost of delivering stormwater services to developed properties based on the demand the property places on the city's stormwater management program, the stormwater services provided by the city to that property and the benefits derived. (b)  The stormwater user fee rate is initially set at $2.50 per ERU. Stormwater user fees shall annually increase by the Consumer Price Index over the prior 12 month period. As used herein, the term "Consumer Price Index" is the Consumer Price Index published by the United States Department of Labor - Bureau of Labor Statistics All Urban Consumers (CPI-U), 1982-1984 +100. If the Consumer Price Index ceases to incorporate a significant number of items now incorporated therein, or if a substantial change is made in the method of establishing the Consumer Price Index, then the Consumer Price Index will be replaced with a reasonable substitute. Additionally, the billing rates may be modified by the mayor and city commission from time to time to meet the financial and operational needs of the Albany Stormwater Utility. A current schedule of said rates shall be on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. (c)  In setting or modifying such rates, it shall be the goal of the mayor and city commission to establish rates that are fair, equitable and reasonable, and which, together with other funding sources available to the City of Albany Stormwater Utility for services, systems, and/or facilities related to stormwater management are sufficient to support the cost of the stormwater management program, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, non-operating expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other stormwater utility related costs as deemed appropriate by the city. (d)  Stormwater user fee charges shall be based upon the total number of equivalent residential units (ERUs) associated with developed properties within the city. Each ERU shall correspond to 2,700 square feet of impervious surface. (e)  Gravel and compacted soil associated with driveways, parking areas, roads and other areas that consist of these type surface (or near surface) conditions on developed property will be designated as impervious surface and included in the customer's ERU calculation because of the hydrologic response characteristics of these materials. The total surface area associated with these materials will be calculated at 85 percent of the total ERUs to reflect the hydrologic response characteristics and limited infiltration capabilities of partial impervious surface materials. (f)  Calculation of stormwater user fee charges. The periodic stormwater user fee charges imposed on developed properties shall be calculated by multiplying the stormwater user fee billing rate times the number of ERUs for each customer account. The number of ERUs that will be utilized to calculate the user fee charge for each customer account shall be in general accordance with the following: (1)  SFR customer class: Each SFR customer account shall be charged a flat rate of 1.0 ERU except as noted below. a.  If a SFR customer account consists of more than 8,100 square feet of impervious surface (or 3.0 ERUs), the customer account for that parcel will be charged as per the NSFR calculation described herein. (2)  NSFR customer class: Each NSFR customer shall be charged 1.0 ERU for each 2,700 square feet, or increment thereof, of impervious surface located on the property to establish the total number of ERUs for billing. Fractional ERUs will be rounded to one decimal place to establish the total number of ERUs for billing. (3)  Undeveloped land customer class: Undeveloped land shall not be charged a stormwater user fee. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-9. - Stormwater user fee charge exemptions. (a)  Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no developed public or private property located in the incorporated area of the City of Albany shall be exempt from the stormwater user fee charges. The stormwater utility user fee charge is not a tax and no exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater user fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion, disability, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management program services and facilities. (b)  Exemptions to the stormwater user fee charges are as follows: (1)  Parcels which contain 500 square feet, or less, of impervious surfaces shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. (2)  Linear railroad rights-of-way (i.e. tracks, rails, road bed) outside of the defined yard limits shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by the rail road company associated with rights-of-way and drainage conveyance systems. However, railroad stations, rail yards, maintenance buildings, and/or other improved property used for railroad operations shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. (3)  City of Albany streets and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges and the stormwater utility shall not charge the city a user fee charge for the city's impervious surface area resulting from the city's impervious surfaces which are owned and/or maintained by the city within the public rights-of-way. This exemption is in consideration of the city allowing the stormwater utility to utilize the city's existing streets, curbs, gutters, drainage ways and ditches, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural and man-made within and owned by the city which controls and diverts surface water for the purposes of collecting, diverting, transporting and controlling surface and storm waters. All other developed property owned by the city shall be subject to the imposition of stormwater user fee charges in accordance with this article. (4)  Dougherty County roads and rights-of-way located within the city limits shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges in situations where Dougherty County has legal responsibility to perform all drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities with respect to such roads and rights-of-way. This exemption is in recognition of the drainage system maintenance and capital construction responsibilities undertaken by Dougherty County. All other developed property owned by Dougherty County that is within the service area shall be subject to the imposition of stormwater user fee charges in accordance with this article. (5)  Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) roads and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by GDOT in association with GDOT rights-of-way road and drainage conveyance systems. However, maintenance buildings and/or other developed property used for GDOT purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-10. - Stormwater user fee charge credits. (a)  The stormwater utility manager shall grant credits or adjustments based on the technical and procedural criteria set forth in the City of Albany Stormwater Utility User Fee Credit Manual (Credit Manual), which is incorporated into this article by reference and made a part hereof. Copies of the credit manual will be maintained by and made available from the stormwater utility manager. (1)  Customers may apply for credits and/or adjustments in accordance with the credit manual. (2)  A stormwater user fee charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements, standards and criteria contained in the credit manual. The amount of credit, or reduction of the stormwater user fee charge, shall be in accordance with the criteria contained in the credit manual. (3)  Any credit allowed against the stormwater user fee charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the credit manual and upon continuing provision of the controls, systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the customer. the stormwater utility manager may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance with applicable standards and criteria as established in the credit manual or this article. (4)  In order to obtain a credit, the customer must make application to the city on forms provided by the stormwater utility manager for such purpose, and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the credit manual. (5)  The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, and be in the format described in the credit manual. The customer's stormwater utility account must be paid and current prior to review and approval of a stormwater utility credit application by the city, except during the initial credit application period prior to issuance of the first bill. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for consideration and processing. (b)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the stormwater utility manager, he/she shall have 30 days from the date the complete application is received to approve the credit in whole, approve the credit in part, or deny the credit. The stormwater utility manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. Credits applied for by the customer and approved in whole or in part, shall apply to all stormwater user fee charges in accordance with the terms defined in the credit manual. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-11. - Enforcement methods and inspections. (a)  All property owners of improved property within the incorporated areas of the city shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater runoff in a safe manner consistent with applicable city development regulations, ordinances, as well as state and federal laws. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a violation of this article and be subject to citation and prosecution in the City of Albany Municipal Court. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. (b)  The city shall have the right for its employees or designated agents to enter upon public and private property during reasonable hours, and after reasonable notice to the owner thereof, in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this article, and state and federal law. Such inspections shall generally be limited to the following purposes: (1)  Inspecting or conducting engineering analyses on existing stormwater management systems and facilities located on-site; (2)  Verification and review of information contained within a stormwater utility credit manual application; and (3)  Determining that stormwater management systems and facilities need to be constructed. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-12. - Stormwater user fee billing, delinquencies, and collections. (a)  Billing (1)  Stormwater user fee charges shall begin to accrue April 1, 2014. (2)  The stormwater user fee charge will be billed and collected on the monthly water, gas and light bill and collected along with other city utility services from the person in whose name such services have been placed on account with the city. If and when the account is closed, or becomes delinquent, the bills for unpaid previous service as well as for current and future service shall be sent to the property owner. (3)  The city may bill the landlord, property manager, or property owner for stormwater services where accurate apportionment of the user fee charges to multiple accounts on a property is difficult. For example, the user fee charge for multi-family properties with five or more units will be billed to the property owner, landlord or property management company. (4)  The utility customer account holder or the property owner (if applicable), as identified from the water, gas and light utility billing database information and the public land records of Dougherty County, shall be obligated to pay the stormwater user fee charges. (5)  If no bill is sent for a particular tract of developed property, the stormwater utility may back bill for a period of up to one year, but shall not be entitled to any interest or any delinquency charges during the back billed period. (b)  Delinquencies and collections (1)  A late charge of 1½ percent per month will accrue on the unpaid balance of any stormwater user fee charge which has been due and payable for 30 days or more as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 7-4-16. In addition, all costs of collection, including attorney's fees and court costs, will be added. (2)  Unpaid stormwater user fee charges shall be collected in any manner permissible by Georgia law, including but not limited to, utilizing the services of a collection agency, by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account, or by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-13. - Stormwater user fee charge adjustments. (a)  Adjustments. (1)  The stormwater utility manager shall administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge. a.  If a customer believes his stormwater user fee is incorrect, the customer may seek an adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge allocated to a property at any time by submitting the request in writing to the stormwater utility manager on forms provided by the city and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. The customer's stormwater utility account must be paid and current prior to consideration of an adjustment request by the city, except during the period prior to issuance of the first bill. b.  Customers requesting an adjustment shall be required, at their own expense, to provide accurate impervious area and other supplemental information to the Stormwater utility manager, including, but not limited to, a survey certified by a registered land surveyor or a professional engineer, unless waived by the stormwater utility manager. Submittal of this information will be required if city staff cannot make a determination based on field inspection and/or review of existing city aerial photography. Failure to provide the required information within the time limits established by the stormwater utility manager, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the customer's adjustment request. c.  Once a completed adjustment request and all required information are received by the stormwater utility manager, the stormwater utility manager shall within 30 calendar days render a written decision. d.  In considering an adjustment request, the stormwater utility manager shall consider whether the calculation of the stormwater user fee charge for the property is correct. e.  The stormwater utility manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. f.  If the result of an adjustment is that a refund is due, there will be a credit applied on the next stormwater user fee billing. (b)  Appeals and hearings. An appeal may be taken to the city manager by filing with the stormwater utility manager a written notice of appeal within 30 days of the stormwater utility manager's decision. The notice shall contain a concise statement outlining the grounds which form the basis of the appeal. A copy of the notice of appeal and all documentation considered by the stormwater utility manager, as well as any documentation placed in the record by the property owner/customer, shall immediately be provided to the city manager. Within 30 days of the filing of the notice of appeal, the city manager will schedule a hearing and provide written notice to the customer/property owner of the date, time and place of the hearing, with a copy of the same to the stormwater utility manager. The city manager shall have 14 days from the date of hearing in which to prepare a decision and provide copies to the property owner/customer and stormwater utility manager. If the city manager's decision is that a refund is due, there will be a credit applied on the next stormwater user fee billing. A timely petition for certiorari may be taken to the Superior Court of Dougherty County, Georgia, from the decision of the city manager. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-14. - Severability.     If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 54-15. - Repealer.     All ordinances or parts thereof which are in conflict with any provision or any section, subsection, paragraph, provision or clause of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict. (Ord. No. 13-133, § 1, 11-26-2013) 
Secs. 54-16—54-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 
Sec. 54-20. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this chapter, which occurs by chance, and without planning or thought prior to occurrence.     City means the City of Albany, Georgia.     City administrator means the city manager for the City of Albany.     City municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: (1)  Owned or maintained by the city; (2)  Not a combined sewer; and (3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works.     Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.     Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grabbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.     Director of engineering means the appointed head of the city's engineering department.     Illegal connection means either of the following: (1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or (2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.     Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 54-23.     Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR 12226(b)(14).     National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPI) under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.     Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.     Person means, except to the extent exempted from this chapter, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     Pollutant means anything, which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.     Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.     Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.     State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person.     Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.     Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. (Code 1985, § 12.5-12; Ord. No. 06-128, § 3, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-21. - General provisions. (a)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by state and federal law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city's municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) phase II stormwater general permit. The objectives of this chapter are to: (1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system by any person, property owner, site operator, etc.; (2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system; (3)  Prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system; and (4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (b)  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the municipal boundaries of the city. (c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other article, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. (d)  Responsibility for administration. The director of engineering for the city, or the director of engineering's designee, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 12.5-11; Ord. No. 06-128, § 3, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-22. - Prohibitions. (a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall dispose, discard, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to dispose, discard, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city's municipal separate storm sewer system any materials, including, but not limited to, contaminated or polluted water, liquids, materials, waste products, etc., other than stormwater. The following discharges to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system are exempt from the prohibition provision of this section: (1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, noncommercial car wash water, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; (2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; (3)  The prohibition provision of this section shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an approved NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state EPD and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system. (b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. (1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. (2)  A person violates this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. (3)  Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be abated, disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system with approval of the city engineering department. (4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. (Code 1985, § 12.5-13; Ord. No. 06-128, § 3, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-23. - Watercourse protection.     Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse, as required by the litter control and post-construction ordinances. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. (Code 1985, § 12.5-14; Ord. No. 06-128, § 3, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-24. - Industrial or construction activity discharges.     Any person subject to a NPDES industrial stormwater permit or NPDES construction activity permit administered by the state EPD shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system. (Code 1985, § 12.5-15; Ord. No. 06-128, § 3, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-25. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities.     The engineering director or the engineering director's designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect private properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter and to meet applicable state and federal regulations. (1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the engineering director or the engineering director's designee. (2)  The property owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. (3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. (4)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at such owner's or operator's own expense. All devices used to measure flow and water quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. (5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. (6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility are a violation of this chapter. (7)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged or would likely be discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant or a mandatory injunction from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Code 1985, § 12.5-16; Ord. No. 06-128, § 3, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-26. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. (a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city's municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. (b)  Said person shall notify the city and other appropriate agencies (state, federal, etc.) in person, by phone, or by facsimile no later than 24 hours after the discharge, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the director of engineering within three business days of the initial notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the property owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an onsite written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. (c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. (d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided in subsection (b) of this section is a violation of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 12.5-17; Ord. No. 06-128, § 3, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-27. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. (a)  Violations of provisions. (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. (2)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in this chapter. (b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city may order compliance by a written notice of violation. (1)  The notice of violation shall contain: a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager, or the city manager's designee, within 15 days of service of notice of violation. (2)  Such notice may require without limitation: a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. (c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the city's determination. The notice of appeal must be received by the city manager within 15 days from the date of the notice of violation. The failure to file a timely notice of appeal shall be deemed a waiver of appeal. A hearing on the appeal before the city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall take place within 15 days from the date of timely receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall be final. (d)  Enforcement measures/recovery by city of costs. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or in the event of an appeal, within the later of five days of the decision of the city manager upholding the decision of the city or the time schedule set forth in the notice of violation, the city (and its representatives) are authorized to enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. (1)  Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. (2)  If payment is not made pursuant to the notice in subsection d(1) of this section, a summons shall issue returnable to the city's municipal court so as to provide the property owner with an opportunity to show why execution should not issue against the real property for all costs incurred by the city. (3)  Notices and summons addressed as per the most recent the county tax commissioner's records and mailed certified, return receipt requested, shall constitute appropriate service. (4)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become personally liable to the city by reason of such violation, provided such individual have been afforded the notice and summons outlined in this section. (5)  Such individual shall be subject to summons to the city municipal court of and subject to penalty as set forth in section 1-17. Each day the violation remains un-remedied after the person becomes noncompliant shall be considered a separate violation. (6)  In assessing an appropriate penalty, the judge of the municipal court may consider: a.  The harm done to the public health or the environment; b.  Whether the civil penalty imposed will be substantial economic deterrent to the reoccurrence of any illegal activity; c.  The economic benefit gained by the violator; d.  The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this violation; e.  Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by the city; f.  Any other factor or equity as deemed appropriate by the municipal court. (e)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by applicable law. (f)  Remedies not exclusive of other remedies. (1)  The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. (2)  The city may recover attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. (Code 1985, § 12.5-18; Ord. No. 06-128, § 3, 10-24-2006) 
Secs. 54-28—54-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
Sec. 54-48. - General provisions for post construction stormwater management. (a)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: (1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; (2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; (3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; (4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; (5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; (6)  Establish provisions for the longterm responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and (7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and longterm follow up. (b)  Applicability. All persons proposing development and/or construction within the city shall submit a stormwater management plan and hydrology study to the director of engineering (the director) for review of conformity with this chapter, except as provided in section 54-53. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: (1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; (2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; (3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size that is defined as a hotspot land use; (4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules; or (5)  Activities that lie within a special drainage district as defined in the Albany Stormwater Local Design Manual (LDM) and are regulated by the provisions of the special drainage district. (Code 1985, § 12.5-19; Ord. No. 06-128, § 4, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-49. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Words not defined herein, shall be construed to have a meaning given by common and ordinary use. The term "shall" is mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated:     Addition (to an existing structure) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.     Agricultural activities means the raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, ratites, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the production of agricultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products.     As-built design certification means a report prepared and signed by the professional that prepared the construction plans and/or stormwater management plan certifying that the stormwater facilities constructed as part of the development and depicted on the as-built survey will function as designed in the stormwater management plan and meeting the requirements outlined in the Stormwater LDM.     As-built survey means a drawing prepared and signed by a licensed professional engineer or registered land surveyor registered in the state illustrating the locations, dimensions and elevations of a development as it has been constructed following completion of construction based on direct field measurements and shown to scale. One hard and one electronic copy shall be provided to the city. The electronic copy shall be in ArcGIS or AutoCad/AutoDesk format projected in the Georgia State Plane West for the City of Albany, Georgia.     Best management practices (BMP's) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control, prevent or reduce the pollution of the water of the state, or prevent flooding. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in the state" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b), the "Georgia Stormwater Management Manual" or the "Local Design Manual."     Business day means operating hours of the city government, Monday through Friday, excluding locally recognized holidays.     Construction means any alteration of land for the purpose of achieving its development of changing use, including particularly any preparation for, building of, or creation of a structure and/or infrastructure.     Construction activity means activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits or those activities addressed in the LDM. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.     Day means a day is defined as a calendar day.     Design storm means the rainfall event of such size and frequency as described in the LDM that is used for the design of stormwater facilities.     Developer means any person who acts in his or her own behalf or as the agent of any owner of property for construction activity.     Director means the City of Albany Director of Engineering.     Drainage means a general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water.     Drainage system means the surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams, marshes, and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the manmade element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, retention facilities and the storm sewer system.     Electronic copy means (as related to design drawings) a copy of applicable design drawings produced in AutoCad/Autodesk which incorporate the state plane system.     Hardship means (as related to variances of this article) the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.     Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.     Hotspot means an area where the land use or activities generate or have the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater and as defined in the LDM.     Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).     Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.     Local design manual means a manual containing specific guidelines and standards for stormwater management that are either watershed or citywide specific, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this chapter.     Maintenance of stormwater facility means the performance of routine methods and procedures that preserve drainage structures and other stormwater facilities in good condition; ensuring structural soundness, functional adequacy and mostly free from sediment, debris and other obstructions; and rectifying any unforeseen erosion and water quality problems.     National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (or by the state of the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.     Nonstructural best management practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels.     Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.     Owner means the person in who is vested the fee ownership, dominion or title of property, by proprietor; this term may also include a tenant, if chargeable under such tenant's lease for the maintenance of the property, and any agent of the owner or tenant, including a developer.     Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality, or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     Pollutant means any impurity or waste material that degrades the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of surface or subsurface waters.     Pollution means the contamination or other significant alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including, but not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.     Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution.     Site development permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article.     Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.     Stormwater design manual means the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM), current edition, as published by the Atlanta Regional commission. The GSMM is available online at www.georgiastormwater.org.     Stormwater facility means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity, the quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow.     Undisturbed natural buffer means a tract of land in its natural undisturbed state where no vegetation can be removed or planted without a city permit. No herbicides, pesticides, or other chemicals, either natural or manmade can be used in this buffer without a city permit.     Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this article. A structure or other development without evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Code 1985, § 12.5-20; Ord. No. 06-128, § 4, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-50. - Stormwater local design manual.     The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the GSMM and the Albany Stormwater LDM, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this chapter. The LDM may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Where the LDM and GSMM conflict, the LDM will govern. (Code 1985, § 12.5-21; Ord. No. 06-128, § 4, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-51. - Exemption from requirements.     The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter and the requirements of providing stormwater management but are not exempted from Georgia Erosion Control/Forestry BMPs: (1)  Agricultural and forestry land management activities. (2)  Additions or modifications to existing detached single-family or duplex dwellings. (3)  Construction of a detached single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger development. (4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city. (5)  Two-lane road construction by a governmental body (any road wider than a two-lane road is not exempted). (Code 1985, § 12.5-22; Ord. No. 06-128, § 4, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-52. - Requirements for stormwater management plan.     All stormwater management plans submitted to the city shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions as outlined in this chapter and the LDM. (1)  The stormwater management plan shall be prepared under the supervision of, and certified by, a professional engineer or professional land surveyor with competency in hydrology and hydraulics, currently registered in the state. The plan shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and the LDM. (2)  Upon receipt of the stormwater management plan, the city shall perform appropriate reviews, and shall either approve the stormwater management plan or return comments and reasons for rejection. (Code 1985, § 12.5-23; Ord. No. 06-128, § 4, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-53. - Permit procedures and requirements. (a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first developing an approved stormwater management plan prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, or granted a waiver to meeting the minimum requirements outlined in the LDM, a site development permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: (1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification if required by the city; (2)  Stormwater management plan; (3)  Inspection and longterm maintenance agreement; (4)  Performance bond, if applicable; and, (5)  Site development permit application and applicable review fees. (b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. Projects that are complex in nature may require a stormwater concept plan and consultation prior to submittal of design plans for review by the city. The stormwater concept plan shall meet the requirements outlined in the LDM. For the purposes of this section, any proposed development activity that meets any of the following criteria shall be required to perform a stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting prior to submittal of engineering plans for review: (1)  Any residential subdivision with greater than 50 lots, unless such development contains lots which are all two-acres or greater in area. (2)  Any nonresidential development with a disturbed area of ten acres or greater. (3)  Any nonresidential development regardless of size which has an impervious surface coverage that covers 50 percent or more of the property excluding those lands contained within undisturbed buffers including but not limited to floodplains, stream buffers and undisturbed buffers between dissimilar zonings. (4)  Any nonresidential development regardless of size, which is defined as a hotspot land use. (c)  Modifications for offsite facilities. The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made with the city to manage stormwater by an offsite, or regional facility. The offsite or regional facility: (1)  Must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose; (2)  Must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by onsite practices; (3)  There must be a city approved, legally-obligated entity responsible for longterm operation and maintenance of the offsite or regional stormwater facility; and (4)  An easement must be provided for culverts or drainageways. In addition, onsite measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to address stormwater management issues upstream and downstream from the development site to the offsite or regional facility. (d)  Stormwater management plan must be submitted. A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city, which shows the adequacy of the offsite or regional facility. To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an offsite or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: (1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; (2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; (3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; (4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or (5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state of the state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. (e)  Fee in lieu of stormwater management practices. Where the city waives all or part of the minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant may be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the city. (1)  When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required stormwater management, the monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with a fee schedule (unless the developer and city agree on a greater alternate contribution) established by the board of commissioners. (2)  All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any development permits. (Code 1985, § 12.5-24; Ord. No. 06-128, § 4, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-54. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria.     The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: (1)  Water quality. Stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: a.  The system is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the LDM; b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained in accordance with the specific criteria in the LDM; and c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified in the LDM are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. (2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using the following approaches: a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; b.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. All design and construction work that is undertaken proximate to stream channels (including the buffer areas) shall be in strict conformance with current local, state and federal regulations. (3)  Flood protection. Flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying storm events such that flooding is not exacerbated for the storm events specified in the LDM and in accordance with applicable requirements of this chapter. (4)  Drainage system guidelines. A system emphasizing a natural as opposed to an engineered drainage strategy shall be encouraged. The applicability of a natural approach depends upon such factors as site storage capacity, open channel hydraulic capacity, maintenance needs/resources and regulatory permitting factors. Stormwater conveyance facilities may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catchbasins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutters, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public and private properties adjoining project sites. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry stormwater runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the LDM; b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the LDM; and c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the LDM. (Code 1985, § 12.5-25; Ord. No. 06-128, § 4, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-55. - Maintenance of facilities. (a)  Stormwater detention facilities which are deemed to be an essential and integral part of the city stormwater management program may be maintained by the city. Stormwater management facilities, which are built to satisfy this chapter for nonresidential developments, and function for only one owner of a parcel of land in fee simple, will not be maintained by the city, and the owner thereof shall meet the requirements of the subsequent provisions of this chapter. No stormwater detention facility shall be accepted for maintenance by the city without first being approved by the mayor and board of commissioners. (1)  In order to facilitate the maintenance of said stormwater detention facilities, a drainage easement shall be provided which will at a minimum encompass the 100-year flood elevation contour plus 20 feet. The 20 feet shall be measured horizontally outward from the 100-year flood elevation contour (or top of slope of the pond). When a fence is placed around the pond for restrictive access, as required by section 3.2.1 of the Local Design Manual, the fence shall be placed no less than 20 feet, measured horizontally outward, from the 100-year flood elevation or top of slope of the pond. (2)  A 20-foot access easement shall be provided from an existing or proposed right-of-way to the said stormwater detention facility. The access easement shall be improved so as to allow for periodic usage for the purpose of maintenance of the stormwater management facility. (b)  An inspection and maintenance agreement shall be executed for all private onsite stormwater management facilities prior to approval of the final plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (1)  The property owner must incorporate language into the final plat wherein the property owner agrees and covenants to maintain the stormwater management facility as set forth in this subsection and to perform maintenance to ensure the proper function of the stormwater management facility. The final plat shall also include language that: a.  Obligates the property owner to conduct periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts; b.  Obligates all subsequent property owners to maintain the facility so as to maintain proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts; and c.  Obligates all subsequent property owners such that all inspection, maintenance and repair procedures of such facilities shall be their responsibility. (2)  Such agreement shall provide for access to the facility by virtue of a non-exclusive perpetual easement in favor of the city at reasonable times for regular inspection by the director of engineering, or the director of engineering's designee. (3)  The agreement shall provide that the city, as it deems appropriate, may conduct preventive maintenance inspections of infiltration systems, retention, or detention structures. The city's inspection schedule shall be established on a frequency that meets the intent of this chapter and applicable regulatory compliance requirements bestowed on the city. (4)  The agreement shall provide that if, after an inspection, the condition of a facility presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, the city shall have the right, but not the duty, to take such action as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and adjacent properties from damage. If it is determined that such deficient conditions are the result of neglected maintenance, or other action caused by the property owner, then any cost incurred by the city shall be paid by the property owner as set forth in section 54-27. (5)  The agreement shall provide that the city shall notify the property owner of the facility of any violation, deficiency or failure to comply with this chapter. The agreement shall also provide that upon a failure to correct violations requiring maintenance work, within 30 days after notice thereof, the city may provide for all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. The city is entitled to recover its costs pursuant to section 54-27(d)(2). (c)  In lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, the mayor and board of commissioners may, at its discretion, accept dedication of any existing or future regional stormwater management facility for perpetual maintenance by the city, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter, the LDM and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular structural maintenance by the city. (Code 1985, § 12.5-26; Ord. No. 06-128, § 4, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-56. - Maintenance of pre-existing stormwater facilities. (a)  Pursuant to the Georgia's Service Delivery Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.), the county (Resolution No. 06-025) and the city (Ordinance No. 06-118) have adopted a service delivery strategy. Those same provisions (contained in the latter document) are expressly incorporated herein as if set forth verbatim. (b)  All other stormwater management facilities in the city on the effective date of this chapter shall be maintained by the property owner of the property on which the facility is located in a manner so as to maintain the level of service provided by the facility as intended by the original design or current conditions whichever is more stringent. (Code 1985, § 12.5-27; Ord. No. 06-128, § 4, 10-24-2006) 
Sec. 54-57. - Inspection. (a)  The director, or the director's designee, shall be responsible for determining whether a development is proceeding in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. Periodic inspection of the development site shall be made by the director, or designee, to ensure that the stormwater management plan is properly implemented. (b)  Upon completion of the construction phase on the project, and prior to approval of the final plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the developer shall provide an as-built survey and an as-built design certification for each stormwater management facility. One hard copy and one electronic copy of the survey shall be provided. The survey shall employ the state plane coordinate system for the state so that it may be incorporated into the city's GIS database. To ensure uniformity and consistency, the developer shall reference a known elevation marker or benchmark within the city. If the developer is unable to locate an appropriate marker within a one-mile radius of the site, the city will assist in identifying or establishing a suitable marker. (c)  A certified record drawing of the facility shall be prepared based upon this as-built survey and certified by the design professional who prepared the stormwater management plan. Based on the actual parameters established on the record drawing, an addendum to the stormwater management plan shall be prepared which demonstrates that the facility, as constructed, complies with the requirements of the approved stormwater management plan. (d)  Following final plat approval or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the director of engineering, or the director of engineering's designee, shall conduct periodic inspections of the stormwater facility on a schedule established by the city. Inspection reports including documented deficiencies and needed maintenance requirements will be included on the inspection reports and provided to the property owner to undertake appropriate action. (Code 1985, § 12.5-28; Ord. No. 06-128, § 4, 10-24-2006) 
Chapter 56 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— City has power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 56-1. - Sidewalks adjacent to business establishments to be cleaned.     Every person conducting any ground floor business establishment, any part of which abuts and opens on any street of the city, shall, upon closing such establishment at night, sweep all trash from the sidewalk immediately adjacent to such establishment. All articles of trash and rubbish shall be removed to a garbage receptacle. Dust and water shall be swept to the street proper. (Code 1975, § 29-1; Code 1985, § 24-1) 
Sec. 56-2. - Interfering with street grade line stakes, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person to dislocate or in any manner interfere with any city limit, street or grade line stake or post, established, erected or designated within the city by authority of the board of city commissioners or by any officer or employee under their authority. (Code 1975, § 29-3; Code 1985, § 24-2) 
Sec. 56-3. - Parking wells. (a)  Except as hereafter provided, parking wells are prohibited on arterial and collector streets. Parking wells are prohibited on adjacent alleys where there is limited sight distance. Applications for those desired on minor streets shall be made to the director of engineering who shall review and forward the application along with his or her recommendations to the board of city commissioners for disposition. (b)  Parking wells shall follow the same requirements for curb cuts and driveways, except for width, and provided they are not intended for use to meet off-street parking requirements. Depth of parking wells may vary depending on the angle used; the following minimum depth shall apply: 45 degrees, 17 feet, 90 degrees, 30 feet. Parallel parking wells shall be a minimum of ten feet in depth, and 22 feet in length. A row of parallel parking wells shall have a minimum ten foot taper at each end. Parallel parking wells shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of these regulations. Modification of the 90-degree parking well requirement on minor streets may be made by the board of commissioners upon the recommendation of the traffic engineer. Application for such modification shall be made to the director of engineering, who shall review the application in the light of its impact on the public safety, and shall forward the application to the board of commissioners with his or her recommendation. (c)  Parking wells may be permitted on arterial and collector streets within the area defined as "downtown" subject to compliance with the following requirements and procedures: (1)  Such parking wells shall be subject to and shall meet all the requirements and standards of subsection (b) of this section, all of the construction and other standards of the city, and all other ordinances and regulations of the city governing parking wells. (2)  All costs of the construction of said parking well shall be paid by the applicant. (3)  The applicant and the property owner and their successors shall at all times and at their expense maintain such parking well in good repair and condition. (4)  Within 30 days after completion of construction, applicant shall replace at applicant's expense any trees removed in the construction of the parking well at a location specified by the city and of a variety specified by the city. (5)  No parking well shall be so located or constructed as to interfere with pedestrian access to the street or adjoining property, or in such manner as to constitute a hazard or danger to the public. (6)  No person shall acquire a vested interest of any kind in any parking well constructed hereunder. Any parking well constructed hereunder shall be subject to termination by the board of commissioners for violation of the provisions of this section or of any ordinances or regulations of the city pertaining thereto. It shall also be subject to termination at any time the board of commissioners determines, in its sole judgment and discretion, that the property is needed for public purposes. If the parking well is terminated for any of the reasons in subsections (c)(1) through (5) of this section, neither the owner thereof, nor any tenant, nor any other person shall be entitled to any compensation or reimbursement on account thereof. (7)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply on state or federal highways. (8)  Application for such parking wells shall be made to the director of engineering. Such application shall be reviewed by the engineer for compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and in the light of its impact on public safety. The engineer shall also submit the application to Albany-Dougherty Inner City Authority (ADICA) for review and determination as to whether the proposed parking well fits into the theme of the ADICA Downtown Urban Design Plan. After such reviews, the application shall be forwarded, with the recommendations of ADICA and the engineer, to the board of commissioners for final determination. (Code 1975, § 29-4; Code 1985, § 24-3; Ord. No. 89-111, § 1, 2-28-1989; Ord. No. 95-119, § 1, 5-23-1995) State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate the parking of vehicles on public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92(A)(7). 
Sec. 56-4. - Heavy vehicles, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle over and upon the paved streets in the city in such a manner or so heavy or equipped as to cause injury and damage to the streets or any part thereof. (Code 1975, § 29-6; Code 1985, § 24-4) 
Sec. 56-5. - Unlawful discharges.     It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or discharge from any lot or building any water, liquid or foul or unclean substance so as to affect injuriously any street, lane, alley, way or sidewalk in the city or create any condition dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare. (Code 1975, § 29-7; Code 1985, § 24-5) 
Sec. 56-6. - Vehicle access to unpaved alleys; nuisance declared. (a)  There shall be no direct access between unpaved alleys and the off-street parking areas that have been provided for apartment buildings and condominiums. In the event that the parking spaces or drives located on private property are adjacent to the right-of-way of an unpaved alley, an unbroken concrete or asphalt curb shall be placed along the right-of-way line to prevent vehicle movement between the parking lot and unpaved alley. (b)  Off-street parking areas serving apartment buildings and condominiums may be connected to an alley only when that alley meets all of the following criteria: (1)  The alleyway shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width for its entire length (i.e., between intersecting streets); (2)  The pavement shall be at least 18 feet in width; (3)  The alley shall be paved for its entire length. (c)  The maintenance of any parking areas in violation of this section shall constitute a nuisance, and shall be subject to be abated under the nuisance procedures of this Code. (Code 1975, § 29-8; Code 1985, § 24-7) 
Secs. 56-7—56-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET NUMBERING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 56-31. - Title.     This article shall be known as the Street Naming and Address Guidelines for the city and the county. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(1.01), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-32. - Purpose.     The planning and development services department shall develop a standard system by which addresses may be assigned and maintained from the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived forward. This addressing system shall be used in designating addresses for new and existing parcels and/or structures and to resolve address problems which may confuse citizens or delay the response of emergency services and other service providers by: (1)  Creating a formal system with standards and regulations for assigning road names to be administered by the planning and development services department. (2)  Creating a formal system with standards and regulations for assigning addresses to be administered by the planning and development services department for: a.  New parcels and/or structures; and b.  Existing parcels and/or structures. (3)  Providing for notification of interested parties of assigned new road names and address numbers, and maintaining a master record of addresses. (4)  Providing minimum standards and regulations for display of addresses and road signs that comply with those of the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT), the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), and local ordinances. (5)  Providing for the enforcement of these guidelines. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(1.02), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-33. - Enforcement.     A person violating any provision of this article, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00, six month imprisonment, or both. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(6.01), 2-24-2009) 
Secs. 56-34—56-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ROAD NAMES 
Sec. 56-55. - Authority to name.     The planning and development services department shall be the agency with exclusive authority to name roads in the city and the county. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(2.01), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-56. - Highway and route numbers.     A road name shall not be given a highway number or county route number. Such highways and routes shall receive a road name to be used in conjunction with an address. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(2.02), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-57. - Naming standards. (a)  A road shall not be given a name which duplicates the name of any other road in the city or county. (b)  A road shall not be given a name which sounds like or approximates the name of any other road in the city or county. (c)  The proposed name of any new roads will be verified with the planning and development services department database to avoid duplication before any assigning will be completed. (d)  An official name shall be given to a private road and approved by the planning and development services department when the private road services five or more residences or the location and/or length of the private road is such that, for safety and emergency purposes, it is more appropriate to name the private road than to assign addresses from the main road. (e)  A committee composed of the following officials or their representatives is hereby appointed to review, rationalize, and recommend to the board of commissioners of the county and/or the board of commissioners of the city, as appropriate, changes in names of or new names for streets and other public and nondedicated ways of the city and the county, so as to avoid duplications and/or confusing similarities: (1)  The city manager; (2)  Dougherty County Administrator; (3)  Chief of Albany Fire Department; (4)  Chief of Albany Police Department; (5)  Chief of Dougherty County Police Department; (6)  Sheriff of Dougherty County; (7)  General Manager of Water, Gas, and Light Commission; (8)  U.S. Postmaster of Albany; (9)  Director of planning and development services; (10)  Director of Dougherty County Tax Department; (11)  Director of Dougherty County Emergency Medical Services; (12)  Director of Albany Engineering Department; (13)  Director of Albany Public Works Department; (14)  Director of Dougherty County Public Works Department; (15)  The 911 Communication Center manager. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(2.03), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-58. - Changing existing road names. (a)  The existing road name or the name applied to a right-of-way as shown on an approved preliminary plat or recorded plat shall be changed when road construction has resulted in the extension of a road to another road so that both roads are joined in such a manner that both roads may be considered one road. In the instance of changing a road name, one of the two existing road names shall be used. The planning and development services department shall determine which road name is used based upon: (1)  The road name which results in the fewest number of address changes. (2)  The road name which is the oldest. (b)  Street name changes shall only be allowed when the name is a duplicate of another street within a designated postal area or within the county and interferes with the accurate dispatch of emergency vehicles or postal delivery. A road name may also be changed when one road has two commonly used names or where portions of what appears to be the same road have two or more names. (c)  In the case of a street name change, the following procedure will be followed: (1)  The reason for the street name change shall be documented with date and reporting party. (2)  A new numeric address shall be determined using the planning and development services department addressing standards. (3)  Upon approval of the new street name by the planning and development services department, confirmation of the new street name will be mailed to each property owner affected by the change. (4)  No street name will be changed upon recommendation of the street naming committee if 51 percent of the adjacent property owners on the street to be renamed disagree with the renaming of said street. a.  The owners of each property abutting each side of said street to be renamed will count as one property, and the total number of properties abutting on each side of said street to be renamed will be the total number of properties from which the 51 percent is to be derived. b.  Each property owner will be entitled to agree or disagree in the renaming of said street. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(2.04), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-59. - Notification of road names. (a)  The planning and development services department shall notify interested persons whenever a road is named for the first time and whenever an existing road name is changed. (b)  In cases of naming roads for the first time, a written notice shall contain: (1)  The new road name. (2)  A structure's new address. (3)  The extent of the road to which the new road name is to apply. (c)  Notification of any new street names will be sent to: (1)  Property owners. (2)  Fire department (911/EMA/EMS). (3)  U.S. Postal Office. (4)  City clerk. (5)  Dougherty County School Board. (6)  County clerk. (7)  Engineering. (8)  Dougherty County Public Works. (9)  Water, gas and light commission, Sumter EMC, Mitchell EMC, and Georgia Power. (10)  Dougherty County Tax Department. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(2.05), 2-24-2009) 
Secs. 56-60—56-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMEMORATIVE STREET NAMING 
Sec. 56-77. - Definition.     The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commemorative naming means the bestowing of an additional name to portions of streets or highways commemorating persons or events as a way to honor or memorialize the person or event in question. A commemorative street name does not change the official street name or address of any property along that stretch of street or highway. Commemorative street naming guidelines will only be effective in the unincorporated area of the county. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(3.01), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-78. - Guiding principles. (a)  A proposed name will only be considered for persons posthumously; a minimum of five years must elapse from the date of death before a commemorative name proposal will be considered. (b)  For events, at least 25 years must have elapsed since the occurrence of the event. (c)  A commemorative name will only be considered for subjects with a strong association with the area, or of outstanding significance to the cultural legacy or development of the area, the state, or the nation. (d)  A proposed name will be supported by the local community and reach beyond a single or special interest group. (e)  A commemorative name will not be used to commemorate victims or mark the location of accidents or tragedies. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(3.02), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-79. - Procedures.     Before contemplating a proposal and undertaking the necessary research, proponents should contact the planning and development services department in order to obtain guidelines and procedures for establishing a commemorative name in the city and the county. In order for a portion of a street or highway to receive consideration for commemorative naming, the following items shall be submitted: (1)  Map delineating the length of the section of street or highway to be named. (2)  Rationale for the proposal. (3)  Evidence that the proposed name is not in use elsewhere in the city or the county and that the proposed name is acceptable and has broad community support. (4)  Brief biography and photograph of the person to be commemorated, including a description of such person's association with the area where the feature is located and an explanation of the unique contribution that would single such person out for commemoration in this fashion. (5)  For events, a description of the event and its association with the feature in question. (6)  Statement of the proponent's relationship to the person or event to be commemorated. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(3.03), 2-24-2009) 
Secs. 56-80—56-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADDRESS NUMBERING 
Sec. 56-102. - Administration and issuance by planning and development services department. (a)  The planning and development services department shall be the agency with exclusive overall administration and coordination responsibility to administer these guidelines following initial implementation. (b)  Street addresses shall be issued by the planning and development services department for all parcels and principle dwellings and buildings located on all officially mapped public and private roads. (c)  Addresses will be provided only on those roads that have been assigned a name in accordance with the guidelines set forth in this article. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(4.01), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-103. - Address numbering system. (a)  Generally. (1)  The addressing system is based on a baseline/meridian structure. The county is divided into four quadrants based on the intersection of Broad Avenue and the Flint River. (See appendix A to this article) (2)  Block ranges are well established for the city and the county and form a relatively evenly spaced grid. Where possible, one address number shall be established for each 20-foot (+/-) interval. Addresses are assigned based on the driveway entrance, not the front of the structure. (3)  Even numbers shall be on the southerly sides of roads and odd numbers shall be on the northerly sides of roads. (4)  Even numbers shall be on the easterly sides of roads and odd numbers shall be on the westerly sides of roads. (5)  Roads which are not traveling due north-south/east-west or that meander shall be numbered as a north-south/east-west road if the major portion of the road within the county runs north-south/east-west. Once a north-south/east-west road has an address number assigned to structures, then that road shall always be considered to be a north-south/east-west road. (6)  Address numbers south of the baseline shall be affixed with the prefix "south," and address numbers north of the baseline shall be affixed with the prefix "north" to avoid duplication of address numbers. The above also applies to east and west streets. (b)  Fractional, alphanumeric, and hyphenated addresses. There shall be no use of fractional addresses, alphanumeric address numbers or hyphenated address numbers. This also applies to apartment numbers and suite numbers. (c)  Component order. Components of a street address shall always be in the following order: address number, directional prefix (if any), street name and street type, designation of apartment or suite, and apartment/suite number. (d)  Diagonal streets. Diagonal streets shall be treated as either north-south or east-west streets. Once orientation is established, it shall be used throughout the entire length of the road. The orientation will not change even if the road changes direction. Within developments, it is advisable to consider the direction of the beginning of the road. If it originates off a north-south road and begins by going east-west before meandering north-south, it is generally considered an east-west road. (e)  Circular streets. A circular street/road is one that returns to the same origin point or to the same originating road. Circular streets shall be numbered beginning at the low numbered intersection and continuing to the other end of the road. The outside of the circle is numbered first and the inside is then numbered mix and matched with the outside. This will result, in most cases, with fewer numbers on the inside of the circle and with larger spaces between inside numbers. The numbering sequences of the outside and inside of the circle shall be used throughout the entire length of the road. (f)  Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs shall be addressed using the system based on the baseline/meridian structure, with odd/even numbers on the appropriate sides of the street and meeting at the midpoint or the back of the cul-de-sac. (g)  Corner lots. It is preferable for corner lots to be addressed to the road that the driveway is accessed from. However, corner lots have the option of being addressed to the driveway or the front of the structure. Addresses based on the driveway shall require the mailbox to be placed at the driveway access. Addresses based on the front of the structure shall require the mailbox to be placed on the road at the front of that structure. Display of address numbers on the structure shall face the road to which the home is addressed. The assigned address will be determined by the site plan presented at the time a building permit is requested. (h)  Private drives/easements. Private drives/easements may be addressed to an existing adjoining road when they serve no more than two lots or structures. A sign or post which clearly indicates the address numbers assigned to the structures shall be located at the entry point of the private drive/easement. Private drives and easements that serve more than two lots or structures will be addressed to the private drive/easement. (i)  Single-family residences. A single-family residence shall receive its own individual address determined by the basic rules for distance and direction. (j)  Duplex residences. A duplex shall be addressed with each unit receiving its own individual address determined by the basic rules for distance and direction. (k)  Apartment residences. Apartments shall be numbered with the main building receiving one address and each individual apartment being assigned apartment numbers as secondary location indicators. The apartment number assigned should indicate floor location (e.g., apartment 204 being the fourth apartment on the second floor). Alphanumerical numbers are not to be used. Apartment buildings with multiple entrances, where each entrance provides access to a limited number of apartments, shall require an address for each individual entrance as determined by the street allowing main access to the entrance and following the basic rules for distance and direction. (l)  Mobile home parks/manufactured home communities. Each individual mobile home or manufactured home shall be assigned its own individual address following the basic rules for distance and direction. This generally results in leaving four to eight numbers between adjacent sites. (m)  Townhouses. Townhouses that are individually owned and not part of an apartment complex shall be assigned an individual address for each unit as determined by the street allowing main access to the building and following basic rules for distance and direction. In cases where entry is not from the street on which the townhouse is addressed (e.g., alleys or parking areas), address numbers shall be posted on both the front and rear of the structure. Townhouses that are under the apartment category will be addressed as apartments, with the main building receiving one address and each individual townhouse being assigned apartment numbers as secondary locators. (n)  Condominiums. (1)  Condominiums shall be assigned an individual address for each unit as determined by the street allowing main access to the building and following the basic rules for distance and direction. In cases where entry is not from the street on which the townhouse is addressed (e.g., alleys or parking areas), address numbers shall be posted on both the front and rear of the structure. (2)  An apartment building or townhouse complex that is converted to a condominium shall be required to be addressed with an individual address for each unit. (o)  Office buildings. Office buildings shall be numbered with the main building receiving one address and each individual office being assigned suite numbers as secondary; location indicators. The suite number assigned should indicate the floor location (e.g., suite 204 being the fourth office on the second floor). Alphanumerical numbers are not to be used. Office buildings with multiple entrances, where each entrance provides access to a limited number of offices, shall be assigned an address for each individual entrance as determined by the street allowing main access to the entrance and following the basic rules for distance and direction. (p)  Individual commercial buildings. (1)  Individual commercial buildings shall be given one address to the road/street on which the driveway access is located as determined by the basic rules for distance and direction. When a business faces a main road but is accessed from a secondary road, an address will be allowed to the main road if the primary entrance faces the main road. In addition to being posted on the side of the building facing the main road, this address shall be posted on the outside of the main building in a manner that is legible to the public as well as emergency responders from the point of access. (2)  An individual building housing more than one business shall require a separate address for each unit. Suite numbers shall not be allowed. (3)  A large retail complex/superstore that houses one main retail business with additional smaller retail spaces within (e.g., grocery store with cleaner, bank, hair salon, etc.) shall be assigned one address for the use of all businesses located within the main structure. This address shall be posted on the outside of the main building in a manner that is legible to the public as well as emergency responders. (q)  Strip commercial buildings. Strip commercial buildings shall require an address to be reserved for each individual entry door. Careful planning shall be taken to reserve enough numbers for future divisions of businesses. Each business shall receive its own individual address. If a business is large enough to use space accessed by two or more doors, the business shall be assigned the number that corresponds to its primary entrance. (r)  Miscellaneous structure. Outbuildings and/or utilities requiring metering that are required to have an address shall be given their own individual address, generally four to six numbers from the main residence. Outbuildings having their own access drives shall be assigned addresses following the basic rules for distance and direction. (s)  Wireless tower. A wireless tower shall be assigned one address determined by the basic rules for distance and direction. When additional carriers are added, all carriers will be assigned a suite number with the address, including the carrier. A sign or post which clearly indicates the address numbers assigned to the tower shall be located at the entry point of the road on which the tower is located. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(4.02), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-104. - Changing address numbers. (a)  It shall be the policy of these guidelines to discourage the practice of changing existing addresses or address numbers which are already in use except: (1)  If the existing address number is not in sequence and does not run consecutively in the same direction as the county address system; (2)  If the existing address number is such that assignment of address numbers for new structures is not practical and in keeping with the requirements; (3)  When a new road is constructed or recognized which results in the most appropriate address for a structure to be on the new road rather than the original road, such as where a structure is previously on landlocked property and then has a new road built to service it; (4)  If it is determined that an address needs to be changed for safety and emergency purposes; (5)  When an address is duplicated or otherwise in violation of these guidelines. (b)  Whenever an error in a numeric address or street number name comes to the attention of the planning and development services department, they shall initiate proceedings to correct the error. (c)  Address changes become effective within 30 days of receipt of notice of address correction. A resident who does not put a change of address in with such resident's post office and who does not display the new correct address within the 30-day period will be in violation of this article and subject to a penalty as provided by this article. (d)  In the case of a numeric address change, the following procedure shall be followed: (1)  The reason for the numeric change shall be documented with the date and reporting party. (2)  A new numeric address shall be determined using the planning and development services department addressing standards. (3)  The property owner shall be contacted in written form using the governing assessor's information to identify ownership. (4)  Notification shall be sent to the following: a.  Property owners. b.  Fire department (911/EMA/EMS). c.  U.S. Postal Office. d.  City clerk. e.  The county school board. f.  County clerk. g.  City engineering department. h.  County public works department. i.  Water, gas and light commission or any other utility offices providing service to the area. j.  County tax department. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(4.03), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-105. - Master address file. (a)  The GIS division of planning and development services department shall maintain a geofile showing the location of each structure which has an address and the address number. The geofile shall be updated as addresses are added. For subdivided parcels which do not have a structure an address shall be assigned to the parcel. (b)  The address geofile serves as a master address file for the city and the county. All city/county departments can access the address geofile via the city's network and will validate addresses against the address geofile. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(4.04), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-106. - Notification of address.     The planning and development services department shall be the recipient of applications for new addresses. Addresses for subdivision lots should be assigned and noted on the final plat when recorded, not waiting until an application for a new address is received. (1)  Prior to the issuance of a construction permit, the planning and development services department shall assign addresses and provide the person with a form containing: a.  The structure's address number. b.  Compass designation. c.  Road name. d.  Street suffix name. (2)  The person shall make use of this form or copies to notify, in turn, utilities, the post office, or other interested persons. (3)  The planning and development services department shall not issue a construction permit until after an address number has been issued for the proposed structure. (4)  The planning and development services department shall assign addresses in the original instance after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. (5)  In cases where an existing address number is changed, the planning and development services department shall send written notice to each resident, occupant, or person with an affected address on the road and to the owner, if different of structures with a change of address form within ten days by mail or personal delivery. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(4.05), 2-24-2009) 
Secs. 56-107—56-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DISPLAY OF ADDRESS AND STREET NAME SIGNS 
Sec. 56-126. - Regulation.     The planning and development services department and city fire department shall be the agencies with exclusive overall administrative and coordination responsibility to administer the display of addresses and street name signs. All street name signs should be supplied and installed by the city/county sign shop after payment is received from the appropriate developer. The planning and development services department has the authority to withhold or revoke any permits, including certificate of occupancy permits, if any portion of this division is not complied with or if an individual intentionally removes an address or street name sign after a permit has been issued. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(5.01), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-127. - Display of address.     It shall be the responsibility of each and every property owner, trustee, lessee, agent and occupant of each residence, apartment building, business or industry to post and maintain, at all times, address numbers as required under this division. All addresses shall be displayed in such a way that they are unobstructed and legible from the traveled roadway. (1)  When a cluster box is used, it will only be required for the address to be displayed on the structure. a.  Mobile homes or manufactured homes located within a development shall display the address number in numbers of at least four inches in height and on the side of the home facing the access road. b.  Structures located within a subdivision, condominium or within a city or village that is within 50 feet from the edge of the road right-of-way shall display the assigned address number on the structure in such a way that is visible from the road. 1.  The address shall be composed of numbers that are not less than four inches in height and contrasting in color with the background on which they are affixed. 2.  The address shall also be displayed on both sides of the mailbox. 3.  The address shall be composed of reflective numbers that are not less than two inches in height. 4.  The numbers shall be reflective numbers on a contrasting background. 5.  The address shall not be obstructed in any way by any form of landscape, other mailboxes or newspaper delivery boxes. 6.  When the mailbox is obstructed, it will be required that an address sign be displayed at the road, following the standards listed for structures located more than 50 feet from the road. c.  Structures located more than 50 feet from the edge of the road right-of-way shall comply with the previous requirements listed for structures within 50 feet of the edge of the right-of-way and in addition shall display the assigned address number on a post, fence or wall or other permanent structure no farther than ten feet back from the edge of the traveled roadway. 1.  The address shall be composed of numbers that are not less than four inches in height. 2.  The sign shall be composed of reflective numbers on a contrasting background. 3.  The numbers shall be not less than four feet and not more than seven feet above the ground. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(5.02), 2-24-2009) 
Sec. 56-128. - Display of street name signs.     New roads shall have permanent street name signs posted within 30 days of the date of approval given by the city manager, before any permits are issued by the city's planning and development service's department. Street name signs on public roads shall be installed and maintained by city engineering/traffic division. Street name signs for a private road are the responsibility of the owners of properties on the private road. (1)  All road signs shall be MUTCD compliant for both public and private roads. (2)  All street name signs, public and private, shall have a white legend on a green background. (Ord. No. 09-110, § 1(5.03), 2-24-2009) Appendix A 
Secs. 56-129—56-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Sec. 56-141. - Permit required.     No street or alley grading or paving shall be constructed, altered or repaired on any land to be designated for public use or in any way causing a connection to a public street or alley until a street construction permit has been obtained from the director of engineering. (Code 1975, § 29-21; Code 1985, § 24-31) 
Sec. 56-142. - Opening, altering or closing streets and alleys; approval of city required; notice.     No street or alley shall be laid out, closed or altered without the consent of the board of city commissioners. Any person making application for such purpose shall cause a notice of the pendency of such application to be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once a week for four consecutive weeks. Said publication shall give notice of the time, date and place of a public hearing to be held by the board of city commissioners concerning the application, and the last notice shall appear not more than ten days prior to the date of said public hearing. Such application shall be acted upon only at a regular meeting of the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 29-23; Code 1985, § 24-32; Ord. No. 86-157, § 1, 6-10-1986) 
Sec. 56-143. - Appropriations and use of public funds for new streets, improvements, etc.     No appropriations of the city shall be made or public funds used in the opening or laying of or improving any street, alley or way, within the city, unless such street, alley or way is now owned or hereafter owned or acquired by the city. (Code 1975, § 29-24; Code 1985, § 24-33) 
Sec. 56-144. - Advertisement for bids; appeal by bidder.     In all cases where street improvements of any character, amounting to $5,000.00 or more, are ordered to be done by contract, such contract shall be let only to the lowest and best bidder, after advertisement for bids according to the procurement policy of the city or the requirements of state law. The best bid shall be determined by the authority appointed to secure bids, subject to an appeal to the board of the city commissioners by any bidder who, within two days after submission of bids, enters a protest to the decision of the authorities accepting any bid. In case of such protest no contract will be entered into until such protest has been heard and acted upon by the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 29-25; Code 1985, § 24-34) State Law reference— Advertisement of public bids on contracts for municipal street system improvements, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-115. 
Sec. 56-145. - Paving, curbing, etc., to be by ordinance.     All paving, curbing, surfacing and the repairing thereof and all repaving, recurbing and resurfacing shall be ordered by ordinance only, which ordinance shall specify the kind of paving, curbing or surface to be used and in the case of paving and surfacing, shall specify the width thereof. (Code 1975, § 29-27; Code 1985, § 24-35) 
Sec. 56-146. - Work to be inspected before payment.     No paving, curbing or other street improvement made through a contractor shall be paid for until inspected by the engineering department and formally approved by the authority of the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, § 29-26; Code 1985, § 24-35) 
Sec. 56-147. - Assessments.     Assessments shall be conducted in compliance with the policy and procedures established, from time to time, by the board of city commissioners. (Code 1975, §§ 29-41—29-48; Code 1985, §§ 24-46—24-53) 
Secs. 56-148—56-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OBSTRUCTIONS 
Sec. 56-161. - Encroachments generally; nuisance declared.     No encroachment on any portion of any street, alley or sidewalk shall be permitted except upon written application and permission from the board of city commissioners therefor. It shall be unlawful for any person to make such encroachment without such permission. Any unauthorized encroachment shall be and is hereby declared a nuisance. (Code 1975, § 29-61; Code 1985, § 24-66) 
Sec. 56-162. - Empty boxes, barrels, etc.     No person shall place in or on any street or sidewalk in this city any empty boxes, barrels or other obstructions of any kind unless otherwise allowed by this Code or other ordinances of the city. (Code 1975, § 29-62; Code 1985, § 24-67) 
Sec. 56-163. - Gates opening upon sidewalks.     It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any gate opening upon a public sidewalk of the city so that it may become, when open, an obstruction to the same. (Code 1975, § 29-63; Code 1985, § 24-68) 
Sec. 56-164. - Embankments.     It shall be unlawful for any person, by himself or by such person's agent, servant or employee, to make an embankment in any street or alley or any sidewalk in the city without the permission of the city manager. (Code 1975, § 29-64; Code 1985, § 24-69) 
Sec. 56-165. - Cellars opening into sidewalks; gratings.     It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain in the city cellars having openings to the sidewalks of the public streets not covered by iron gratings with openings no larger than one inch. (Code 1975, § 29-65; Code 1985, § 24-70) 
Sec. 56-166. - Cellar doors.     No cellar door shall extend more than six feet into any sidewalk, street or alley, nor shall the outer or front part be elevated above the level of such sidewalk, street or alley, nor shall the inner part thereof attached to the building be elevated more than ten inches above the ground or pavement. (Code 1975, § 29-66; Code 1985, § 24-71) 
Sec. 56-167. - Loading or unloading on sidewalks.     It shall be unlawful for any person to unload upon or to load from the paved sidewalks in the city any heavy goods of any description whatever, in such manner as to injure and damage the sidewalks or any part thereof or in any other manner to cause damage to the sidewalks. (Code 1975, § 29-67; Code 1985, § 24-72) 
Sec. 56-168. - Newspaper racks, telephone booths; bond required. (a)  Newspaper publishers and telephone companies may be permitted, upon filing with the city clerk an indemnity bond having a corporate surety in the amount of at least $50,000.00 conditioned to indemnify the city and members of the public at large from all damages which may be sustained in any single casualty by virtue of the placing of any obstruction upon the sidewalks within the city, to establish and maintain newspaper racks and public telephone booths. (b)  The board of city commissioners may accept, in lieu of the surety bond required by subsection (a) of this section, proof of liability insurance in an amount which it deems to be adequate, or satisfactory proof of a financially adequate self-insurance program. (Code 1975, § 29-68; Code 1985, § 24-73; Ord. No. 81-136, § 1, 4-14-1981) 
Sec. 56-169. - Permit required.     Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to place, deposit, erect, construct, leave, maintain or otherwise cause to be upon any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or other property belonging to the city or in which the city has any interest, any sign, advertisement, notice, merchandise, or other thing, or any encroachment or obstruction of any kind whatsoever, without first having made written application to and received permission in writing from the city manager. (Code 1975, § 29-81; Code 1985, § 24-81) 
Sec. 56-170. - Removal and disposition of property. (a)  If within 24 hours after receipt of written notice to do so from the city manager any person violating the provisions of section 56-169 shall fail to remove the sign, notice, merchandise, or other thing, or the encroachment or obstruction from the street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other property belonging to the city or in which the city has any interest, the city manager may cause the same summarily and without further notice or hearing to be removed. In such case the city shall not be responsible for the loss of, damage to or safekeeping of such property, but the city manager may elect to hold the property until the owner thereof shall pay all expenses and damages incurred by the city by reason of the presence of such property, encroachment or obstruction on city property in violation of this Code, and its removal. (b)  If within ten days after receipt by the owner of the property of notice in writing from the city manager notifying the owner of the seizure, and that the property will be sold as provided in this section, the owner shall not claim the property and pay the damages and expenses of the city, together with all costs of storing and keeping the property, the city manager may sell the same at public or private sale. If the owner is unknown, or if for any reason notice cannot be given to the owner, the city manager shall give such notice by publishing it in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements for the county are published once a week for four weeks, after which the city manager may sell the property as provided in this section. The proceeds from any sale of such property shall be used first for the payment of all damages and expenses of the city, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the property. If the owner cannot be located or fails to claim the proceeds within 12 months from the date of sale, the same shall be paid into the general fund of the city, and the owner's claim shall be forever foreclosed and barred. (Code 1975, § 29-82; Code 1985, § 24-82) 
Sec. 56-171. - Issuance of execution.     As an additional remedy, the city may issue an execution against the owner of any such property violating the provisions of section 56-169 for all expenses and damages incurred by the city by reason of the violation of such section, and by reason of the removal of any property or obstructions or encroachments which are in violation of section 56-169, and such execution, when recorded on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county shall constitute a general lien against all of the property of the person violating section 56-169 equal in rank to tax executions issued by the city for ad valorem taxes. (Code 1975, § 29-83; Code 1985, § 24-83) 
Sec. 56-172. - Affixing notice of violation.     Upon discovering any sign, advertisement, notice, merchandise or other thing, or any encroachment or obstruction of any kind which is in violation of section 56-169, the city manager may cause to be affixed to the sign or other thing which is in violation of section 56-169 a notice stating that the same is upon city property in violation of the law. (Code 1975, § 29-83; Code 1985, § 24-84) 
Sec. 56-173. - Upon rights-of-way of state highways.     Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, erect, construct, use, maintain or otherwise cause to be upon the right-of-way of any state highway within the city limits any sign, advertisement, notice, merchandise, or other thing, or any encroachment or obstruction of any kind whatsoever, except by authority of the state highway department. The provisions of this article are hereby made fully applicable to this section, and are incorporated by reference and made a part of this section, and in the enforcement of this section, and in the punishment for its violation, the city, and the city manager, shall have all of the rights, powers and authorities granted by such sections. (Code 1975, § 29-85; Code 1985, § 24-85) State Law reference— Authority of municipality to enact local sign control regulations that are more restrictive than state laws, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-97. 
Sec. 56-174. - Blind intersections. (a)  No structure, wall, fence, shrubbery, flowers, trees, or other matter or things shall be erected, planted or maintained on any property in such manner as to obstruct the view of the driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection, excepting that shade trees will be permitted where all of the branches are not less than eight feet above the street level. In no event shall any such structures except such shade trees be placed or permitted upon a triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from the intersection of the street lines, or in the case of a rounded corner, from the intersection of the street property lines extended. (b)  The city may remove or cause to be removed any thing or matter in violation of this section, whether located on public or private property. (Code 1975, § 29-86; Code 1985, § 24-86) 
Sec. 56-175. - Conditional use of city right-of-way for existing businesses.     The use of unused portions of city right-of-way or other city property for the storage of vehicles or other property in connection with the performance thereon of service or repair work, whether prior to, during, or subsequent to such work, is prohibited unless and until a permit shall have been obtained from the city manager. Permits may be issued by the city manager only under the following circumstances and subject to the following requirements and conditions: (1)  The portion of city right-of-way or property desired to be used shall not be in actual public use for any other purpose. (2)  Permittee shall not use city right-of-way or property in such manner as to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic or otherwise interfere with the normal use of the property by the public. (3)  The city manager may issue such permits only in connection with the operation of an existing business, where the use is necessary to the operation of the business and hardship would result if the permit were denied. (4)  Permits may issue only to businesses which were in existence at the time of the passage of Ordinance No. 86-109, adopted February 11, 1986, and which at that time were using the right-of-way for the purpose herein provided. (5)  The city manager shall establish reasonable rules and regulations for applying for permits. The applicant must enter into an agreement to indemnify the city against all claims for damages to person or property, including death, resulting from the applicant's use of the property. The applicant must furnish public liability insurance in an amount approved by the city manager, naming the city as an additional insured, and must furnish contractual insurance insuring applicant's indemnity obligation. (6)  Applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city manager that there is no reasonable alternative to the storage of the vehicles or property requested. (Code 1985, § 24-87; Ord. No. 86-109, § 1, 2-11-1986) 
Secs. 56-176—56-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DRIVEWAYS AND CURBS 
Sec. 56-191. - Application for driveway curb cut—Required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to encroach upon any portion of any street, alley or sidewalk or to cut any curb for the purpose of establishing a driveway, ramp or for any other purpose, until approval has been obtained from the planning department subject to prior approval of the director of engineering for commercial/industrial areas, including apartment and condominium complexes and mobile home parks. Prior approval must be obtained from the director of engineering only for single- and two-family residential areas. (Code 1975, § 29-121; Code 1985, § 24-146) 
Sec. 56-192. - Same—Application.     When any person desires to cut any curb for the purpose of providing ingress and egress to property from streets within the city, the property owner shall first make application for the approval required by section 56-191, to the city. Such application shall be in writing and contain the location of the property, along with a plat or sketch depicting the specific location and width of the curb cut and driveway and also location of curb cuts on adjoining lots. Such application shall be made to the city planning department. (Code 1975, § 29-122; Code 1985, § 24-147) 
Sec. 56-193. - Work to be done by city or contractor; fee.     In the event the application is approved, the necessary work may be done either by the city or by contractor. If the city does the work, the applicant shall pay in advance before any work is begun a fee for such work as is established by the director of public works. The fee shall be based upon the specifications of such curb cut or driveway by cost estimate covering materials, equipment and labor incurred by the city. (Code 1975, § 29-123(a); Code 1985, § 24-148) 
Sec. 56-194. - Specifications. (a)  In one- and two-family areas, on any lot on which a single-family residence or two-family residence is located, or is proposed to be located, with the exception of lots located in approved townhouse subdivisions, no driveway shall exceed 20 feet in width or be closer than 20 feet to another or driveway as measured along the property line. In approved townhouse subdivisions, a driveway on one lot may be located closer than 20 feet, as measured along the property line to another driveway. On any other lots, driveways shall not exceed 30 feet in width or be closer than 20 feet to another driveway. (b)  In all areas approved and already platted, one driveway is permitted for lots up to 99 feet frontage with one additional driveway for each succeeding 100 feet of frontage up to a maximum of three driveway per lot. For new commercial and industrial subdivisions that abut or contain an urban principal or minor arterial listed in appendix 3 in the Albany/Dougherty County Subdivision Regulations and where more than one or more lots are created or where multiple lots are recombined into a single lot, driveways shall follow driveway access guidelines established by the GDOT document, Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control, chapters 3, 3A, 3A-1 and 3A-2. Where subdivision regulations allow for lots with frontages of insufficient distances to meet the guidelines of the aforementioned document, driveways shall be designed as "shared driveways" and be placed on every other lot line. Where odd lots occur, the director of engineering may approve exceptions to minimum distance requirements as needed. Driveways, except for ramps for handicapped persons shall provide a minimum distance of 20 feet from right-of-way intersections as measured along the property line. Unusual intersection geometrics will require additional restrictions as determined by the director of engineering. Driveways for commercial and industrial purposes, including apartment and condominium complex or mobile home parks, may require acceleration and deceleration lanes as required by the director of engineering. All driveways shall have a minimum curb radius of four feet on each edge and a minimum paved apron of eleven feet width across the entire driveway opening. Driveway slabs and that portion of the driveway to the property line shall be a minimum thickness of six inches if constructed of concrete. Those constructed of asphalt shall have a minimum pavement thickness of two inches on a minimum of six inches compacted approved base. (c)  Trees removed from city property as a result of driveway construction shall be replaced at the expense of the abutting property owner. Such replacement shall be of a type, size and location as determined by the city arborist. (d)  The board of city commissioners, upon written application outlining unusual conditions, may modify the specifications in this section for a specific location. (e)  Where a driveway, proposed or already existing, is anticipated to have an average daily traffic volume, during working days, in excess of 500 vehicles per day or to accommodate special design needs for large trucks, the director of engineering may, in the director of engineering's discretion, authorize a greater width than 30 feet, including any driveways which may be necessary for the utilization of such driveway. (f)  The term "driveway" as used in this section shall mean every way or place in private ownership used for vehicular traffic by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by the general public. (Code 1975, § 29-124; Code 1985, § 24-149) 
Sec. 56-195. - New installations.     All new installations of curbs and gutters, whether done under private contract or by the city forces, shall conform in all respects to the provisions and restrictions of this Code. New construction of streets shall provide not less than one ramp per linear block on the crosswalks at intersections. Such ramps shall be at least 40 inches wide and so constructed to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically handicapped persons. (Code 1975, § 29-125; Code 1985, § 24-150) State Law reference— Standards for construction of curb ramps, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-94. 
Sec. 56-196. - Proximity to crosswalks; safety island, etc.     No curbing shall be cut within four feet of the regular crosswalk, except for the construction of ramps for handicapped persons. Where two or more adjoining driveways are provided for the same property, a safety island of not less than ten feet at the outer edge of the walk shall be provided. (Code 1975, § 29-126; Code 1985, § 24-151) 
Sec. 56-197. - Business establishments and parking lots; thickness required, etc.     All driveways providing access to business establishments and parking lots leading from paved streets or which cross paved sidewalks must be paved with a minimum of six inches of concrete the full width of the driveway from the curb to the property line at the expense of the property owner and in accordance with city specifications and regulations. (Code 1975, § 29-127; Code 1985, § 24-152) 
Sec. 56-198. - Charges for installation of pipe.     When the installation of drainage driveway pipe is desired by property owners, the city will provide labor to the property owner for installing the pipe. The fee for this service shall be established by the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the public works department. The property owner will also be required to furnish the driveway pipe and applicable fees prior to installation of the pipe. (Code 1975, § 29-128; Code 1985, § 24-153) 
Sec. 56-199. - Driveway responsibility.     Maintenance and repair of residential and commercial driveways on city property shall be the responsibility of the owner whose private property is served by the driveway. 
Chapter 58 - TAXATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(a) and (b)(2); ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; local administrative provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 58-1. - Property of transient persons. (a)  Whenever at any time during any year any transient person shall temporarily locate in the city for the purpose of selling or disposing of goods, wares, merchandise or any other article of value, it shall be the duty of the city finance director or the director of the code enforcement department or the director of the code enforcement department's designee to call on such person and make a return for taxation of all of such person's stock in trade at its fair market value to the county tax director as in other cases, and in case such person shall neglect or refuse to return the same within 24 hours after such demand, it shall be the duty of the city finance director or the code enforcement director, as the case may be, to report the same to the county tax director who shall immediately assess and determine the same, as in other cases, and the tax shall be computed thereon at the rate of assessment of the city taxes. (b)  If a city rate has not been fixed for the current year, then the rate for the previous year shall prevail. In case such person shows that such property has been returned and the taxes assessed thereon paid, then no further tax shall be assessed for such year. (Code 1975, § 31-5; Code 1985, § 26-3) 
Secs. 58-2—58-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES 
Sec. 58-25. - Exemption of certain tangible personal property from ad valorem taxation.     There is hereby exempted from ad valorem taxation all three types of tangible personal property as described under the section commonly known as the Freeport Exemption (O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2(b)(1)—(3)), including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes, at the rate of 80 percent of the value of said property as defined in Ga. Const. art. 7, § 2, ¶ III and O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. (Code 1985, § 26-4; Ord. No. 87-208, 12-8-1987, Ord. No. 89-175, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 90-103, 1-23-1990; Ord. No. 91-109, 1-22-1991) 
Sec. 58-26. - Homestead exemptions. (a)  An applicant seeking one or both of the homestead exemptions provided in Act No. 117, Georgia Laws 1989, p. 4062 et seq. (1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 117), p. 4062), shall, on or before April 1 of the year in which the exemption from taxation is sought file a written application with the tax director of Dougherty County, Georgia, on forms provided by that official, specifying the exemptions sought. Said application shall be accompanied by the affidavit of the owner that said owner was the owner of an interest in the real property for which exemption is sought and resided therein as such owner's residence, on January 1 of the year in which the exemption is sought; and if the additional exemption allowed for such owners who are 65 years or older is sought, said affidavit shall likewise state that said owner was 65 years of age or older on January 1 of said year. (b)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, the failure to file timely and properly the application and the affidavit herein required shall constitute a waiver of the homestead exemption on the part of the owner failing to make application for such exemption for that year. (c)  The owner of a homestead which is actually occupied by the owner as a residence and homestead shall not have to apply for the exemption more than once so long as the owner remains in continuous occupation of the residence as a homestead. The homestead shall automatically be renewed from year to year so long as the owner continuously occupies the residence as a homestead. If the original application did not include an application for the exemption granted to persons 65 years or older, such owner shall not be entitled to that exemption until such owner supplements his or her application by an affidavit establishing that said owner was on January 1 of the year in which that exemption is sought. (d)  All persons now qualified for the $2,000.00 homestead exemption granted to property owners in the county residing on the property as a residence, and for the special homestead exemption from ad valorem taxes granted to certain residents of the county who have reached the age 65 years and are below a certain level of income, are hereby declared to be qualified for the equivalent city tax exemptions without having to file any additional application or affidavit. (e)  In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1, the determination of eligibility of an applicant to claim the exemptions shall be made by the municipal governing authority subject to appeal to the superior court of Dougherty County, Georgia. Any such appeal must be filed within 30 days after the final determination by the municipal governing authority and shall be a de novo proceeding. (Code 1985, § 26-5; Ord. No. 89-159, §§ 1—5, 8-22-1989) 
Secs. 58-27—58-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
Sec. 58-56. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed.     Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use.     Hotel means any structure or portion of a structure, including a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value.     Monthly period means the calendar months of any year.     Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room, except when such room is being used as a meeting room.     Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise.     Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel.     Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for more than ten consecutive days next preceding such date.     Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or co-operative non-profit membership, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided in this article.     Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.     Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. (Code 1975, § 31-81; Code 1985, § 26-36) 
Sec. 58-57. - Imposition and rate of tax.     There shall be paid a tax of eight per centum of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist cabin, campground or any other place in which rooms, lodging or accommodations are regularly or periodically furnished for value in the City of Albany, Georgia all in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(1) through (6). The tax imposed by this article shall be paid upon any occupancy on or after the effective date of this article, although such occupancy is pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. (Code 1975, § 31-82; Code 1985, § 26-37; Ord. No. 87-181, § 1, 9-22-1987; Ord. No. 06-100, § 1, 1-24-2006; Ord. No. 12-122, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 58-58. - Collection of tax by operator; receipt to occupant; rules for collection schedules.     Every operator maintaining a place of business in this city, as provided in the next preceding section, and renting guestrooms in this city, not exempted under section 58-59, shall collect a hotel occupancy tax from each occupant. (Code 1975, § 31-83; Code 1985, § 26-38; Ord. No. 87-181, § 1, 9-22-1987) 
Sec. 58-59. - Exemptions.     This tax shall be subject to all exemptions required under state law, and shall not be imposed upon the class of guests exempted from its application under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(1)(C). (Code 1975, § 31-84; Code 1985, § 26-39) 
Sec. 58-60. - Registration of operator; certificate of authority. (a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall immediately register with the finance director or the finance director's designee of the city, on a form provided by the finance director or the finance director's designee. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of such person's place of business, and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the finance director or the finance director's designee may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. (b)  The finance director or the finance director's designee shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. (c)  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. (d)  Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. (Code 1975, § 31-85; Code 1985, § 26-40) 
Sec. 58-61. - Determination, returns and payments. (a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of taxes due under this article shall be due and payable to the finance director or the finance director's designee monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. (b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the finance director or the finance director's designee showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the finance director or the finance director's designee. (c)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax authorized by this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for, and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate as provided under state law. (Code 1975, § 31-86; Code 1985, § 26-41) State Law reference— Each person collecting the tax allowed a three percent rate of deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due if the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 58-62. - Deficiency determinations. (a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the finance director or the finance director's designee is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required by this article to be paid to the city by any person, the finance director or the finance director's designee may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. (b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. (c)  Notice of determination; service of. The finance director or the finance director's designee shall give to the operator written notice of his or her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at the operator's address as it appears in the records of the finance director or the finance director's designee. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. (d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination is to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. (Code 1975, § 31-87; Code 1985, § 26-42) 
Sec. 58-63. - Determination if no return made. (a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the finance director or the finance director's designee shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax required by this article. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return, and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the finance director or the finance director's designee. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 58-62(c). (b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. (Code 1975, § 31-88; Code 1985, § 26-43) 
Sec. 58-64. - Administration of article. (a)  Authority of finance director or the finance director's designee. The finance director or the finance director's designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. (b)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the finance director or the finance director's designee may require. (c)  Examination of records; audits. The finance director or the finance director's designee or any person authorized in writing by the finance director or the finance director's designee may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. (d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the finance director or the finance director's designee may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance director or the finance director's designee when required by the finance director or the finance director's designee, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, and such other information as the finance director or the finance director's designee may require. (Code 1975, § 31-89; Code 1985, § 26-44) 
Sec. 58-65. - Collection of delinquent taxes. (a)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required by this article to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any such tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the finance director or the finance director's designee may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. (b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out such owner's business or quits the business, such owner's successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient sum from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the finance director or the finance director's designee showing that such owner's has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. (c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase price as required, such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him or her to the extent of the purchase price. (d)  Tax credit, or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset by the finance director or the finance director's designee. If the operator or person determines that he or she has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the finance director or the finance director's designee, such operator or person will have three years from date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the finance director or the finance director's designee, the excess amount paid to the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or such person's administrators or executors. (Code 1975, § 31-91; Code 1985, § 26-45) 
Sec. 58-66. - Proceeds of the tax.     The proceeds of the tax shall be used in accordance with state law. (Code 1985, § 26-46; Ord. No. 05-107, § 1, 4-26-2005) 
Secs. 58-67—58-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COLLECTION BY LEVY AND SALE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 58-91—58-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXECUTIONS FOR TAXES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Tax executions, O.C.G.A. § 48-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 58-109. - Time of issuance.     For all taxes unpaid on December 20 in each year, execution shall immediately be issued therefor. (Code 1975, § 31-41; Code 1985, § 26-61) 
Sec. 58-110. - Issuance by clerk, etc.; form.     All tax executions shall be issued by the city clerk and directed to the code enforcement director and bear test in the name of the mayor and shall follow substantially the form of executions for state and county taxes. (Code 1975, § 31-42; Code 1985, § 26-62) 
Sec. 58-111. - Levy of executions. (a)  It shall be the duty of the code enforcement director to immediately levy all tax executions placed in his or her hands on the goods, chattels, lands and tenements in the city of the person or property in default and to sell the same in accordance with the provisions of the law and this Code. (b)  All executions for taxes shall be by the code enforcement director in the same manner as pointed out for the levy of state and county tax executions and all entries thereon shall be made in accordance therewith. (Code 1975, § 31-43; Code 1985, § 26-63) 
Sec. 58-112. - Execution to be collected within 90 days.     It shall be the duty of the code enforcement director within 90 days after the delivery of tax executions to the code enforcement director to collect the same or either return the same with an entry of "nulla bona" entered thereon. (Code 1975, § 31-44; Code 1985, § 26-64) 
Sec. 58-113. - Cost of executions to be collected.     It shall be the duty of the code enforcement director to collect, in addition to the principal and interest, the costs allowed by law on all tax executions issued by the city clerk and placed in his or her hands for collection or levy and sale, such cost to be turned into the city treasury. (Code 1975, § 31-45; Code 1985, § 26-65) 
Sec. 58-114. - Insolvent list.     It shall be the duty of the code enforcement director to make a complete list of insolvent persons against whom he or she holds executions with an entry thereon of "nulla bona" and file same with the city finance director. When such list has been allowed or approved by the board of city commissioners, the clerk shall then receipt the code enforcement director for the amount of executions with such nulla bona entries and such receipt shall be his or her voucher to be credited on his or her account with the city. (Code 1975, § 31-21; Code 1985, § 26-66) 
Sec. 58-115. - Record of tax defaulters.     The city finance director shall keep a record containing, in alphabetical order, the names of all persons who have not paid their taxes, placing opposite the name of each person the amount due for such taxes and the year due. Such record shall be made in a well-bound book. When any tax shall be collected after such record is made, it shall be applied to the oldest tax payment against the person paying the same. (Code 1975, § 31-22; Code 1985, § 26-67) 
Secs. 58-116—58-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAX SALES[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Tax sales, O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.; time, place and manner of sale of property for taxes due municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359. 
Sec. 58-144. - Time, place and manner.     The time, place and manner of sale of property, both real and personal, for taxes due the city shall be the same as that provided by law for the sheriff's sales for state and county taxes; provided, however, that such sale may be conducted and had before the door of the city hall when so advertised and such sale shall be conducted by the code enforcement director, or in the code enforcement director's absence, a chief of his or her department. (Code 1975, § 31-61; Code 1985, § 26-76) 
Sec. 58-145. - Advertisement.     All sales of property for taxes due the city shall be advertised the same number of times, in the same paper and in the same manner as sheriff's sales in the county for state and county taxes are advertised. (Code 1975, § 31-62; Code 1985, § 26-77) 
Sec. 58-146. - Redemption by owner.     All sales for city taxes shall be subject to redemption by the owner as provided by law. (Code 1975, § 31-65; Code 1985, § 26-80) 
Secs. 58-147—58-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTRIC SUPPLIERS 
Sec. 58-180. - Gross receipts business tax established; verified statement of revenues to be filed.     Each electric supplier (including specifically electric membership corporations whether or not operated for profit), within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq., distributing and selling electric power within the city, which is not otherwise paying a franchise fee pursuant to a franchise agreement, and whether or not said electric supplier has, operates and maintains offices within the city shall pay a gross receipts tax at the rate of four percent on any and all gross revenue derived from distribution and sale of electric power to their customers, members, or purchasers within the city, according to the verified statement of said gross revenues which shall be submitted by said electric supplier at the time said taxes are paid. This gross receipts business tax is levied pursuant to authority granted the city in Georgia Laws 1923, page 370 of the Acts of the General Assembly of Georgia (1923 Ga. Laws (Act No. 303), p. 370, § 27(2)). (Code 1985, § 26-91; Ord. No. 95-106, § 1, 2-28-1995) 
Sec. 58-181. - Taxes payable monthly; taxes to be in lieu of certain other taxes.     The taxes hereinbefore set out in this article shall be due and payable to the city on the 20th day of each month, calculated on gross revenues billed for the immediately preceding month; also, the percentage of said gross revenues hereinbefore prescribed to be collected shall be in lieu of all other license and business or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with, or in any way prevent the collection of ad valorem taxes upon the property of said electric supplier in the same manner as all other property, real and personal, in the city is taxed. (Code 1985, § 26-92; Ord. No. 95-106, § 2, 2-28-1995) 
Sec. 58-182. - Electric service within the city.     Electric suppliers distributing and selling electric power within the city, and which do not have a franchise agreement with the city, do not acquire any additional rights by the payment of the tax herein levied under this article other than those rights granted under the Georgia Electric Territorial Service Act. (Code 1985, § 26-93; Ord. No. 95-106, § 3, 2-28-1995) 
Sec. 58-183. - Enforcement and administration. (a)  The finance director shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article and shall have the power to prepare and provide the necessary forms and for the collection of the tax herein levied. (b)  The finance director shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes imposed and assessed by this article. The unpaid taxes and executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due the city. (Code 1985, § 26-94; Ord. No. 95-106, § 4, 2-28-1995) 
Secs. 58-184—58-204. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LICENSE FEES AND GROSS PREMIUMS TAX ON INSURERS 
Sec. 58-205. - Insurers license fees.     There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Albany, Georgia, in an amount as established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 58-206, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in an amount as established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. For the purpose of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. (Code 1985, § 26-106; Ord. No. 95-158, § 1, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 58-206. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.     For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional annual license fee per location. The amount of the additional annual license fee shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1985, § 26-107; Ord. No. 95-158, § 2, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 58-207. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurance.     There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in the O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fee imposed by section 58-205. (Code 1985, § 26-108; Ord. No. 95-158, § 3, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 58-208. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers.     There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 58-205. (Code 1985, § 26-109; Ord. No. 95-158, § 4, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 58-209. - Due date for license fee.     License fees imposed in sections 58-205 and 58-206 shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. (Code 1985, § 26-110; Ord. No. 95-158, § 5, 11-21-1995) 
Secs. 58-210—58-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLES TAX;rn0;0;Ord. No. 13-117, adopted 5-28-2013, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as §§ 58-236—58-242 at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 58-236. - Imposition and rate of tax.     There shall be a tax of three percent of the rental charge for every rental motor vehicle. (Ord. No. 13-117, § 1, 5-28-2013) 
Sec. 58-237. - Definitions.     Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease for 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes.     Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in this state.     Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. (Ord. No. 13-117, § 2, 5-28-2013) 
Sec. 58-238. - Collection of tax. (a)  As provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93, the amount of taxes collected shall be expended as follows: capital outlay projects as described in subsection (a)(2)(b). (b)  Every rental motor vehicle concern maintaining a place of business in the City of Albany, shall collect the tax from each customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to the tax levied in this article. (c)  The finance director, or the finance director's designee, shall issue to each rental motor vehicle concern that has registered with the finance director pursuant to City Code section 58-60, a certificate of authority to such rental motor vehicle concern to collect the tax from the customer. The certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which is applicable, with separate certificates being issued for each place of business of a rental motor vehicle concern. (Ord. No. 13-117, §§ 3-5, 5-28-2013) 
Sec. 58-239. - Determination, returns and payments. (a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of taxes due under this article shall be due and payable to the finance director or the finance director's designee monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. (b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the finance director or the finance director's designee showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the finance director or the finance director's designee. (c)  Collection fee allowed rental motor vehicle concerns ("RVMC"). Operators collecting the tax authorized by this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for, and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment, all as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-94. (Ord. No. 13-117, § 6, 5-28-2013) 
Sec. 58-240. - Deficiency determinations. (a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the finance director or the finance director's designee is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required by this article to be paid to the city by any person, the finance director or the finance director's designee may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. (b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. (c)  Notice of determination; service of. The finance director or the finance director's designee shall give to the operator written notice of his or her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at the operator's address as it appears in the records of the finance director or the finance director's designee. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. (d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination is to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. (Ord. No. 13-117, § 6, 5-28-2013) 
Sec. 58-241. - Determination if no return made. (a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any rental motor vehicle concern fails to make a return, the finance director or the finance director's designee shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax required by this article. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return, and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the finance director or the finance director's designee. Written notice of the finance director's determination, or the finance director's designee's determination, shall be given to the motor vehicle rental concern via certified mail, return receipt requested addressed to the motor vehicle rental concern's address as it appears in the records of the finance director or finance director's designee. (b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. (Ord. No. 13-117, § 6, 5-28-2013) 
Sec. 58-242. - Administration of article. (a)  Authority of finance director or the finance director's designee. The finance director or the finance director's designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. (b)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every rental motor vehicle concern renting vehicles in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the finance director or the finance director's designee may require. (c)  Examination of records; audits. The finance director or the finance director's designee or any person authorized in writing by the finance director or the finance director's designee may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. (d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the finance director or the finance director's designee may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of vehicles which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance director or the finance director's designee when required by the finance director or the finance director's designee, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, and such other information as the finance director or the finance director's designee may require. (Ord. No. 13-117, § 6, 5-28-2013) 