CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF AVONDALE ESTATES, GEORGIA ____________ GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY ____________ Published in 1995 by Order of the Board of Mayor and Commissioners ____________ > CURRENT OFFICIALS of the City of AVONDALE ESTATES, GEORGIA ____________ Jonathan Elmore, Mayor Terry Giager, Mayor Pro Tem Randy Beebe Brian Fisher Adela Yelton Board of Mayor & Commissioners ____________ Clai Brown City Manager ____________ Bob Wilson City Attorney ____________ Gina Hill City Clerk PREFACE     This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, of a general and permanent nature.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1973 Code, as supplemented through April 25, 1988, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of mayor and commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1973 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Numbering System     The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-1 and the third section of Chapter 4 is 4-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-2 and 6-3 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-2.1, 6-2.2 and 6-2-3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 8 and 9, it will be designated as Chapter 8.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date periodically. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Successfully keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of B. Meade White, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Mr. A. Joseph Nardone, Jr., City Attorney, and Ms. Phyllis D. Flowers, City Clerk/Treasurer, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION Tallahassee, Florida  ADOPTING ORDINANCE ORDINANCE NO. 867 An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances for the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. Be it Ordained by the City of Avondale Estates, as Follows:     Section 1. The document entitled, "Code of Ordinances, City of Avondale Estates, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation, attached hereto, and numbered as follows: Part I City Charter ..... 1—30 Charter Comparative Table ..... 69 Part II Chapter 1, General Provisions ..... 81—87 Chapter 2, Administration ..... 137—145 Chapter 3, Alcoholic Beverages ..... 195—220 Chapter 4, Animals and Fowl ..... 271—277 Chapter 5,  Buildings; Construction, Maintenance, and Related ..... 327—392 Chapter 6, Emergency Management ..... 443—446 Chapter 7, Court and Criminal Procedure ..... 497—502 Chapter 8, Elections ..... 553—559 Chapter 9, Finance and Taxation ..... 609—615 Chapter 10, Fire Protection and Prevention ..... 665—667 Chapter 11, Health and Sanitation ..... 717—722 Chapter 12,  Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses ..... 773—783 Chapter 13, Municipal Utilities and Services ..... 833—841 Chapter 14,  Occupation and Business Taxes, Licenses, and Regulations ..... 891—918 Chapter 15, Parks and Recreation ..... 969—972 Chapter 16, Personnel ..... 1019—1021 Chapter 17, Streets and Sidewalks ..... 1071—1080 Chapter 18, Traffic and Vehicles ..... 1131—1147 Chapter 19, Wreckers ..... 1197—1202 Appendix A, Zoning ..... 1403 Appendix B, Subdivision Regulations ..... 1503—1528 Appendix C, Franchises ..... 1629—1644 Code Comparative Tables ..... 1845—1850 State Law Reference Table ..... 1901—1902 Charter Index ..... 1953—1956 Code Index ..... 1957—1993  is hereby adopted as the City Code for the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia.     Section 2. The document referred to in Section 1 is hereby made public record and shall be maintained by the city clerk as such and be accessible to the members of the general public at City Hall during all normal business hours.     Section 3. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 17, 1994, and not included in the City Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. The City of Avondale Estates Zoning Ordinance of 1982, as amended and as recognized in Appendix A, is continued in force.     Section 4. The repeal provided for in Section 3 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.     Section 5. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every violation of any provision of the City Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both, or alternative sentencing as provided by law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any City Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits.     Section 6. Additions or amendments to the City Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Mayor and Commissioners to make the same a part of the City Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.     Section 7. Ordinances adopted after January 17, 1994, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.     Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective fifteen (15) days after adoption.     First Reading: May 1, 1995     Second Reading: May 22, 1995     Third Reading: June 26, 1995     Adopted this 26 day of June, 1995. Board of Mayor and Commissioners Avondale Estates, Georgia /s/ John W. Lawson       Mayor   /s/ John B. Parker       City Clerk [City Manager]   Certificate of Adoption     I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Board of Mayor and Commissioners of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, held on the 26th day of June, 1995. /s/ Kathryn Vessell       City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE     The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted."     In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 12 10-02  2-22-2010 Omitted 10-03  2-22-2010 Omitted 10-04  6- 9-2010 Omitted 10-05  7-26-2010 Included 10-06  7-26-2010 Included 10-07  9-27-2010 Omitted 10-08  9-27-2010 Included 10-09 12-13-2010 Omitted 10-10 12-13-2010 Included 10-11 12-13-2010 Omitted 10-12 — Omitted 10-13 — Omitted 10-14  8-23-2004 Included Supp. No. 13 11-02  5-23-2011 Included 11-04 11-17-2011 Included Supp. No. 14 12-02  4-16-2012 Included 12-05  8-20-2012 Included 12-06  8-20-2012 Included 12-07  8-20-2012 Included 12-08 10-22-2012 Included Supp. No. 15 12-10 12-17-2012 Included 13-01  2-25-2013 Included 13-02  6-24-2013 Included 13-04 12-16-2013 Included 13-05 12-16-2013 Included 14-01  1-27-2014 Included 14-02  1-27-2014 Omitted 14-03  2-24-2014 Included Supp. No. 16 15-02  3-18-2015 Included 15-04  8-24-2015 Included Supp. No. 17 16-01  6-29-2016 Omitted 16-02  7-27-2016 Omitted 16-03  7-27-2016 Included 16-04  8-22-2016 Included 16-05  8-22-2016 Included Supp. No. 18 16-07 12-12-2016 Included 16-08 12-12-2016 Included 17-01  4-24-2017 Included 17-02  5-17-2017 Included 17-03  5-17-2017 Included 17-04  5-22-2017 Omitted Supp. No. 19 17-05  6-26-2017 Omitted 17-06 10- 2-2017 Omitted 17-07 10- 2-2017 Omitted 18-01  1-31-2018 Omitted 18-02  6-25-2018 Omitted 18-03 10-22-2018 Included 18-04 10-22-2018 Included 18-05 10-22-2018 Included 18-06 11-19-2018 Included 18-07 12-13-2018 Omitted 19-01  1-28-2019 Included  
PART I - CITY CHARTER[1] AN ACT To provide a new charter for the City of Avondale Estates; to provide for the name, corporate boundaries, and powers of the city and the governing authority; to provide for the structure of the government of the city; to provide for a board of mayor and commissioners and the membership, officers, election, terms, qualifications, vacancies, compensation, and expenses thereof; to prohibit conflicts of interest and holding other offices; to provide for disclosures and ethics; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for eminent domain; to provide for meetings and rules of procedure; to provide for quorums and voting; to provide for ordinances, resolutions, emergencies, and codes of technical regulations; to provide for a city manager and the appointment, removal, powers, and duties thereof; to prohibit certain conduct; to provide for a mayor pro tempore; to provide for the powers and duties of the mayor; to provide for administrative affairs and departments, boards, commissions, committees, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, city clerk/treasurer, and other officials, officers, and employees; to provide for position classification and pay plans and personnel policies; to provide for a municipal court and the judges, jurisdiction, compensation, terms, powers, authority, rules, and other matters related to the court; to provide for certiorari; to provide for elections and removal; to provide for financial affairs of the city and taxation, regulatory fees, and permits; to provide for franchises; to provide for service charges, special assessments, construction, and other taxes and fees; to provide for bonds and loans; to provide for contracts and leases; to provide for a fiscal year and budgets; to provide for audits, contracting procedures, and purchasing; to provide for sale and lease of city property; to provide for bonds of officials; to provide for prior ordinances, existing personnel and officers, and pending matters; to provide for construction; to provide for severability; to repeal a specific Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— The charter, consisting of Ga. Laws 1999, Act. No. 301, p. 4886, is set out herein as it appears in the 1999 Code book, and as amended, except as otherwise noted herein. Said charter replaced in its entirety the former charter, consisting of Ga. Laws 1927, p. 813, as it appears in the 1973 Code book. Amendments are cited in parentheses following amended sections or subsections. For stylistic purposes, headings, catchlines, capitalization and expression of numbers in text have been made uniform. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. See the Charter Comparative Table. 
[ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL] 
Section 1.10. - Name.     This city and the inhabitants thereof are reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. (a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter and are as more particularly described and set forth in Appendix A attached hereto. (b)  The board of mayor and commissioners, as defined in Section 2.10 of this charter, may provide for changes in Appendix A by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. (c)  The city shall maintain an official map of the city which accurately depicts the corporate boundaries. (Ord. No. 0101, § 1, 1-29-01) 
Section 1.12. - Powers and construction. (a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter, including, without limitation: (1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and to license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter; (2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; (3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas and heating and air-conditioning codes; (4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted, and other privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to permit and to regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; (5)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate boundaries of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; (6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements; (7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; (8)  Environmental protection. To protect and to preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; (9)  Fire regulations. To prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; (10)  Garbage disposal and fees. To provide for and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, refuse, and trash; to provide for the separate collection and disposal of recyclable materials; to levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, rubbish, and trash collection and disposal, and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services from all individuals, firms, and corporations owning property or doing business in the city; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such charges, taxes, and fees; (11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, or safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; (12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; (13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; (14)  Jail sentences and community service. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; or to provide for such other community service as the municipal court may deem appropriate; (15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including, without limitation, parking upon the streets, roads, alleys, walkways, and other areas of the city; (16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, committees, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such bodies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; (17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; (18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or intangible property, in fee simple or any other interest, inside or outside the corporate boundaries of the city; (19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city, and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; (20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, without limitation, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants and facilities for the transportation of same, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; (21)  Nuisance. To abate nuisances, whether public or private, on public or private property; (22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; (23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning as the board of mayor and commissioners deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community and to provide regulation for subdivision, historic preservation, and all other purposes; (24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise all police powers, including, but not limited to, the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for police, fire-fighting, emergency medical service, and all other public safety agencies; (25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure or condition which is dangerous or detrimental to the public; (26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of all public improvements, including, without limitation, public ways, public transportation, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, inside or outside the corporate boundaries of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation utilizing the procedures enumerated in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; (27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; (28)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or to make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; (29)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or to regulate and to control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets, roads, and alleyways or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate boundaries of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; (30)  Retirement. To provide and to maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; (31)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges, viaducts, and other public property for the use of public utilities; and to repair and maintain in a safe condition the walkways on public rights-of-way; (32)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or to prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, inflammable, and hazardous materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; (33)  Special assessments. To levy and to provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; (34)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; (35)  Taxes: other. To levy and to collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; (36)  Taxicabs. To regulate and to license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; (37)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and (38)  Other powers. To exercise and to enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, education, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by municipal governments under the laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. (b)  This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by law. (c)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Section 1.13. - Exercise of powers.     All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia, as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 
Section 2.10. - Board of mayor and commissioners; creation; number; election.     The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a board of mayor and commissioners to be composed of a mayor and four commissioners and shall be known as the board of mayor and commissioners. The board of mayor and commissioners established shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. The mayor and commissioners shall be elected in the manner provided by law and this charter. 
Section 2.11. - Board of mayor and commissioners; terms and qualifications for office.     The members of the board of mayor and commissioners shall serve for terms of four years commencing on the first regular meeting in January of the year immediately following the year such commissioner or the mayor is elected and until the respective successor is elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or commissioner unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for a continuous 12 months prior to the date of qualification for election of mayor or commissioner; each shall continue to reside therein during that member's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the city; and each shall not have been convicted of a felony at the time of qualification or during that member's period of service. 
Section 2.12. - Vacancy; filing of vacancies. (a)  Vacancies —The office of mayor or commissioner shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any event specified as constituting a vacancy by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted, or this charter or should the mayor or commissioner no longer be qualified pursuant to this charter. (b)  Filling of vacancies —A vacancy in the office of mayor or commissioner shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by special election in accordance with Titles 21 and 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other laws as are or may hereafter by enacted. 
Section 2.13. - Compensation and expenses.     The mayor and commissioners shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. (a)  Elected officials and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. (b)  Conflict of interest—No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: (1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, including, but not limited to, any business, transaction, or any such interest of an immediate family member of such individual, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that elected official's, appointed officer's, or employee's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of the elected official's, appointed officer's, or employee's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; (2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service, including, but not limited to, those for or on behalf of an immediate family member of such individual, is incompatible with the proper discharge of that elected official's, appointed officer's, or employee's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of the elected official's, appointed officer's, or employee's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; (3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which the elected official, appointed officer, or employee is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of the elected official, appointed officer, employee, or others, including, but not limited to, an immediate family member of such individual; (4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation, including, but not limited to, a member of the immediate family of such individual, which to the elected official's, appointed officer's, or employee's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; (5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government, including, but not limited to, the private interests of an immediate family member; or (6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which the elected official, public officer, or employee, or any member of the immediate family of any such individual, has financial interest. (c)  Disclosure—Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have, or whose immediate family member shall have, any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall promptly disclose such interest to the board of mayor and commissioners. The mayor and any commissioner who has, or whose immediate family member has, a financial interest in any matter pending before the board of mayor and commissioners shall promptly disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the board of mayor and commissioners, and the mayor or that commissioner shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any discussion, decision, or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have, or whose immediate family member shall have, any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall promptly disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity and to the board of mayor and commissioners. (d)  Use of public property—No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use or knowingly permit the use of property owned or leased by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the board of mayor and commissioners or the governing body of such agency or entity. (e)  Contracts voidable and rescindable—Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the board of mayor and commissioners. (f)  Ineligibility of elected official—Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any commissioner shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which that official was elected. No former mayor and no former commissioner shall hold any compensated appointive office in or be an employee of the city until two years after the expiration of the term for which the mayor or that commissioner was elected. (g)  Political activities of employees—No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon election to any public office in this city or upon election to any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. No employee of the city may campaign for or on behalf of or contribute to any candidate for election to any public office in the city. (h)  Penalties for violation. (1)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited immediately that person's office or position. (2)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city who shall forfeit an office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. (i)  Immediate family—For the purposes of this article, the term "immediate family," "member of the immediate family," "immediate family member," and similar terms shall mean and include any one or more of the following persons: a parent, spouse, child, stepchild, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, parent-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, or nephew of and any person residing with the respective elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies. 
Section 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations.     Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the board of mayor and commissioners may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who falls or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the board of mayor and commissioners shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.16. - General power and authority of the board of mayor and commissioners.     Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the board of mayor and commissioners shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
Section 2.17. - Eminent domain.     The board of mayor and commissioners is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof and, for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Section 2.18. - Regular and special meetings. (a)  The board of mayor and commissioners shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. (b)  Special meetings of the board of mayor and commissioners may be held on call of the mayor or two commissioners. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other commission members in writing at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to commissioners shall not be required if the mayor and all commissioners are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a commissioner in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such commissioner's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. (c)  All meetings of the board of mayor and commissioners shall be open to the public in compliance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 2.19. - Rules of procedure. (a)  The board of mayor and commissioners shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. (b)  Unless otherwise provided by law or this charter, all committees shall be established and appointed by the board of mayor and commissioners, provided that the mayor may appoint committee chairs upon the advice and consent of the board. 
Section 2.20. - Quorum; voting.     Three members of the board of mayor and commissioners shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the board of mayor and commissioners. Voting on the adoption of ordinances, resolutions, and any other matter requiring a vote of the board shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the board of mayor and commissioners shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. The affirmative vote of three members present and voting shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Section 2.21. - Ordinance form; procedures. (a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the appropriate form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall address a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "Be it ordained by the City of Avondale Estates, as follows:" and every ordinance shall so begin. (b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the board of mayor and commissioners and be read at a regular or special meeting of the board of mayor and commissioners. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the board of mayor and commissioners in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted until such time that the ordinance has been read at three separate meetings of the board of mayor and commissioners, except for emergency ordinances provided in Section 2.23 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the city clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each commissioner and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the board of mayor and commissioners may designate. 
Section 2.22. - Action requiring an ordinance.     Acts of the board of mayor and commissioners which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Section 2.23. - Emergencies. (a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the board of mayor and commissioners may convene on call of the mayor or two commissioners and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. The affirmative vote of three members of the board of mayor and commissioners shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. (b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 2.24. - Codes of technical regulations. (a)  The board of mayor and commissioners may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.21 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to Section 2.25 of this charter. (b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for inspection by the public. 
Section 2.25. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. (a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the board of mayor and commissioners. (b)  The board of mayor and commissioners shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the board of mayor and commissioners by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the board of mayor and commissioners may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of City of Avondale Estates, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city manager. (c)  The board of mayor and commissioners shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the board of mayor and commissioners. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city manager shall make such further such further arrangements as deemed desirable for reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Section 2.26. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation;     The board of mayor and commissioners shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the city manager's compensation. The city manager shall be appointed on the basis of executive, administrative, and educational qualifications. 
Section 2.27. - Removal of city manager.     The city manager is employed at will and may be summarily removed from office at any time by the affirmative vote of a majority of the board of mayor and commissioners at a regular meeting or at a special meeting called for that purpose. 
Section 2.28. - Acting city manager.     By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager may designate, subject to approval of the board of mayor and commissioners, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the city manager's temporary absence or physical or mental disability. During such absence or disability, the board of mayor and commissioners may revoke any such designation at any time and may at any time appoint any officer or employee of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or the city manager's disability shall cease. 
Section 2.29. - Powers and duties of the city manager.     The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the board of mayor and commissioners for the administration of all city affairs placed in the city manager's charge by or under this charter. As the chief executive and administrative officer, the city manager shall: (1)  Appoint and, when the city manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the city manager appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter; and the city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise those powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; (2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; (3)  Attend all board of mayor and commissioners meetings except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, performance evaluation, discipline, or removal of the city manager and have the right to take part in discussion but have no vote; (4)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the board of mayor and commissioners, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; (5)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the board of mayor and commissioners; (6)  Submit to the board of mayor and commissioners and make available to the public a complete report of the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the and of each fiscal year; (7)  Make such other reports as the board of mayor and commissioners may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; (8)  Act as purchasing agent of the city and purchase all materials, supplies, and equipment for the conduct of the business of the city; (9)  Keep the board of mayor and commissioners fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the board of mayor and commissioners concerning the affairs of the city as the city manager deems desirable; and (10)  Perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the board of mayor and commissioners. 
Section 2.30. - Commission interference with administration.     Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.15 of this charter, the board of mayor and commissioners or the members of the board of mayor and commissioners shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the board of mayor and commissioners nor any member of the board of mayor and commissioners shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. Said board shall exercise its powers in session, duly assembled, and no member or group of members thereof shall otherwise attempt to exercise the powers conferred upon the board. 
Section 2.31. - Selection of mayor pro tempore.     The board of mayor and commissioners shall elect a commissioner to serve as mayor pro tempore, who shall serve at the pleasure of the board of mayor and commissioners. The mayor pro tempore shall continue to vote and otherwise participate as a commissioner. 
Section 2.32. - Mayor pro tempore.     During the absence or physical or mental disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore, or in the mayor pro tempore's absence or disability for any reason, any one of the commissioners chosen by a majority vote of the board of mayor and commissioners, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all commissioners. The mayor pro tempore or selected commissioner shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in Section 2.14 of this charter. 
Section 2.33. - Powers and duties of mayor.     The mayor shall: (1)  Preside at all meetings of the board of mayor and commissioners; (2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; (3)  Have the power to administer oaths, issue proclamations, and take affidavits; (4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; (5)  Vote on matters before the board of mayor and commissioners and be counted toward a quorum as any other commission member; (6)  Fulfill such other duties as the board of mayor and commissioners shall by ordinance or resolution establish; and (7)  Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as are otherwise provided by law and this charter. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 
Section 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. (a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the board of mayor and commissioners, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all nonselective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. (b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the heads of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed, in the manner set forth below, solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. (c)  All appointed officers and heads of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. (d)  There shall be a head of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each principal officer shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager as set forth below, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that department or agency. (e)  All appointed officers under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the board of mayor and commissioners, and heads of departments under the supervision of the city manager shall be selected by the city manager. All appointed officers and department heads shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the city manager unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
Section 3.11. - Boards, commissions, committees, and authorities. (a)  The board of mayor and commissioners shall create by ordinance or resolution such boards, commissions, committees, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the board of mayor and commissioners deems necessary and shall by ordinance or resolution establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. (b)  All members of boards, commissions, committees, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the board of mayor and commissioners for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance or resolution, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. (c)  The board of mayor and commissioners, by ordinance or resolution, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, committee, or authority. (d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, committee, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. (e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, committee, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this charter or such ordinance or resolution for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. (f)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, committee, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice chair, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, committee, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Section 3.12. - City attorney.     The board of mayor and commissioners shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, each of whom shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney and assistants shall serve at the pleasure of the board of mayor and commissioners, and the city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the board of mayor and commissioners as directed; shall advise the board of mayor and commissioners, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the person's position as city attorney. 
Section 3.13. - City clerk/treasurer.     The city manager shall appoint a city clerk/treasurer (referred to throughout this charter as the "city clerk") who shall not be an elected officer of the city. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain board of mayor and commissioners records required by this charter; and report to and perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager. 
Section 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans.     The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the board of mayor and commissioners for approval. Such plan shall apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the board of mayor and commissioners shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Section 3.15. - Personnel policies.     All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 
Section 4.10. - Creation; name.     There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia. 
Section 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge; city solicitor. (a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. (b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge or solicitor of the municipal court unless that person shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges and solicitors shall be appointed by the board of mayor and commissioners and shall serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the board of mayor and commissioners. (c)  Compensation of all judges and solicitors shall be fixed by the board of mayor and commissioners. (d)  Before assuming office, each judge or solicitor shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the board of mayor and commissioners journal required in Section 2.19 of this charter. 
Section 4.12. - Convening.     The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Section 4.13. - Jurisdictions; powers. (a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as permitted by law. (b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed those limits established by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated as applicable to municipal courts, by both fine and imprisonment. (c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction. (d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. (e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. (f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. (g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served and executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. (h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Section 4.14. - Certiorari.     The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of DeKalb County, Georgia, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 4.15. - Rules for court.     With the approval of the board of mayor and commissioners, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the board of mayor and commissioners may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be promptly furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 
Section 5.10. - Applicability of law.     All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.11. - Election of the board of mayor and commissioners and mayor. (a)  There shall be a municipal general election biennially in the odd years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. (b)  There shall be elected two commissioners at one election and at every other election thereafter. The two remaining seats for commissioner and the seat for mayor shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created, provided that the first such election of two commissioners and mayor pursuant to this section shall be held in November 1999. 
Section 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections.     No primaries shall be conducted for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations or incumbency. 
Section 5.13. - Election by plurality.     The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Section 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies.     In the event that the office of commissioner or mayor shall become vacant as provided in Section 2.12 of this charter, the board of mayor and commissioners or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.15. - Other provisions.     Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the board of mayor and commissioners shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the appropriate provisions of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.16. - Removal of members of the board of mayor and commissioners.     The mayor, commissioners, or appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted or as provided in this charter. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
Section 6.10. - Property tax.     The board of mayor and commissioners may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the board of mayor and commissioners in its discretion. 
Section 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods.     The board of mayor and commissioners, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The board of mayor and commissioners, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes.     The board of mayor and commissioners by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The board of mayor and commissioners may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.13. - Regulatory fees; permits.     The board of mayor and commissioners by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises. (a)  The board of mayor and commissioners shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city streets, alleys, and other public property for the purposes of railroads, street railways, public transportation, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other organizations. The board of mayor and commissioners shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchises shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The board of mayor and commissioners shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book maintained by the city clerk for that sole purpose. The board of mayor and commissioners may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. (b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the board of mayor and commissioners has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of the city streets, alleys, and other public property for the purposes of railroads, street railways, public transportation, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other organizations. 
Section 6.15. - Service charges.     The board of mayor and commissioners by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.16. - Special assessments.     The board of mayor and commissioners by ordinance shall have power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.17. - Construction; other taxes and fees.     The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees.     The board of mayor and commissioners, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law, including, without limitation, providing for the dates when the taxes, fees, and other revenues are due; late penalties and interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 6.19. - General obligation bonds.     The board of mayor and commissioners shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.20. - Revenue bonds.     Revenue bonds may be issued by the board of mayor and commissioners as law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds shall be paid solely out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which the bonds were issued. 
Section 6.21. - Short-term loans.     The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts.     The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies, provided the contract terminates without further obligation an the part of the city at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 6.23. - Fiscal year.     The board of mayor and commissioners shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city. 
Section 6.24. - Preparation of budgets.     The board of mayor and commissioners shall provide by ordinance the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. 
Section 6.25. - Submission of operating budget to board of mayor and commissioners.     On or before a date fixed by the board of mayor and commissioners no later than 120 days prior the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the board of mayor and commissioners a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget provided for in Section 6.29 of this charter, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 6.26 - Action by board of mayor and commissioners on budget. (a)  The board of mayor and commissioners may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. (b)  The board of mayor and commissioners shall enact an ordinance adopting the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the last day of the last month of each fiscal year. If the board of mayor and commissioners fails or refuses to adopt the operating budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the board of mayor and commissioners adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.24 of this charter. (c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Section 6.27. - Tax levies.     The board of mayor and commissioners shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city. 
Section 6.28. - Changes in appropriations.     The board of mayor and commissioners by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or any special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Section 6.29. - Capital budget. (a)  On or before the date fixed by the board of mayor and commissioners but no later than 120 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the board of mayor and commissioners a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The board of mayor and commissioners shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget. The board of mayor and commissioners shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such projects are included in the capital budget or added by amendment to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.23 of this charter. (b)  The board of mayor and commissioners shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 31 of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Section 6.30. - Independent audit. There  shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the board of mayor and commissioners. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles and in accordance with state law. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available to the public from the city clerk and at a price in accordance with all applicable state law. 
Section 6.31. - Contracting procedures. No  contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: (1)  It is in writing; (2)  It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and (3)  It is made or authorized by the board of mayor and commissioners and such approval is entered in the city journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.19 of this charter. 
Section 6.32. - Centralized purchasing.     The board of mayor and commissioners shall provide for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 6.33. - Sale and lease of city property. (a)  The board of mayor and commissioners may sell and convey or lease any real, personal, or tangible property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. (b)  The board of mayor and commissioners may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city in the property has no readily ascertainable monetary value. (c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the board of mayor and commissioners may authorize the city manager to sell and convey said cut off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Section 7.10. - Bonds for officials     The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the board of mayor and commissioners shall, from time to time, require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Section 7.11. - Prior ordinances.     All prior unrepealed ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the board of mayor and commissioners. 
Section 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers.     Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 180 days before or during which the existing board of mayor and commissioners shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointed officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Section 7.13. - Pending matters.     Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the board of mayor and commissioners. 
Section 7.14. - Construction. (a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. (b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. (c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Section 7.15. - Severability     If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Section 7.16. - Specific repealer.     An Act creating the City of Avondale Estates, approved August 25, 1926 (Ga. L. 1927, p. 813), as amended, is repealed in its entirety. 
Section 7.17. - General repealer.     All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. APPENDIX A CORPORATE BOUNDARIES OF CITY OF AVONDALE ESTATES, GEORGIA The said corporate limits of the City of Avondale Estates shall embrace the territory within the following boundary to wit: beginning at the northwest corner of Land Lot 217 of the 15 th district of originally Henry, now DeKalb County, Georgia, thence northwesterly along the northeasterly line of Lot 37, Block A, Forrest Hills, Second Addition, as per plat recorded in Plat Book 14, page 89, DeKalb County Records, approximately two hundred ten feet (210'), more or less, to the corner formed by the intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of Wiltshire Drive and the easterly right-of-way line of Forrest Boulevard, if extended; thence easterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Wiltshire Drive approximately one hundred eight-six feet (186'), more or less, to the northeasterly corner of Lot 39, of said block and subdivision; thence north approximately one thousand nine hundred forty-five feet (1,945'), more or less, parallel with the west line of said Land Lot 232 and approximately one hundred five feet (105'), more or less, east therefrom to a point; thence west approximately four feet (4'), more or less, to the easterly right-of-way line of Forrest Boulevard; thence in a northerly direction along the easterly right-of-way line of Forrest Boulevard approximately five hundred ninety-four feet (594'), more or less, if extended, to the intersection of the southerly line of Land Lot 248 of the 15 th District of originally Henry, now DeKalb County, Georgia; thence west along the southern line of land Lot 248 approximately five hundred thirty-nine feet (539'), more or less, to the southwesterly corner of Parcel 15 248 16 33; thence north, eight degrees (8;deg;) and thirty minutes (30') west approximately one thousand two hundred fifty-nine feet (1,259'), more or less, along the eastern boundary of Parcels 15 248 16 33 and 15 248 16 16 to a point, said point is approximately two hundred twenty-five feet (225'), more or less, southeast of the southern right-of-way line of North Avondale Road/East College Avenue/US 278; thence in a westerly direction at an interior angle of eighty-nine degrees twenty-four minutes (89;deg; 24') with the preceding call, a distance of approximately three hundred seventy feet (370'), more or less, to a point; thence in a northwesterly direction at an interior angle of one hundred degrees thirty-seven minutes (100;deg; 37') with the preceding call, a distance of approximately two hundred thirty feet (230'), more or less, to the intersection of the southern right-of-way line of East College Avenue/US 278; thence westerly along said right-of-way line of East College Avenue/US 278, a distance of approximately four hundred seventy-five feet (475'), more or less, to a point, which point is directly opposite the westerly right-of-way line for Maple Street, if extended; thence in a northerly direction crossing East College Avenue/US 278 and following the westerly line of Maple Street a distance of approximately six hundred fifty feet (650'), more or less, to the intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of the Georgia Railroad; thence continuing in a northerly direction following the westerly line of Maple Street, if extended, a distance of approximately two hundred feet (200'), more or less, to the intersection of the northerly right-of-way line of the Georgia Railroad; thence in a northeasterly direction along said northerly right-of-way line of the Georgia Railroad a distance of approximately two thousand ninety feet (2,090'), more or less, to a point that would intersect with the easterly right-of-way line of Oak Street (60' right-of-way), if extended; thence in a southerly direction along the easterly right-of-way line of Oak Street, if extended, a distance of approximately five hundred five feet (505'), more or less, to a point at the intersection of said right-of-way line and the original designated centerline of Green Street (never opened); thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Green Street a distance of approximately two hundred one feet (201'), more or less, to the intersection of the westerly right-of-way line of Lake Street (40' right-of-way), if extended, in a straight line to intersect with said center line; thence in a southerly direction along the westerly right-of-way line of Lake Street approximately twenty feet (20'), more or less, to a point; thence easterly in a straight line along the northwestern boundary of Parcel 15 249 14 01 a distance of approximately four hundred twenty feet (420'), more or less, to a point; thence in a northwesterly direction approximately forty-nine feet (49'), more or less, to a point on the face of a brick mill building; thence in an east, northeasterly direction along the face of a brick mill building approximately forty-one feet (41'), more or less, to a point; thence south, southeast a distance of approximately forty-nine feet (49'), more or less, to the intersection of the northwestern boundary of Parcel 15 249 14 01; thence easterly along said Parcel Line approximately sixteen feet (16'), more or less to a point; thence in a southerly direction a distance of approximately one hundred eighty-seven feet (187'), more or less, to the intersection of the northerly right-of-way line of Parry Street (40' right-of-way); thence in a northeasterly direction along the northerly right-of-way of Parry Street a distance of approximately three hundred sixty feet (360'), more or less, to the intersection of the westerly right-of-way of Laredo Drive (40' right-of-way); thence in a northwesterly direction along the westerly right-of-way of Laredo Drive a distance of approximately eight hundred feet (800'), more or less, to the northerly right-of-way of the Georgia Railroad line; thence in a northeasterly direction along said railroad right-of-way a distance of approximately seven hundred ninety-six feet (796'), more or less, to a point on the northerly right-of-way of said railroad right-of-way perpendicular to the northeasterly right-of-way of Hobbs Street, if extended; thence in a southeasterly direction along the northeast right-of-way of Hobbs Street, if extended, a distance of approximately six hundred seventy-nine feet (679'), more or less, to the point of intersection with the northwest right-of-way line of North Clarendon Avenue; thence in a northeasterly direction along the northwesterly right-of-way of North Clarendon Avenue a distance of approximately one hundred seventy feet (170'), more or less, to a point; thence in a northeasterly direction across North Clarendon Avenue a distance of approximately one hundred fifty feet (150'), more or less, to the intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of North Clarendon Avenue and the northern right-of-way line of Old Rockbridge Road; thence in an easterly direction along the northern right-of-way line of Old Rockbridge Road a distance of approximately five hundred fifty feet (550'), more or less, to a point approximately thirty-five feet (35'), more or less, east of the eastern right-of-way line of First Street; thence south across Old Rockbridge Road along the eastern boundary of Parcel 18 9 20 04 approximately four hundred twenty feet (420'), more or less, to the northeast corner of Land Lot 249; thence south along said east line of Land Lot 249 a distance of approximately sixty feet (60'), more or less, to a point; thence west approximately sixty-five feet (65'), more or less, to a point; thence south a distance of approximately three hundred thirty-nine feet (339'), more or less, along the western property line of Parcel 15 250 01 34; thence east a distance of approximately sixty-five feet (65'), more or less, to the intersection of the eastern line of land Lot 249; thence south along the east line of said Land Lot 249 to the northerly right-of-way line of Covington Road (also known as Covington Highway/US 278); thence in a southeasterly direction along said northerly right-of-way line of Covington Road a distance of approximately one thousand forty feet (1,040'), more or less, to the intersection of the western right-of-way line of Stratford Green; thence in a northeasterly direction along the westerly right-of-way line of Stratford Green a distance of approximately one hundred forty-three feet (143'), more or less, to a point; thence east northeast along the southern right-of-way line of Stratford Green Lane a distance of approximately one hundred eighty-six feet (186'), more or less, to a point on the western boundary of Parcel 15 250 01 02; thence south along said Parcel Line approximately one hundred sixty-four feet (164'), more or less, to the northern right-of-way line of Covington Highway; thence along the northern right-of-way line of Covington Highway (US 278) and following the curvature of the northerly right-of-way line of Covington Highway crossing the intersections of Mountain Drive and Kensington Road a distance of approximately two thousand sixty-two feet (2,062'), more or less, to the northwest corner of Parcel 15 231 05 01; thence east along the northern boundary of said lot a distance of approximately six hundred forty-three feet (643'), more or less, to the intersection of Land Lots 15 250; 15 251; 15 230 and 15 231; thence south along said Land Lot line of 15 231 and 15 230 a distance of approximately three hundred seventy-two feet (372'), more or less, to the intersection of Parcel 15 231 05 03; thence in a west southwesterly direction along the northern boundary of Parcel 15 231 05 03 approximately two hundred thirty-nine feet (239'), more or less, to the intersection of the northern right-of-way of Covington Highway (US 278); thence in a southeasterly direction along the northern right-of-way line of Covington Highway (US 278) a distance of approximately two hundred eighty-eight feet (288'), more or less, to the intersection of the western right-of-way of Memorial Drive; thence south crossing Covington Highway/US 278 and following the westerly right-of-way of Memorial Drive a distance of approximately six hundred fifty feet (650'), more or less, to the intersection of the southern right-of-way line of Nottingham Drive; thence west northwest along the southern right-of-way line of Nottingham Drive a distance of approximately one hundred twenty-five feet (125'), more or less, to the northeast corner of Parcel 15 231 10 04; thence in a southwesterly direction along the southeasterly line of Parcel 15 231 10 4 a distance of approximately one hundred fifty-one feet (151'), more or less, to the southeast corner of said parcel; thence in a northwesterly direction along the southwesterly boundary of said parcel a distance of approximately seventy-five feet (75'), more or less, to the southwest corner of Parcel 15 231 10 04; thence in a southwesterly direction along the southerly boundary lines of Parcels 15 231 10 7, 8, 9 and 10 a distance of approximately five hundred twelve feet (512'), more or less, to the southeast corner of Parcel 15 231 10 11; thence in a southerly direction approximately two hundred seventy-five feet (275'), more or less, to the southeast corner of Parcel 15 231 10 40; thence in a southwesterly direction along the northwesterly boundary line of Parcels 15 231 10 52, 30 and 51; 15 218 01 23, 01, 24 and 02 a distance of approximately three thousand forty-five feet (3,045'), more or less, to a point on the southeastern boundary of Parcel 15 218 01 07; thence westerly approximately one hundred ninety-two feet (192'), more or less, to the western boundary of Land Lot 218; thence in a southerly direction along the western boundary of Land Lot 218 approximately five hundred sixty-seven feet (567'), more or less, to the intersection of the westernmost right-of-way line of Memorial Drive; thence in a southwestern direction along the western right-of-way line of Memorial Drive a distance of approximately seven hundred feet (700'), more or less, to the intersection of the most southerly point of Parcel 15 217 09 13; thence in a west northwest direction a distance of approximately four hundred fifteen feet (415'), more or less, to the intersection of Parcels 15 217 04 11, 03 and 02; thence in a northerly direction along the eastern boundary of Parcel 15 217 04 02 a distance of approximately eight hundred seventy-four feet (874'), more or less, to the intersection of the southern right-of-way of Berkeley Road; thence in a westerly direction along the southern right-of-way of Berkeley Road approximately nine hundred ninety-five feet (995'), more or less, to the eastern right-of-way line of Clarendon Avenue; thence south along the eastern right-of-way line of Clarendon Avenue approximately one thousand five hundred sixty-seven feet (1,567'), more or less, to a point approximately one hundred sixty feet (160'), more or less, from the intersection of the northern right-of-way line of Columbia Drive; thence in a northwestern direction across South Clarendon Avenue and along the southern boundary of Parcel 15 217 01 02 a distance of approximately three hundred twenty-five feet (325'), more or less, to a point on the westerly boundary of Land Lot 217; thence north along the west boundary of Land Lot 217 a distance of approximately two thousand five hundred twenty-five feet (2,525'), more or less, to the northwest corner of Land Lot 217 and the point of beginning. (Ord. No. 0201, § 1, 2-25-02) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. Ga. Laws Year Act No. Page Section   Section this Charter 1927 813 1-103 1-602 1953 3107 1-103 1956 2703 1-601 1-903 221 3 1-201 1971 3937 1-402 1988 4488 1019 1 1-101 1995 8 3502 1 1-301, 1-302 2 1-310 1999 301 4886 1.10—7.17 App. A  Ordinance Number Adoption  Date Section  Section this Charter 788  3-28-83 1, 2 1-803 811  7-27-87 1 1-2001 859 12-16-93 1 1-601 0101  1-19-01 1 1.111 0201  2-25-02 1 7.17  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited.     The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Avondale Estates, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction.     In the construction of this Code and all ordinances amending the same, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body:     Board of mayor and commissioners, mayor and commissioners, governing authority, governing body. The terms "board of mayor and commis- sioners," "mayor and commissioners," "governing authority" and "governing body" mean the board of mayor and commissioners of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia.     Bonds. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they are bound thereby. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(1).     City. The term "city" means the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia. Where appropriate, it shall also mean duly authorized officials, officers and employees of the city.     Code. The term "Code" or "this Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.     Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, as amended, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3).     County. The term "county" means DeKalb County, Georgia.     Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires an official or the head of a department of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the official or head of the department to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise.     Gender. A word importing one (1) gender extends and applies to the other genders.     Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.     Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.     Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" means and includes persons as the term "person" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee.     Month. The word "month" means a calendar month.     Number. A word importing only the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one (1) person or thing.     Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."     O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended.     Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.     Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title.     Person. The word "person" extends and applies to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, receivers, trustees and personal representatives, and to bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.     Personal property. The words "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined.     Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" means next before and next after, respectively.     Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property.     Public place. The words "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any open area.     Real property. The words "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.     Shall, may. The word "shall" is considered mandatory; "may" is considered permissive.     Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.     Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person includes a mark intended as such when the person cannot write.     State. The term "state," in reference to a political entity, means the State of Georgia.     Street. The word "street" means to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city.     Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others.     Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.     Title of officer or official. Whenever the title of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Avondale Estates" were added.     Week. The word "week" means seven (7) calendar days.     Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall mean to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.     Year. The word "year" means a calendar year. (Code 1973, §§ 2-103, 2-107) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, references in Code. (a)  The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or subsections, nor as any part of the section or subsection, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references, Charter references, related law references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. (c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions or sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. (Code 1973, § 2-109) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. (a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. (b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect. (Code 1973, § 2-103) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability.     It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. (Code 1973, § 2-110) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. (a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and added hereto. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. (b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Avondale Estates, Georgia is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. (c)  In the event a new section not theretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Ordinances, City of Avondale Estates, Georgia is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, and to read as follows: …." The new section (or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. (d)  All sections, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. (Code 1973, § 2-112) 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. (a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the governing body. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the governing body or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. (b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. (c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: (1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; (2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; (3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; (4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and (5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations; abatement of nuisances. (a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city amending this Code, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code, ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both, or by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as provided by law. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (b)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. (Code 1973, § 2-105) Maximum punishment, § 1-102(29); jurisdiction of municipal court, § 1-803(2). 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances.     The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Code 1973, § 2-111) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code, ordinance or other public document. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, or in any other manner alter any ordinance book or minute book, or any notice posted by the city for the benefit of the public, or any other document or record of the municipal government of the city. (Code 1973, § 2-113) 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code.     Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: (1)  Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; (2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; (3)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; (4)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing salaries of officials, officers or employees of the city; (5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; any ordinance levying any tax; (6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance to any person; (7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; (8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; (9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; (10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city, or providing regulations for platting or subdividing property; (11)  Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundary of the city; (12)  Any zoning ordinance of the city.     All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. (a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. (b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Personnel, ch. 16. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 2-1. - City seal.     The seal of the city shall be of a form prescribed by the governing body, the impression to be on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1973, § 2-106) 
Sec. 2-2. - Oath.     Upon the election or appointment of the mayor, a city commissioner, city manager or any department head, the one so elected or appointed shall subscribe to an oath of office, said oath to be as follows: "Georgia, DeKalb County: I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly demean myself as _______ of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, for the ensuing term; that I will faithfully enforce the charter and ordinances of said city, to the best of my ability without fear or favor, and in all my acts as _______, act as I believe to be in the best interest of the city, so help me God. (Signed) _____ " (Code 1973, § 2-305) Charter reference— Oath required, § 1-602. 
Sec. 2-3. - Public records.     All records of the city are hereby declared to be public records, open to the inspection of any citizen of the city, but no official shall permit any book, paper or other document or record to be taken from such official's office unless on a summons properly served, issued by some court of competent jurisdiction or some committee appointed by the governing body, or on an order from the governing body. (Code 1973, § 2-104) 
Sec. 2-4. - Official newspaper organ.     The Decatur/DeKalb News/ERA, a newspaper published in DeKalb County, Georgia, or such other publication as sheriff's sales for the county are advertised, shall be designated as the official legal organ for the city, and all legal and public notices pertaining to the city shall be published therein. (Code 1973, § 2-108; Ord. No. 804, § 1, 12-20-85; Ord. No. 851, § 1, 1-18-93) 
Sec. 2-5. - Publications, when.     The official publication of any ordinance, resolution, advertisement for bids, or other official publication may be made on any day of the week, Sundays excepted, as directed by the officer authorized to make such publication. (Code 1973, § 2-303) 
Sec. 2-6. - Execution of contracts, etc.     All deeds and leases of land sold or leased by the city and all deeds, leases, agreements, indentures, assurances and contracts made and entered into by the city and authorized by the Charter or ordinances, or by order of the board of mayor and commissioners, shall be signed and executed by the mayor and countersigned and the seal of the city affixed thereto by the city clerk; provided, this shall not restrict the power of the city manager to make contracts for the purchase of supplies, material or equipment, or for services conferred upon such official by the Charter or ordinance. (Code 1973, § 2-206) Charter reference— Contracting authority, § 1-102(13). Cross reference— Contracting for services, § 9-4. 
Sec. 2-7. - Ordinances to be numbered.     All of the laws of the city shall be designated "ordinances" and shall be designated by number, in consecutive order, according to date of passage. (Code 1973, § 2-102) Charter reference— Enactment of ordinances, § 1-401 et seq. 
Sec. 2-8. - Personal gratuities prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person in the employ of the city government to accept or use any free pass, ticket or service for personal use; provided, that this shall not apply to any person who, at the time of beginning and during such employment by the city government, was entitled to such pass or ticket under the rules of the interstate commerce commission; provided further, that this shall not prevent city officials from receiving for their official use on city business any free service provided for by franchise, contract or order of the board of mayor and commissioners. This shall not prevent any members of the police force or inspectors, acting in the discharge of duty, from entering without pay any place requiring investigation. (Code 1973, § 2-304) 
Sec. 2-9. - Social security—Coverage. (a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal social security administration, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this section, the benefits of the system of old age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act, and the state enabling act, and amendments thereto. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations. (b)  The mayor, or other chief executive officer, of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the employees' retirement system of the state for coverage of such employees and officials as provided for in subsection (a) of this section to include any employees who are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner by such law provided. (c)  Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in subsection (a) of this section are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. (d)  There shall be appropriated from general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses, and a guarantee fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in subsection (b) of this section. Such funds shall be paid over to the employees' retirement system of the state in accordance with regulations established by such agency. (e)  The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations. (f)  There is hereby excluded from this section any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state and federal laws and regulations. (g)  This section shall take effect upon its approval and publication as required by law. (Code 1973, § 2-306) 
Sec. 2-10. - Same—Release of escrow deposits. (a)  The mayor, or other chief executive officer, is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement amending the original plans and agreements with the employees' retirement system of the state providing for the release of social security escrow deposits. (b)  The city agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the employees' retirement system of the state, herein called the "state agency," in regard to collections from city employees and in making reports and payments to the state agency. (c)  The city hereby pledges an amount which it would receive in state grant funds as security for assurance that it will make collections from its employees, submit required reports, and remit payments to the state agency as agreed to in its plan of coverage of employees for social security benefits. The city further agrees that if the amount of state grant funds which it is entitled to receive in a calendar year is less than its annual payment to the state agency, as may be determined by the state agency, the city shall deposit in escrow, when so notified in writing by the state agency and in accordance with its rules and regulations, an amount which, when added to the city's state grant funds, would total an amount sufficient to meet its obligations of reporting and remitting collections to the state agency. (Code 1973, § 2-307) 
Sec. 2-11. - Powers and duties of, and limitations on supervisors and subordinates.     Any powers, duties and limitations conferred or imposed on the city manager or director of any department by this Code shall also be deemed to be conferred or imposed on any subordinate of any such officer properly designated by such officer; and any powers, duties and limitations conferred or imposed on any subordinate of any such officer shall also be deemed to be conferred or imposed on the city manager and director of that department. (Code 1973, § 2-302) 
Sec. 2-12. - General election date; commissioners' terms. (a)  For all general city elections occurring before January 1, 1993, the date of the election shall be as specified by the city Charter. Effective January 1, 1993, the general city election shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in 1993 and on such day biennially thereafter. Public notice of such elections shall be published in the city's legal organ at least thirty (30) days prior to the elections. (b)  As specified by the city Charter, each commissioner shall be elected for a term of four (4) years with such term beginning at the first regular meeting of the board of mayor and commissioners in January following the election at which such commissioners are elected. (Ord. No. 819, §§ 1, 2, 12-30-88) Charter reference— Date of elections, § 1-201. Cross reference— Elections, ch. 8. State Law reference— Election date requirement, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-51; commissioners' terms, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-60. 
Secs. 2-13—2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF MAYOR AND COMMISSIONERS 
Sec. 2-20. - Legislative powers.     The legislative powers of the city shall be vested in and exercised by the board of mayor and commissioners in the manner and under the provisions of the Charter of the city. (Code 1973, § 2-201) Charter reference— Powers of board generally, § 1-306. 
Sec. 2-21. - Time and day of regular meetings; calling special meetings. (a)  The regular meetings of the board of mayor and commissioners shall be held at 6:30 p.m. Eastern Standard Time on the fourth Monday night of each month. (b)  Special meetings of the board of mayor and commissioners may be held at any time when in the opinion of the mayor, or of any three (3) commissioners, the welfare of the city demands it. In each event, the mayor or city clerk shall call the special meeting upon written notice in accordance with the requirements of state law. Each call for a special meeting shall set forth the character of the business to be discussed at such meeting and no other business shall be considered at such meeting. (Code 1973, § 2-202; Ord. No. 756, § 1, 8-26-74; Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 8-22-16) Charter reference— Meetings of board, § 1-307. State Law reference— Open meetings law, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-22. - Presiding officer.     The mayor, and in the mayor's absence, the mayor pro tem shall preside at all meetings of the board of mayor and commissioners. The mayor shall sign the journal of the proceedings of the board and all ordinances immediately after final passage. (Code 1973, § 2-203) Charter reference— Similar provisions, §§ 1-308, 1-311. 
Sec. 2-23. - Procedures; vacancies. (a)  The board may regulate the conduct of its members during its meetings and, except as provided in the Charter, prescribe its own rules of procedure. "Robert's Rules of Order" shall be used as the guide to parliamentary procedure. (b)  Any vacancy occurring in the board of mayor and commissioners shall be filled within the provisions of the Charter. (Ord. No. 804, § 2, 12-20-85) Charter reference— Powers as to rules, etc., § 1-313; filling vacancies, § 1-310. 
Sec. 2-24. - Absences.     Absent members may be compelled to attend any meeting of the board of mayor and commissioners by summons issued by the city clerk under the direction of the mayor or two (2) commissioners, and served by a police officer; and on refusal of such member to answer such summons by such member's immediate attendance, such member may be fined in the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) by the board for each offense. (Code 1973, § 2-205) Charter reference— Arrest and punishment of members, § 1-315. 
Sec. 2-25. - Expense reimbursement for members.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4(c), members of the board of mayor and commissioners shall be entitled to reimbursement for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by them in carrying out their official duties, subject to such limitations and procedures as shall be adopted by resolution of the board of mayor and commissioners. (Ord. No. 779, § 1, 4-27-81) 
Sec. 2-26. - Stipend for members.     The members of the board of mayor and commissioners shall be compensated for their service as follows: (a)  The mayor shall receive a stipend of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per month. (b)  Commissioners shall receive a stipend of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month. (Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 7-27-16) 
Secs. 2-27—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER 
Sec. 2-31. - Calling on police and others for assistance.     The city manager is hereby empowered to call to such official's aid the entire police force and as many other persons as such official may require, to preserve peace or to prevent or quell any unlawful assembly or riot. All persons so called shall be subject to such official's orders while on the duty for which they are called; a refusal to obey such order, by anyone so called, shall be a misdemeanor. (Code 1973, § 2-310) Charter reference— Duty to see that ordinances are enforced, § 1-702(a). Cross reference— Police department, § 2-60 et seq. 
Secs. 2-32—2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY ATTORNEY 
Sec. 2-40. - Appointment and duties.     The board of mayor and commissioners shall appoint a city attorney who shall hold office at the pleasure of the board. The city attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and attorney and counsel for, the municipality and all its officers in matters relating to their official duties. The city attorney shall prepare all contracts, bonds and other instruments in writing in which the municipality is concerned, and shall endorse on each such attorney's approval of the form and correctness thereof, and no contract with such municipality shall take effect until such approval is endorsed thereon. The city attorney shall, upon the introduction of an ordinance, see that it is in proper form, and see that it is not in conflict with any constitutional, statutory or charter provisions. The city attorney or the city attorney's assistant may be the prosecutor or prosecutors in the municipal court, and shall perform such other duties and have such assistants and clerks as the board of mayor and commissioners may authorize. In addition to such duties, the city attorney shall perform such other duties as may be required of city attorneys by the general laws of the state applicable to municipalities and not inconsistent with the Charter or with any ordinance or resolution that may be passed by the board of mayor and commissioners. (Code 1973, § 2-313) Charter reference— Similar provisions, §§ 1-902, 1-903. 
Secs. 2-41—2-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY CLERK/TREASURER; FINANCE OFFICER[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 0803, adopted May 19, 2008, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 2-50—2-58, and enacted a new Art. V, §§ 2-50—2-58, as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. Cross reference— Purchases and contracts, § 9-4. 
Sec. 2-50. - City clerk; appointment; duties. (a)  The city manager shall appoint the city clerk, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the city manager. (b)  In addition to such duties, the city clerk shall perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager, as well as such as may be required of city clerks by the general laws of the state applicable to municipalities and not inconsistent with the Charter or with any ordinance or resolution that may be passed by the board of mayor and commissioners. (Ord. No. 0803, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 2-51. - Duties of city clerk at meetings.     It shall be the duty of the city clerk to be present at all meetings of the board of mayor and commissioners and to keep a full, accurate record of all business transacted by the same, to be preserved in a permanent book form. The clerk shall attest the signature of the mayor to the journal of the proceedings of the board and to the ordinances and endorse on each ordinance the dates of its passage of first, second and third readings. (Ord. No. 0803, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 2-52. - Seal and records.     The city clerk shall have custody of and preserve in such official's office the city seal, the public records, the original roll of ordinances, ordinance books, minutes of the board of mayor and commissioners, contracts, bonds, title deeds, certificates and papers, all official indemnity or security bonds, oaths and applications (except the clerk's own bond, which shall be in the custody of the mayor), and all other bonds, vouchers, and all records, papers and documents not required by the Charter or by ordinance to be deposited elsewhere, and register them by number, dates and contents and keep an accurate and modern index thereof. (Ord. No. 0803, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 2-53. - Direction of printing.     The city clerk shall direct the printing of ordinances and other documents. (Ord. No. 0803, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 2-54. - Copies of records.     The city clerk shall provide and, when required by any officer or other person, certify copies of records, papers and documents in such official's office and charge therefor for the use of the city a fee of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per page for each page or part of a page of such document so certified, and fifty cents ($0.50) per page additional for certifying the same. (Ord. No. 0803, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 2-55. - Finance officer; appointment; duties. (a)  The city manager shall appoint a finance officer, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the city manager. (b)  The finance officer shall keep an accurate account of all taxes and assessments, of all money due to, and all receipts and disbursements by the municipality of all its assets and liabilities, and of all appropriations made by the board of mayor and commissioners. (c)  The finance officer shall issue all checks or drafts for payment of money by the city. All such checks or drafts for payment of money by the city shall be counter-signed by the city manager or the mayor and shall not be valid unless so countersigned. (Ord. No. 0803, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 2-56. - Audits. (a)  At the end of each fiscal year, and whenever required by the board of mayor and commissioners, the finance officer shall audit all the accounts of the several departments and officers and shall audit all other accounts in which the municipality is interested. The finance officer may prescribe the form of reports to be rendered and the method of keeping accounts; and shall require daily reports to be made to such official by each department showing the receipt of all monies by such department and the disposition thereof. (b)  Upon the death, resignation, removal, or expiration of the term of any officer, the finance officer shall audit the accounts of such officer and, if such officer shall be found indebted to the municipality, the finance officer shall immediately give notice thereof to the city manager and the city attorney; and the latter shall forthwith proceed to collect the same. Such internal audits by the finance officer shall not replace the periodic audits of the city's accounts by independent auditors. (Ord. No. 0803, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 2-57. - Treasurer—Designation.     Pursuant to city Charter section 3.13, the city clerk shall serve as the city treasurer. (Ord. No. 0803, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 2-58. - Same—Duties; bond. (a)  The city treasurer shall be in charge of the city treasury and shall be the custodian of all money of the city and of all school and other public money coming into the hands of the city. The city treasurer shall keep and preserve such monies in the official depositories designated by ordinance. (b)  Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, the city treasurer shall, under the direction of the city manager, collect and receive all taxes, revenue and income of the city. (c)  The city treasurer shall execute and deliver to the city a bond in the sum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) to secure the faithful performance of duty and to account for all monies coming into such official's hands with a solvent surety company authorized to do business in the state, as surety. (Ord. No. 0803, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 2-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Charter reference— Police force, § 1-1701 et seq. Cross reference— Calling for assistance by city manager, § 2-31; personnel, ch. 16. 
Sec. 2-60. - Personnel.     The chief of police shall have control of the police personnel constituting the police force, under such rules and regulations as the city manager may prescribe. The police department shall be composed of a chief of police and such officers and other employees as the city manager may determine. In cases of riot, emergency at the time of elections, or similar occasions, the city manager may appoint additional personnel for temporary service. (Code 1973, § 2-322) 
Sec. 2-61. - Special police.     No person shall act as a special police officer or other personnel for any purpose whatsoever except upon authority from the chief of police, approved by the city manager. Such authority shall be exercised only under the direction and control of the chief of police and for a specified time. (Code 1973, § 2-323) 
Sec. 2-62. - Employment of police.     The city manager shall appoint the chief of police (with the approval of the board of mayor and commissioners). The chief of police shall select the personnel and any special officer needed to do special work in connection with the department or to assist the department for certain periods, with full power to terminate the services of such special officers at pleasure. (Code 1973, § 2-325) 
Sec. 2-63. - Chief's duties.     The chief of police shall devote such officer's entire time to the maintenance and preservation of the peace, order and cleanliness of the city. The chief shall aid, to the fullest extent of such officer's ability, in the enforcement of special laws relating to the city and the ordinances thereof, and shall enforce all orders of the board relating to the business and duties of the department. The chief shall keep an account of the duties performed by each member, note all absentees, report all violations of the rules and regulations of the police department to the city manager, together with the names of witnesses to the facts, that the charges may be investigated, and render a monthly report to the city manager showing in detail the workings of the department. The chief shall carry out the duties of the department as provided in this Code. (Code 1973, § 2-326) 
Sec. 2-64. - Duties of police.     It shall be the duty of the police to prevent crime; detect and arrest offenders; suppress riots; protect rights of persons and property; guard the public health; see that nuisances are removed; restrain disorderly, bawdy and gambling houses; assist, advise and protect strangers and travelers of the streets or at public carrier stations; enforce all laws and ordinances; execute all manner of process upon persons or property; arrest, upon view, any person who shall be guilty of a breach of the ordinances of the city or a crime against the laws of the state; serve any process issued out of the municipal court, or any process issued by a magistrate within the city or any process issued by any other court and do all within their power to enforce the laws and whatever else may be required of them by the board and the laws of the land. All fees for services rendered by any police officer shall be turned in to the city treasury. (Code 1973, § 2-329) 
Sec. 2-65. - Uniforms.     The police, when on duty, shall wear such uniforms and badge as the chief of police, with the approval of the city manager, shall determine and deport themselves in keeping with their positions. (Code 1973, § 2-330) 
Sec. 2-66. - Witnesses.     Whenever an arrest has been made by any city officer, it shall be lawful for such officer to summon any of the bystanders as witnesses, and such summons shall be as binding as though made by virtue of a subpoena issued by competent authority. (Code 1973, § 2-332) 
Sec. 2-67. - Powers during arrests.     In making arrests, the police officer shall be clothed with the powers and governed by the restrictions of state officers in like cases. (Code 1973, § 2-333) 
Sec. 2-68. - Imprisonment; bond; continuance.     When for the safe keeping of the party arrested, or for any sufficient reason, imprisonment until trial is necessary, the prisoner shall be committed to the county jail unless such person gives proper bond for appearance at court. Upon appearance, and upon any proper and legal showing, the city judge may continue the case at the request of the plaintiff or defendant, but not for more than three (3) days without the defendant's consent, and may require bond to be given for the defendant's appearance and, in default of same, may commit the defendant to the county jail. (Code 1973, § 2-335) 
Sec. 2-69. - Entering buildings.     To make arrests with or without a warrant, or to investigate disturbances, the officer may break open any inner or outer door or a window of a dwelling or other building if, after notice of such officer's official authority and purpose, such officer is refused admittance. (Code 1973, § 2-337) 
Sec. 2-70. - Arrest procedures.     The police shall make arrests without using boisterous language, shall treat all persons humanely, shall avoid all violence in making arrests, unless absolutely necessary to use forceful measures, and shall not use the office to oppress or annoy anyone. (Code 1973, § 2-338) 
Secs. 2-71—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CODE OF ETHICS FOR CITY OFFICIALS[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 0304, § 1, adopted July 28, 2003, amended art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 0203, §§ 5.1—5.10, adopted Oct. 28, 2002. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Sec. 2-91. - Preamble.     In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1, any person in government service should: (1)  Put loyalty to the highest moral principle and to country above loyalty to persons, party or government department. (2)  Uphold the Constitution, laws and legal regulations of the United States, the State of Georgia and all governments therein and never be a party to their evasion. (3)  Give a full day's labor for a full day's pay and give to the performance of his duties his earnest and best thought. (4)  Seek to find and employ more efficient and economical ways of getting tasks accomplished. (5)  Never discriminate unfairly by the dispensing of special favors or privileges to anyone, whether for remuneration or not, and never accept, for himself or his family, favors or benefits under circumstances which might be construed by reasonable persons as influencing the performance of his governmental duties. (6)  Make no private promises of any kind binding upon the duties of office, since a government employee has no private word which can be binding on public duty. (7)  Engage in no business with the government, either directly or indirectly, which is inconsistent with the conscientious performance of his governmental duties. (8)  Never use any information coming to him confidentially in the performance of governmental duties as a means for making private profit. (9)  Expose corruption wherever discovered. (10)  Uphold these principles, ever conscious that public office is a public trust. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-92. - Ethics for government service.     In addition, the board of mayor and commissioners establishes the following "Code of Ethics": (1)  The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees conduct themselves in the posts to which they are elected or appointed. (2)  All government, of right, originates with the people, is founded upon their will only; and is instituted solely for the good of the whole. Public officers are the trustees and servants of the people and are at all times amenable to them. Ga. Const. Art. 1, Sec. 2, Paragraph 1. (3)  The people of this state have the inherent right of regulating their internal government. Government is instituted for the protection, security and benefit of the people; and at all times they have the right to alter or reform the same whenever the public good may require it. Ga. Const. Art. 1, Sec. 2, Paragraph 2. (4)  The people have a right to expect that every public official will conduct himself in a manner that will tend to preserve public confidence in and respect for the government he represents. (5)  Such confidence and respect can best be promoted if every public official, whether paid or unpaid, and whether elected or appointed, will uniformly: (a) treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality under the law; and (b) avoid conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-93. - Declaration of policy. (a)  It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office is not used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a Code of Ethics for all city officials is adopted. (b)  This code has the following purposes: (1) to encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; (2) to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts and actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; (3) to require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interests in manners that affect the city; and (4) to serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. (c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports of regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-94. - Scope of persons covered.     The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all members of the board of mayor and commissioners, planning and zoning board, zoning board of appeals, all advisory commissions and committee members. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-95. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:     City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined, means the mayor, members of the commission, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, assistant city managers, city clerk, deputy city clerks, whether such person is salaried, hired or elected, and all other persons holding positions designated by the City Charter, as it may be amended from time to time. City official unless otherwise expressly defined, includes individuals appointed by the board of mayor and commissioners to all city commissions, committees, boards, task forces or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this article by the board of mayor and commissioners.     Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted.     Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the board of mayor and commissioners or other city boards or commissioners, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the board of mayor and commissioners, board or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body.     Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action.     Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of any city official.     Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a commission member in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions is incidental to the extent that the commissioner would be affected in common with the general public.     Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value.     Substantial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity: (1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or (2)  Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous twelve (12) months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or ten (10) percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; (3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the board of mayor and commissioners; or (4)  The person is a creditor, debtor or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more. Substantial interest in real property means interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-96. - Standards of conduct. (a)  No commissioner or member of any board or commission shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such persons or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. (b)  No commissioner or member of a board or commission, in any matter before the board of mayor and commissioners, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. (c)  No commission member or member of a board or commission shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the board of mayor and commissioners or any board or commission. (d)  No commission member or commissioner shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. (e)  No commission member or member of any board or commission shall enter into any contract with the city except as specifically authorized by state statutes. Any commission member or member of a board or commission who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing to the board of mayor and commissioners and the city clerk. (f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. (g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with Georgia law. (h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a city official or employee if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair judgment or performance of city duties. (i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the board or commission on which he serves or to his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. (j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. (k)  No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-97. - Conflict of interest.     A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity or property in which the official or employee has a substantial interest; in addition, a city official or employee who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city of the entity. Where the interest of a city official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official or employee may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-98. - Board of ethics created.     The ethics board shall consist of three (3) persons, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by a majority vote of the board of mayor and commissioners, and the third appointed by the two above named subject to approval by a majority of the board of mayor and commissioners. The third member of the ethics committee shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. All members shall be residents of the City of Avondale Estates and shall serve five (5) year terms. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-99. - Receipt of complaints. (a)  Any person having a complaint against any member of the board of mayor and commissioners, planning and zoning board, zoning board of appeals, all advisory commissions and committees for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation. The complaint shall be filed with the city clerk. The ethics board shall be notified of the alleged violation and shall hold a probable cause hearing within thirty (30) days of being notified of the alleged violation. (b)  In the event the written claim does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed by the ethics board and the complainant, and the alleged violator notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the ethics board, a formal hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the probably cause hearing. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-100. - Ethics board; powers.     The ethics board shall have the power to: (1)  Establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; (2)  Receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; (3)  Adopt forms for formal complaints, subpoenas, notices, or any other forms the ethics board deems appropriate; (4)  Report its findings to the board of mayor and commissioners for such action as the board of mayor and commissioners deems appropriate. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-101. - Member rights.     At any hearing held by the ethics board, the member of the board of mayor and commissioners, planning and zoning board, zoning board of appeals, all advisory commissions and committees who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to (1)  Written notice of the allegations at least ten (10) business days before a hearing; (2)  Be represented by counsel, at their own expense; (3)  To hear and examine the evidence and witnesses; (4)  Present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-102. - Exemptions.     This code shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-103. - Severability.     The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-104. - Penalty.     Any persons violating any provisions of this policy are subject to: (1)  Written and oral reprimand by the board of mayor and commissioners, board, commission or committee of which said violator is a member. (2)  A fine greater than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) to be imposed by the board of mayor and commissioners, board, commission or committee of which the violator is a member. (3)  Request for resignation by the board of mayor and commissioner, board, commission or committee of which the violator is a member. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Sec. 2-105. - Appeals. (a)  Any member of the board of mayor and commissioners, planning and zoning board, zoning board of appeals, all advisory commissions and committees or the complainant adversely affected by the findings of the board of ethics or the board of mayor and commissioners may obtain judicial review of such decision by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of DeKalb County within thirty (30) days after the decision of the ethics board or the board of mayor and commissioners. (b)  Provided however, no action of the board of mayor and commissioners refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. (Ord. No. 0304, § 1, 7-28-03) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-181, and enacted a new Ch. 3, as set out herein. The former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10-06, § 2, adopted July 26, 2010; Ord. No. 11-02, §§ 1—4, adopted May 23, 2011; and Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 2, adopted Nov. 17, 2011. Cross reference— Public intoxication; consumption; transporting open containers of alcoholic beverages, § 12-7. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 3-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alcoholic beverage means all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine as defined in this section.     Beer and malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than fourteen (14) percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.     Craft brewery means a facility where beer, ales, malt beverages or other associated products are manufactured, bottled, packaged, and distributed at a rate of production that does not exceed two (2) million gallons produced annually.     Craft Distillery means a facility where distilled spirits are manufactured (distilled, rectified or blended), bottled, packaged, and distributed at a rate of production that does not exceed sixty thousand (60,000) gallons annually.     Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines.     Drink means any alcoholic beverage served for consumption on the premises which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid.     Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises.     Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Fortified wine includes, but is not limited to, brandy.     Governing authority means the board of mayor and commissioners of the city.     Growler means a reuseable glass jug used to transport draft beer for off-premises consumption. The container shall be sealed, on-premises, with a tamper proof plastic cap. A growler shall be a minimum of thirty-two (32) ounces.     Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer who has been licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.     Licensee shall mean the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of such partnership or corporation.     Liter means metric measurement currently used by the United States.     Minor means any person under twenty-one (21) years of age.     Monthly period shall mean a calendar month of the year.     Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, growler or other original consumer container.     Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public.     Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.     Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any alcoholic beverage by the drink.     Retailer, retail dealer, retail licensee , or retail outlet means any person or other legal entity selling alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale.     Tasting , means the provision of complimentary samples of wine, beer (malt beverages) or distilled spirits to the public for consumption on the premises by a beer or wine retailer whose primary retail function is the sale of wine or beer, or by a craft brewery or craft distillery.     Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers.     Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-2. - Penalties for violation of chapter.     Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days for each offense. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-3. - Sale of alcoholic beverage without license or beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license; penalty. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage where the person does not have a license from the city to sell or possess for sale these alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license, except as otherwise provided in this article. (b)  Violations of this section shall result in a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-4. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the police department.     Sworn officers of the police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city official to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the city Code. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-5. - Audits by city clerk.     If the city clerk deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, he shall so notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-6. - Collection of delinquent fees or taxes.     If any person fails to pay the fees or taxes due under this chapter, the city clerk shall issue an execution against the person, so delinquent, and his property, for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-7. - Employment of underage person prohibited; exceptions. (a)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be employed by an alcoholic beverage caterer who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. (b)  For all other establishments, no person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. (c)  This section shall not be construed to apply to establishments licensed for the retail sale of beer and/or wine by the package where such sale constitutes less than seventy-five (75) percent of the gross revenue of the establishment. However, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is employed by such an establishment to sell or take orders for alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this section shall be construed to discriminate against or impede the employment of any person under eighteen (18) years of age. (d)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed in this section unless such person has obtained written, notarized permission from his parent or legal guardian; nor shall any licensee allow any such person to work without such proof of permission. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-8. - Posting of certain state law provisions. (a)  All retail establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall post in a conspicuous place a notice which shall contain the provisions of the laws of this state which deal with the unlawful sale of such items to minors and the penalties for violating such laws. (b)  All retail consumption dealers and retail dealers who sell at retail any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall post, in a conspicuous place, a sign which clearly reads: "Warning: Drinking alcoholic beverages during pregnancy can cause birth defects." (c)  The state department of revenue shall make such signs available to such retailers of alcoholic beverages and shall promulgate rules and regulations with respect to the form and the posting of such signs. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-9. - Distance requirements. (a)  No person, knowingly and intentionally, may sell or offer to sell: (1)  Any wine, beer or malt beverages within one hundred (100) yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding such application. (2)  Any distilled spirits in or within one hundred (100) yards of any church building or residence or within two hundred (200) yards of any church educational building, school grounds, or college campus. (3)  Any distilled spirits, wine, beer or malt beverages within one hundred (100) yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state, any county, or any city. (4)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply within the central business district (CBD) or the mill district (MD). (b)  The term "school building" or "educational building" referred to in this section shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. The term "campus," as used in this section, shall be defined as buildings used for educational purposes and the space adjoining such buildings necessary and convenient and habitually used for educational purposes. (c)  For the purpose of this section, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. Every license application shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises, showing the distance of the uses described in this section and a certificate of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer that the location complies with these distance requirements. (d)  No license in effect as of the enactment of this chapter shall be revoked before its date of expiration, or renewal denied by reason of the method of measurement set out in this section, if the license was granted in reliance on another method of measurement. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-10. - Types of entertainment, attire, and conduct prohibited. (a)  As used in this section, the term "licensed premises" means any premises in which alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises and shall include any premises which are required by law to be licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. (b)  No person shall perform on licensed premises acts of or acts which constitute or simulate: (1)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; (2)  The touching, caressing, or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals; or (3)  The displaying of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or the displaying of any portion of any person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals. (c)  No person shall use on licensed premises artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform, simulate, or depict any of the prohibited conduct or activities described in subsection (b) of this section. (d)  On licensed premises, it shall be unlawful for any person to show, display, or exhibit any film, still picture, electronic reproduction, or any other visual reproduction or image of any act or conduct described in subsection (b) or (c) of this section. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-11. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-12. - Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession by minors; failure to require and properly check identification. (a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law: (1)  No person knowingly, directly or through another person shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to a minor; (2)  No minor shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage; (3)  No minor shall misrepresent such minor's age in any manner whatsoever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; (4)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a minor; (5)  No minor shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. (b)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (2), and (4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption for the following purposes: (1)  Medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or (2)  At a religious ceremony. (c)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (2), and (4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption by a minor when the parent or guardian of the minor gives the alcoholic beverage to the minor and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. (d)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not apply with respect to sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or state department of public safety ID cards. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate nor any traffic citation or complaint form. (e)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually twenty-one (21) years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and to be furnished with proper identification as provided for in subsection (d) of this section in order to verify the age of such person. The failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than twenty-one (21) years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-13. - Happy hour promotions. (a)  Intent . It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as happy hour. (b)  Unlawful practices . No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: (1)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage; (2)  The sale of two (2) or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; (3)  Selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person any alcoholic beverage at a price less than one-half (½) the price customarily charged for such alcoholic beverage; nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit reducing the price of drinks by up to one-half (½) the price customarily charged; (4)  Requiring or allowing the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased, or before the first such beverage has been consumed, by any one (1) person; or (5)  Increasing the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage. (c)  Definition . As used in this section, the phrase "customarily charged" means the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-14. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only.     No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person, firm or corporation other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverages to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-15. - Notice.     For the purpose of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by mail, five (5) days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Secs. 3-16—3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 3-31. - Sale in city; license a privilege. (a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold and manufactured in the city under a license granted under the authority of the board of mayor and commissioners upon the terms and conditions provided in this article. (b)  All licenses in this article shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city Code and state law. (c)  All licenses in this article shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked or annulled and is subject to any future ordinances which may be enacted." (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-32. - Qualifications. (a)  No license for the sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. (b)  No consumption on premises license for the sale of distilled spirits will be granted where the applicant is not a resident of a county or municipality within the state where the sale of distilled spirits is authorized. (c)  Where the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and to the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, then the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a partnership, the license shall be issued to one (1) of the partners. (d)  No license for the sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within ten (10) years prior to the filing of the application for such license. (e)  No license for the sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state, or local law of any felony within ten (10) years prior to the filing of application for such license. (f)  Reserved. (g)  No license for the sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the city previously revoked within two (2) years prior to the filing of the application. (h)  The city clerk may decline to issue a license when any person having any interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section for the licensee. (i)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand, required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner, may be served. This person must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city clerk in such form as he may prescribe. (j)  No license for the sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages within the city shall be issued for a location that fails to meet all applicable state and local fire, life safety, building, health and zoning codes. (k)  No new or renewal alcoholic beverage licenses shall be issued to any applicant who is delinquent in the payment of city taxes or fees including, but not limited to, property taxes, alcoholic beverage excise taxes, business license fees, or any other taxes or fees which are owed to the city by the applicant. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-33. - Application forms. (a)  All persons desiring to sell or manufacture alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the city clerk. (b)  The application shall include but shall not be limited to: the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers; the name and address of the agent for service of process; the name and address of the manager; and the name of all shareholders holding more than ten (10) percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the city clerk and the police department with the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten (10) days of such change. (c)  All applicants shall furnish data, information and records as required by the city clerk and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish data as requested shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. (d)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer to administer oaths. (e)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one (1) year from the final date of such denial. (f)  The city clerk shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provisions of this chapter. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-34. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale.     A separate application must be made for each location and a separate license must be issued. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-35. - Fee scale. (a)  Before a license shall be granted, the applicant therefore shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the governing authority regulating the sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the scale fixed by the governing authority and set forth in division 2 of this chapter. (b)  In addition, a permit fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the city precedent to the issuance of any employee permit authorized under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-36. - Alcoholic beverage review board.     There is hereby established an alcoholic beverage review board which shall have the duty of hearing appeals from decisions of the city clerk denying the issuance or renewal of any license pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city and to hear appeals from the decision of the city clerk revoking or suspending a license. The alcoholic beverage review board shall be composed of the city manager, the chief of police, and the codes enforcement officer. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-37. - Hearings. (a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as provided in this section. (b)  The city clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of the order to deny, suspend, or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city clerk may have a review thereof by appeal to the alcoholic beverage review board. Such appeal shall be by written petition filed in the office of the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after notification of the final order or action of the city clerk. (c)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of filing with the city clerk unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and city clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. (d)  The findings of the alcoholic beverage review board shall be provided to the city clerk after the conclusion of the hearing and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify in writing the appellant of the action of the alcoholic beverage review board. (e)  The findings of the alcoholic beverage review board shall not be set aside unless found to be: (1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; (2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole; or (3)  Wholly unreasonable in the circumstances. (f)  The findings of the alcoholic beverage review board shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of such findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-38. - Display at place of business.     The city license shall at all times be displayed prominently on the premises for which the license is issued. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-39. - Transferability. (a)  No license for the sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable except as otherwise provided in this section. (b)  In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell or manufacture alcoholic beverages for a period of forty-five (45) days from the date of death, or until expiration of the license, or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur. However, no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization with the city clerk. (c)  If a license is surrendered or a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell or manufacture alcoholic beverages for a period of forty-five (45) days from the date of surrender or from the date determined to be the date of severance. However, no such sale or manufacture shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made, such application indicating that no change of ownership has occurred, except as excepted in this section. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell or manufacture under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. (d)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one (1) or more of the partners in the partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one (1) or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing his stock holdings to a total of ten (10) percent or more of any class of stock. (e)  Should a transfer of location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. (f)  Except as provided above, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall automatically cancel and revoke any license issued under this article without the necessity of any hearing. (g)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used and a fine on the new ownership and the old ownership of five hundred dollars ($500.00). No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the city for one (1) year from the date of the violation. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-40. - Expiration; renewal. (a)  All licenses granted under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file application, with the requisite annual fee provided in division 2 of this article, with the city clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed by November 30 of each year; otherwise, investigative and administrative costs and penalties will be assessed. No renewal license shall be granted after January. Such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. (b)  All licenses granted under this article shall be for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. License fees shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. License fees are not refundable. (c)  Any person renewing any license issued under this article who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after the date set for such payment shall, in addition to such annual fee, pay a late payment penalty of ten (10) percent plus five (5) percent for each additional month, or fraction thereof, during which failure continues. Such penalty shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-41. - Suspension or revocation. (a)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the city clerk where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license, or omits information required in the application for a license, and for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. (b)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell or manufacture alcoholic beverages, the city license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The chief of police, upon notice of this revocation from the city clerk, shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales and manufacture cease. (c)  Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of section 3-14 shall be subject to immediate license revocation in addition to all other penalties provided for in this chapter. (d)  The city clerk shall revoke the license of any licensee where the establishment has been found in violation of the Sunday sales ordinance. (e)  The city clerk shall revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three (3) or more times in any consecutive twelve-month period. (f)  The city clerk shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. (g)  The city clerk may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter at any time such knowledge becomes known to him. (h)  An act or omission, willingly or knowingly performed, of a licensee, owner of more than ten (10) percent interest in the licensed establishment, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this chapter will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of his license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter when evidence is submitted to the city clerk that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues. However, in the case of a violation by an employee, evidence must be submitted to the city clerk that the acts of the employee were known to or, under reasonable circumstances, should have been known to the licensee, were condoned by the licensee, or that the licensee has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring, or that the licensee fails to properly train or supervise employees to prevent the violation from occurring. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section for the suspension or revocation of a license, no such suspension or revocation shall be imposed except for a violation occurring within twelve (12) months after a licensee has been given a written letter of warning, pursuant to procedures listed below as to a reported or observed violation by the licensee's establishment: (1)  Upon receipt of a complaint for a violation of section 3-7, the police department shall send the establishment's licensee a certified letter advising that a complaint has been received by the city and stating that such acts place the licensing status of the establishment in jeopardy. (2)  Should the police department not receive postal confirmation of delivery to the licensee within ten (10) days, the officer assigned to the complaint will hand deliver a copy of the previously sent certified notice to the licensee or the establishment's registered agent. The officer shall require the licensee's or registered agent's personal signature to verify that service was effected. (3)  Upon receipt of a subsequent complaint, the police department shall conduct an appropriate investigation to determine whether the establishment does, in fact, permit or require an employee under the age of eighteen (18) to violate section 3-7. (4)  Should such a violation be established, the licensee and the person committing the violation shall be cited to the municipal court of the city for the code violation. Further, the police department will prepare an incident report detailing all facts and events concerning the violation. This report, along with a copy of the aforementioned certified notice and proof of delivery, shall be sent to the city clerk for a suspension/revocation hearing. (i)  Subject to the provisions of this chapter, a violation of section 3-13 by a licensee, or owner of more than ten (10) percent interest in the licensed establishment, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment shall result in license suspension for a period not less than two (2) days which shall be scheduled to include a Friday and Saturday; second violation within a consecutive twelve-month period shall result in license suspension for a period not less than one (1) week; third violation within a consecutive twenty-four month period shall result in license revocation. (j)  If a licensee or licensed establishment is convicted of violating O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21(a)(1), prohibiting the furnishing of alcoholic beverages to minors, or action is taken against the holder of a license for violating any state or local law relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages to minors, the city clerk shall notify the state department of revenue of such violation or action. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-42. - Establishment to open for business within three (3) months of issuance; cessation of operation; automatic forfeiture for failure to open and remain open. (a)  All holders of licenses under this section must open for business the establishment referred to in the license within three (3) months after issuance of the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within such time shall automatically forfeit and cancel the unused license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. (b)  Any holder of a license under this article who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall cease to operate the business as authorized in the license for a period of three (3) consecutive months, shall automatically forfeit his license. Such license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be canceled by the city clerk. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Secs. 3-43—3-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FEES 
Sec. 3-56. - License fees and permits. (a)  An annual license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged to wholesale dealers in beer and malt beverages when the principal place of business is located outside the corporate boundaries of the city. (b)  An annual license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged to wholesale dealers in wine with the principal place of business located outside the corporate boundaries of the city when deliveries are made inside the city in conjunction with sales of alcoholic beverages. (c)  An annual license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged to wholesale dealers in distilled spirits with the principal place of business located outside the corporate boundaries of the city when deliveries are made inside the city in conjunction with sales of alcoholic beverages. (d)  An annual license fee of six hundred dollars ($600.00) shall be charged to wholesale dealers in beer and malt beverages when the principal place of business is located inside the corporate boundaries of the city. (e)  An annual license fee of six hundred dollars ($600.00) shall be charged to wholesale dealers in wine when the principal place of business is located inside the corporate boundaries of the city. (f)  An annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be charged to wholesale dealers in beer, malt beverages and wine when the principal place of business is located inside the corporate boundaries of the city. (g)  An annual license fee of two thousand five hundred twenty dollars ($2,520.00) shall be charged to wholesale dealers in beer, malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits when the principal place of business is located inside the corporate boundaries of the city. (h)  An annual license fee of six hundred dollars ($600.00) shall be charged to sell beer and malt beverages at retail in original packages, not to be consumed on the premises. (i)  An annual license fee of six hundred dollars ($600.00) shall be charged to sell wine at retail in original packages, not to be consumed on the premises. (j)  An annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be charged to sell beer, malt beverages, and wine at retail in original packages, not to be consumed on the premises, at the same location. (k)  An annual license fee of two thousand five dollars ($2,500.00) shall be charged to sell distilled spirits at retail in original packages, not to be consumed on the premises. (l)  An annual license fee of six hundred dollars ($600.00) shall be charged to sell beer and malt beverages for consumption on the premises. (m)  An annual license fee of six hundred dollars ($600.00) shall be charged to sell wine for consumption on the premises. (n)  An annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be charged to sell beer, malt beverages, and wine for consumption on the premises, at the same location. (o)  An annual license fee of two thousand five hundred twenty dollars ($2,520.00) shall be charged to sell distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, and wine for consumption on the premises. (p)  An annual fee of three hundred forty dollars ($340.00) shall be charged for a Sunday sales permit for qualified establishments to sell beer, malt beverages, and/or wine and/or distilled spirits for consumption on the premises. (q)  A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day for a temporary license for the sale of distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, and/or wine by a nonprofit civic organization for consumption on the premises. (r)  An additional annual fee of two hundred forty dollars ($240.00) shall be charged for an alcoholic beverage caterer license for establishments licensed to sell or distribute beer, malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink off-premises in connection with authorized catered functions. (s)  An annual license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be charged for a qualified wine retailer to hold wine tastings pursuant to article XI of this chapter. (t)  An annual license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be charged for a qualified beer retailer to hold beer tastings pursuant to article XII of this chapter. (u)  An annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be charged for a qualified craft brewery to manufacture on-premises. (v)  An annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be charged for a qualified craft distillery to manufacture on-premises. (w)  An annual license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be charged for a qualified craft beer brewery to hold beer tastings pursuant to article XII of this chapter. (x)  An annual license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be charged for a qualified craft distilled spirit manufacturer to hold distilled spirit tastings pursuant to article XIII of this chapter. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Secs. 3-57—3-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RETAIL SALES OF BEER, MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 
Sec. 3-70. - License fee and amount to defray investigative and administrative costs to accompany application.     Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee plus a separate check or cash in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded but the one hundred dollars ($100.00) paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-71. - Hours of sale. (a)  Beer and/or wine shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and the two (2) hours immediately following such time, i.e., until 1:55 a.m. on the subsequent day. (b)  Any alcoholic beverage served must be consumed within thirty (30) minutes of the required closing. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-72. - Sunday sales authorization. (a)  Licensed establishments deriving a minimum of fifty (50) percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, or licensed establishments deriving at least fifty (50) percent of their total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, are authorized to apply for a Sunday sales permit to sell and serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises on Sundays between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. (b)  Applicants for a Sunday sales permit shall complete a form and affidavit furnished by the city clerk and certify the percentages, as required in subsection (a) of this section, for the most recently ended fiscal year. For new establishments, no affidavit shall be required and such establishments shall be allowed six (6) months to comply with the fifty-percent rule. An audit may be required at any time to ensure compliance. (c)  All annual permit renewals shall be filed with the city clerk not later than November 30 of the year preceding the license year for which the permit is to be issued. All renewals are subject to audit and must be accompanied with a sworn affidavit that certifies the percentages, as required in subsection (a) of this section, for the most recently ended fiscal year prior to being renewed to ensure compliance with this chapter. (d)  Sunday sales permits are granted for the full calendar year for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. The permit fee shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. Fees are not refundable and permits shall not be transferable. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014; Ord. No. 18-06, § 1, 11-19-2018) 
Sec. 3-73. - Open area, deck and patio sales.     No consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in open areas, decks, patios or similar unenclosed spaces on the premises of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages unless written application is made to and approved by the governing authority under such conditions as it may deem appropriate for the protection of public health, safety and welfare including, but not limited to, maximum capacity, ingress and egress. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-74. - Employee regulations. (a)  The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of beer and/or wine on the premises: (1)  Except for the residency requirements, an employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general ordinances for the licensee. (2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license hereunder until such person has been cleared by the city police department and a permit issued indicating that such person is eligible for this employment. (3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the city police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the applicant. The fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. (4)  The chief of police shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person. If there is no record of a violation of this chapter, the chief of police shall issue a permit to the employee which states that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for employment, the chief of police shall notify the employer that this person is not eligible for employment. (5)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the chief of police the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers, twice annually on or before June 1 and again on or before December 1. (6)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the chief of police or the city clerk. (7)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy, cook or dishwasher. (8)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. (9)  If any permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the city police department. (10)  All permits shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the calendar year for which they are issued. (11)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the city police department. (b)  The permit issued to a person under this section shall include the person's name and address, the name of the establishment, and the address of the establishment. Permits shall be either of the following: (1)  An alcoholic beverage permit which shall be issued only to a person eighteen (18) years of age or older who sells, serves or dispenses alcoholic beverages; or (2)  A nonalcoholic beverage permit which shall be issued to a person whose employment includes, but is not limited to, host, hostess, doorman and bouncer. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Secs. 3-75—3-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RETAIL SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 
Sec. 3-90. - License fee and amount to defray investigative and administrative costs to accompany application.     Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee plus a separate check or cash in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded but the two hundred dollars ($200.00) paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-91. - Excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink. (a)  There is imposed and levied upon every sale of an alcoholic beverage purchased by the drink in the city an excise tax in the amount of three (3) percent of the purchase price of such beverage. (b)  Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink operating a place of business in the city shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverages served shall be itemized separately. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. (c)  Every licensee or the licensee's agent shall collect the tax imposed in this section from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink sold within the licensee's licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the city clerk to facilitate the collection of the tax. (d)  All taxes collected by any licensee or agent under this article shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth (20 th ) day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. (e)  On or before the twentieth (20 th ) day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city clerk in such form as the city clerk may prescribe by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of the excise tax. (f)  All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. (g)  The person required to file the return shall deliver the return with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the city clerk. (h)  Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a deduction of three (3) percent of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. (i)  Any licensee who fails to pay the tax to the city within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax, plus interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-92. - Hours of sale. (a)  Distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and the two (2) hours immediately following such time, i.e., until 1:55 a.m. on the subsequent day. (b)  Any alcoholic beverage served must be consumed within thirty (30) minutes of the required closing. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-93. - Sunday sales authorization. (a)  Licensed establishments deriving a minimum of fifty (50) percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, or licensed establishments deriving at least fifty (50) percent of their total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, are authorized to apply for a Sunday sales permit to sell and serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. (b)  Applicants for a Sunday sales permit shall complete a form and affidavit furnished by the city clerk and certify the percentages, as required in subsection (a) of this section, for the most recently ended fiscal year. For new establishments, no affidavit shall be required and such establishments shall be allowed six (6) months to comply with the fifty-percent rule. An audit may be required at any time to ensure compliance. (c)  All annual permit renewals shall be filed with the city clerk not later than November 30 of the year preceding the license year for which the permit is to be issued. All renewals are subject to audit and must be accompanied with a sworn affidavit that certifies the percentages, as required in subsection (a) of this section, for the most recently ended fiscal year prior to being renewed to ensure compliance with this chapter. (d)  Sunday sales permits are granted for the full calendar year for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. The permit fee shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. Fees are not refundable and permits shall not be transferable. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-94. - Consumption sales only.     Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell liquor by the package or bottle at the same location. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-95. - Open area, deck and patio sales.     No consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in open areas, decks, patios or similar unenclosed spaces on the premises of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages unless written application is made to and approved by the governing authority under such conditions as it may deem appropriate for the protection of public health, safety and welfare including, but not limited to, maximum capacity, ingress and egress. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-96. - Employee regulations. (a)  The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of distilled spirits on the premises: (1)  Except for the residency requirements, an employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general ordinances for the licensee. (2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license under this article until such person has been cleared by the city police department and a permit issued indicating that such person is eligible for this employment. (3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the city police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the applicant. The fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. (4)  The chief of police shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person. If there is no record of a violation of this chapter, the chief of police shall issue a permit to the employee which states that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for employment, the chief of police shall notify the employer that this person is not eligible for employment. (5)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the chief of police the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers, twice annually on or before June 1 and again on or before December 1. (6)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the chief of police or the city clerk. (7)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy, cook or dishwasher. (8)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. (9)  If any permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the city police department. (10)  All permits shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the calendar year for which they are issued. (11)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the city police department. (b)  The permit issued to a person under this section shall include the person's name and address, the name of the establishment, and the address of the establishment. Permits shall be either of the following: (1)  An alcoholic beverage permit which shall be issued only to a person eighteen (18) years of age or older who sells, serves, or dispenses alcoholic beverages; or (2)  A nonalcoholic beverage permit which shall be issued to a person whose employment includes, but is not limited to, host, hostess, doorman and bouncer. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Secs. 3-97—3-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PRIVATE CLUBS 
Sec. 3-111. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include a commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulation shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages.     Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: (1)  Has been in existence at least one (1) year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; (2)  Has at least seventy-five (75) regular dues-paying members; and (3)  No member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-112. - Retail sales for consumption on the premises.     Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption upon the premises of the private club upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city, including, but not limited to, articles I, II, III and IV of this chapter. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Secs. 3-113—3-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NONPROFIT CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS 
Sec. 3-120. - Eligibility for issuance of temporary license. (a)  Any bona fide nonprofit civic organization may be issued a temporary permit to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises for a period not to exceed one (1) day. The nonprofit civic organization must make application and pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). (b)  No more than two (2) permits may be issued to an organization in any one (1) calendar year. (c)  Such civic organizations shall be required to comply with all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises' establishments. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Secs. 3-121—3-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF BEER AND WINE 
Sec. 3-130. - Hours of sale.     Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of beer and/or wine except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. The hours within which business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of sale thereof. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-131. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices.     Retailers shall indicate plainly, by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the prices of all beer and wine exposed or offered for sale. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-132. - License fee and amount to defray investigative and administrative costs to accompany application.     Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee plus a separate check or cash in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded but the one hundred dollars ($100.00) paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Secs. 3-133—3-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS 
Sec. 3-140. - Hours of sale.     Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of distilled spirits except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. The hours within which business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of sale thereof. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-141. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices.     Retailers shall indicate plainly, by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the prices of all distilled spirits exposed or offered for sale. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-142. - License fee and amount to defray investigative and administrative costs to accompany application.     Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee plus a separate check or cash in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded but the one hundred dollars ($100.00) paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-143. - Special regulations for retail package businesses selling distilled spirits.     Every retailer of distilled spirits within the city shall comply with each of the following regulations as a condition of the retailer's license to sell distilled spirits by the package. Violation of this section may result in suspension or revocation of the retailer's license. (1)  No retailer shall sell or offer for sale a package of distilled spirits containing less than seventeen (17) fluid ounces; (2)  Every retailer licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package shall post a sign that reads "No Loitering" in a prominent location near the entrance of the business and such retailer shall not allow one (1) or more persons to loiter in or near his business; (3)  No retailer of distilled spirits shall maintain bars or other similar security devices on the outside of the door(s) or window(s) of his business, though bars may be installed inside the building at the retailer's option; (4)  No retailer of distilled spirits may permit on his premises any "amusement machine" as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, any billiard tables, or any other device or game of any type or character which may be operated for amusement purposes; (5)  No retailer of distilled spirits shall also be a "retailer" of lottery tickets, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 50-27-3(22), at the same location. (6)  No retailer of distilled spirits shall offer any tobacco products for sale at the same location where distilled spirits are sold. (7)  No retailer of distilled spirits shall offer growlers for sale at the same location where distilled spirits are sold. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Secs. 3-144—3-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - WHOLESALERS 
Sec. 3-161. - Special provisions applicable to wholesale license. (a)  Any person desiring to sell, at wholesale, any alcoholic beverages in the city shall make written application on the prescribed forms to the city clerk for a license to do so and pay any license fee as set by the governing authority. (b)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale distilled spirit license. (c)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. (d)  No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesaler distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-162. - Excise tax. (a)  There is hereby imposed an excise tax upon all alcoholic beverages purchased by persons holding a retail package license and/or consumption on the premises license at the following rates: (1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of six dollars ($6.00) on each container sold containing not more than fifteen and one-half (15 ½) gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of fifteen and one-half (15 ½) gallons; (2)  Where beer or malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents ($0.05) per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces; (3)  On the first sale or use of wine by the package, a tax of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter; (4)  On the first sale or use of distilled spirits, a tax of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter of distilled spirits and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. (b)  The excise tax shall be collected by all wholesale dealers selling alcoholic beverages to licensed retailers and shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the city clerk by the tenth (10 th ) of each month, based upon the units of alcohol sold during the previous month. Interest shall accrue on late payments at the rate of one (1) percent per month. The wholesale dealer shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments. The monthly remittance shall be accompanied by a sworn statement showing, but not limited to, the type and volume sold to each retail licensee on a form or in a format as approved by the city clerk. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-163. - Bond required on wholesalers. (a)  Each wholesale dealer, prior to commencement of business operation in the city, shall post a performance bond with the city clerk equal to one and one-half (1 ½) times the estimated highest monthly payment made in a calendar year of the excise tax, based on sales collected by the wholesale dealer from the retailers, to secure the payments for the tax imposed herein. These bonds shall be secured by cash, which shall bear no interest, or a surety bond executed by a surety company licensed to do business in this state. (b)  A wholesaler may be excused from posting the performance bond as provided in this section after demonstrating full and satisfactory compliance with the provisions required hereunder for a period of twelve (12) months subsequent to the commencement of business operations within the city. Continued exemption from the requirement of posting the performance bond shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the terms of this article and the payment of all sums as required by the provisions of this section. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-164. - Audit by city clerk.     The city clerk shall have the right to audit each wholesale dealer licensed to do business in the city. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-165. - Hours of sale.     Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Secs. 3-166—3-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SALES OFF-PREMISES FOR CATERED FUNCTIONS 
Sec. 3-171. - Eligibility for license to sell or distribute by the drink off-premises; application; fee. (a)  Any holder of a city license authorizing the licensee to sell beer, malt beverages, or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises may apply for an off-premises license as an alcoholic beverage caterer to sell or distribute beer, malt beverages, or wine by the drink off premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. (b)  Any holder of a city license authorizing the licensee to sell beer, malt beverages, or wine by the package for consumption off the premises may apply for an off-premises license as an alcoholic beverage caterer to sell or distribute beer, malt beverages, or wine by the drink off premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. (c)  Any holder of a city license authorizing the licensee to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises may apply for an off-premises license as an alcoholic beverage caterer to sell or distribute distilled spirits by the drink off-premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. (d)  Each application for a license as an alcoholic beverage caterer shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-172. - Authorized catered functions; event permits. (a)  In order to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine at a catered function, the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall be required to apply to the city clerk for an event permit. The application shall include the name of the caterer; the date, address, and time of the event; and the alcoholic beverage caterer's license number. (b)  When an alcoholic beverage caterer is domiciled outside the city and currently licensed by the local government authority in which it is domiciled as an alcoholic beverage caterer, a city license shall not be required in order for the alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine at a catered function inside the city. However, an event fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged by the city and local excise taxes shall be levied on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the city by the caterer. A copy of the license issued by the local government authority where the alcoholic beverage caterer is domiciled shall be attached to the event application. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-173. - Hours of sale. (a)  Licensed alcoholic beverage caterers may not distribute or sell distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, or wine for off-premises consumption except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and the two (2) hours immediately following such time, i.e., until 1:55 a.m. on the subsequent day. (b)  Licensed alcoholic beverage caterers who derive a minimum of fifty (50) percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food may sell and serve alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such alcoholic beverage caterers must complete a form and affidavit furnished by the city clerk and certify the percentages for the most recently ended fiscal year. For new establishments, no affidavit shall be required and such establishments shall be allowed six (6) months to comply with the fifty-percent rule. (c)  Any alcoholic beverage served must be consumed within thirty (30) minutes of the required closing. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-174. - Regulations as to employees.     A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall not employ any person under twenty-one (21) years of age who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-175-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - WINE, BEER AND DISTILLED SPIRITS TASTINGS 
Sec. 3-181. - Wine tastings.     Upon receiving an application and payment of a license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year, the city manager may issue a permit to hold wine tastings. The permit shall allow the applicant to provide samples of wine to the public for consumption on the premises under the following conditions: (1)  The applicant shall be an establishment licensed to sell wine, in original packages for off-premises consumption. (2)  The applicant shall maintain on the premises and offer for sale at all times a variety of wines from not less than twenty-five (25) manufacturers of wine. (3)  The applicant's establishment shall have minimum interior floor area of eight hundred (800) square feet devoted to the storage, display and sale of wine. (4)  The applicant for a wine tasting must hold a valid current wine license in the state. (5)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in original packages for off-premises consumption. (6)  All wines secured for tasting purposes must be obtained through a retail or wholesale wine outlet. (7)  Wine tastings must comply with all laws and regulations otherwise pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state. (8)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes and sections of this Code and other city ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to those dealing with hours of operation, zoning and distance requirements. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-182. - Beer tastings.     Upon receiving an application and payment of a license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year, the city manager may issue a permit to hold beer tastings. The permit shall allow the applicant to provide samples of beer to the public for consumption on the premises under the following conditions: (1)  The applicant shall be an establishment with a license under this chapter, excluding retail establishments where the primary retail function is not the sale of beer. (2)  If the premises is retail, the applicant shall maintain on the premises and offer for sale at all times a variety of beers from not less than twenty-five (25) manufacturers of beer. (3)  If the premises is retail, the applicant's establishment shall have minimum interior floor area of eight hundred (800) square feet devoted to the storage, display and sale of beer. (4)  If the premises is retail, The applicant for a beer tasting must hold a valid current package malt beverage license in the state. (5)  No tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in original packages for off-premises consumption. (6)  If the premises is retail, all beer secured for tasting purposes must be obtained through a retail or wholesale beer outlet. (7)  Beer tastings must comply with all laws and regulations otherwise pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state. (8)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes and sections of this Code and other city ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to those dealing with hours of operation, zoning and distance requirements. (9)  Beer tasting for each customer shall be available one (1) time per day. (10)  Beer is allowed to be sampled but at no time shall a customer be given more than four (4) two (2) ounce samples or more than one (1) eight (8) ounce sample. (11)  No open containers shall be removed from the licensed premises. (12)  Beer tasting only permitted within the interior portions of the premises, unless allowed for a special event. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-183. - Distilled spirits tastings.     Upon receiving an application and payment of a license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year, the city manager may issue a permit to hold distilled spirits tastings. The permit shall allow the applicant to provide samples of distilled spirits to the public for consumption on the premises under the following conditions: (1)  The applicant shall be an establishment licensed to manufacture distilled spirits. (2)  The applicant for a distilled spirit tasting must hold a valid license in the state. (3)  Distilled spirits tastings must comply with all laws and regulations otherwise pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state. (4)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes and sections of this Code and other city ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to those dealing with hours of operation, zoning and distance requirements. (5)  Distilled spirit tasting for each customer shall be available one (1) time per day. (6)  Distilled spirits tasting is allowed to be sampled but at no time shall a customer be given more than one-half (½) an ounce per day. (7)  No open containers shall be removed from the licensed premises. (8)  Distilled spirits tasting only permitted within the interior portions of the premises, unless allowed for a special event. (Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-27-2014) 
Secs. 3-184—3-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - HOME-BREW SPECIAL EVENTS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-03, § 1, adopted Feb. 24, 2014, repealed the former Art. XII., §§ 3-191—3-193, and enacted a new Art. XII, as set out herein. The former Art. XII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2014. 
Sec. 3-191. - Definition.     A home-brew special event is an event held pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4(d) in which malt beverages brewed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4 may be consumed by participants in and judges of the home-brew special event. (Ord. No. 14-03, § 2, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 3-192. - Permits.     No home-brew special event shall be held in the city except pursuant to a permit issued in advance by the city manager. Upon receiving an application from a qualified applicant and the payment of a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), the city manager may issue a home-brew special event permit allowing for up to six (6) home-brew special events per calendar year. No home-brew special event may be held at a facility otherwise licensed for the production or sale of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. 14-03, § 2, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 3-193. - Transportation of home-brew to special event.     Home-brew may be removed from the residence where produced for transportation and delivery by the producer for use at a permitted home-brew event in a quantity not to exceed twenty-five (25) gallons, provided that such malt beverages are securely sealed in one (1) or more containers and clearly labeled with the following information: (1)  The name of the producer; (2)  The address of the residence at which it was produced; (3)  The name and address of the home-brew special event to which it is being transported; and (4)  The permit number under which the home-brew special event is being held. (Ord. No. 14-03, § 2, 2-24-2014) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Authority to regulate, § 1-102(31). Cross reference— Creation of noise by animals, § 12-4(5). State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-5, 16-12-4, 27-5-6. 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Abandoned animal means any domesticated animal which has been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property and is unattended or uncared for. A domesticated animal shall also be considered as abandoned when it has been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of such animal for a period of time in excess of thirty-six (36) hours unattended and without proper food and water.     Abused animal means any animal which is: (1)  Mistreated, beaten, tormented or teased; (2)  Deprived of water, food or shelter; (3)  Kept under unsanitary conditions; (4)  Abandoned; or (5)  Trained for fighting other animals.     Animal control officer means any person so designated by the county to perform the duties prescribed by this chapter.     Dangerous animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or domestic animals by virtue of a known propensity to endanger life by an unprovoked assault or by biting so as to cause serious bodily harm or an animal trained, owned or harbored for the purpose, primarily or in part, of animal fighting. An animal shall not be deemed dangerous if it: (1)  Bites, attacks or menaces anyone assaulting the owner, a trespasser on the property of the owner, or any person or other animal who has tormented or abused it; (2)  Is otherwise acting in defense of an attack from a person or other animal upon the owner or other person; or (3)  Is protecting or defending its young or other animal.     Dog at large means any dog not under restraint.     Dog under restraint means any dog humanely secured by a leash or other device and held by a person competent to maintain control, or humanely secured by a lead, or enclosed by way of fence or other enclosure, or confined within a vehicle which is parked or in motion.     Domesticated animal means an animal that is accustomed to living in or about the habitation of people.     Guard dog means a dog which has been trained to attack persons independently or upon oral command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of its owner and/or the property upon and within which the dog is located.     Owner means any person owning, keeping, harboring or acting as custodian of a domesticated animal.     Public nuisance or public nuisance animal means: (1)  A dog which is found at large in violation of section 4-9 or 4-11; (2)  A cat or dog which is unlicensed (unregistered) in violation of section 4-12; (3)  A dog which is trained, owned or harbored for the purpose, primarily or in part, of dog fighting; (4)  An animal which is dangerous and is not restrained or confined, as provided for in sections 4-10 and 4-11; (5)  An animal which produces, because of quantity, manner or method in which the animals are domesticated or maintained, unsanitary conditions in the city; or (6)  An animal which is inimical to the public health, welfare or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-1), 5-24-93) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-2. - Enforcement of chapter. (a)  Complaint; owner to appear before judge of municipal court. Upon information made known to or complaint lodged with the county animal control center that any owner, possessor or custodian of any animal is in violation of this chapter, the county animal control center shall cause a summons to be issued requiring the owner, possessor or custodian of the animal to appear before the judge of the municipal court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for the violation of this chapter. If a violation of this chapter has not been personally witnessed by employees of the county animal control center, a subpoena shall be issued to the person making the complaint to be and appear on the day and time set for trial to testify. The city will refuse to respond to anonymous complaints. (b)  Impoundment of animal. If the owner, possessor or custodian of any animal is not known and such animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds, or other public places or premises or the property of another without that property owner's permission as provided by this chapter, upon complaint made to or information made known to the animal control center, it shall be the duty of the animal control center to take possession of such animal and impound it in the county animal control shelter. Once impounded, the animal shall be kept for the period of time defined by the county code pertaining to animal control; thereafter, if the animal is not claimed by anyone after a reasonable effort has been made to locate the owner, possessor or custodian of the animal as hereinafter provided, the animal may be disposed of in a humane fashion or in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 4, ch. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq.). (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-2), 5-24-93) 
Sec. 4-3. - Fees.     The county shall be entitled to retain all fees for boarding and impoundment collected from owners or custodians of animals impounded and/or boarded. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-3), 5-24-93) 
Sec. 4-4. - Breeding pens and barnyard animals prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the limits of the city any breeding pens of any type or any barnyard animals. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-4), 5-24-93) 
Sec. 4-5. - Public and specific nuisances prohibited. (a)  It shall be unlawful to knowingly keep, own, harbor, or act as custodian or caretaker of a public nuisance animal as defined in section 4-1. (b)  All complaints of specific nuisance animals shall be made in writing to the city manager or his designee. Each such complaint shall: (1)  Identify the animal complained of; (2)  Contain a statement of the facts and circumstances which allegedly constitute conduct prohibited by this chapter; and (3)  Identify the owner, possessor, custodian or caretaker of such animal. Upon receipt of a complete, specific nuisance complaint, the city manager or his designee shall cause a summons to issue requiring the owner, possessor, custodian or caretaker to appear in the municipal court on a date and time certain to show cause as to why appropriate civil remedies and/or punishments as provided in the city Code should not be ordered or imposed. In all such cases, the complainant shall also be required to appear and give evidence in support of the specific nuisance allegations. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-5), 5-24-93; Ord. No. 856, § 1, 9-27-93) 
Sec. 4-6. - Dangerous animals.     If a police officer of the city has probable cause to believe that a dangerous animal is being harbored in violation of this chapter, such officer may: (1)  Order the violation immediately corrected and cite the owner or keeper to appear in municipal court for the violation; or (2)  If the violation cannot be immediately corrected and the animal is posing an imminent, serious threat to human beings or other domestic animals, the police officer shall advise the county animal control center and the animal may be seized and impounded by the county animal control center in accordance with provisions of the county code pertaining to animal control. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-6), 5-24-93) State Law reference— Dangerous dog control law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 4-7. - Notice to owner of impounded animal.     Upon impounding any animal, the county shall cause to be made a prompt and reasonable effort to locate the animal's owner, possessor, or custodian in accordance with the county code pertaining to animal control. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-7), 5-24-93) 
Sec. 4-8. - General responsibilities of owners. (a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or anyone having possession or custody of any animal, to exercise reasonable care and to take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property and animals from injuries or damages which might result from such animal's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness or ferocity. (b)  If the owner or keeper of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure that there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-8), 5-24-93) 
Sec. 4-9. - Running at large.     It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog, or anyone having custody of any dog, to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the streets and highways of the city, or on the property of another person without permission of the owner of that property or of the person in possession of that property. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-9), 5-24-93) 
Sec. 4-10. - Keeping dogs under restraint—On owner's property. (a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any dog, or anyone having possession or custody of any dog, to ensure that the dog is kept under restraint and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the dog from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, possessor, or custodian, and to ensure that the dog is: (1)  Securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape on its own volition; such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended; or (2)  On a leash held by a person competent to maintain control. (b)  Additional requirements for precautions to be taken by owners of dangerous dogs are: (1)  Whenever outside of its enclosure as provided for in subsection (a)(1) of this section, but on the owner's property, a dangerous dog must be attended by the owner and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape and which is held by a person competent to maintain control; (2)  No dangerous dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate object such as a tree, post or building outside of its own enclosure as provided for in subsection (a)(1) of this section; and (3)  In addition to the requirements in subsection (a)(1) of this section, owners of dangerous dogs who maintain their dogs out-of-doors shall fence a portion of their property with a perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter fence, the dangerous dog must be humanely confined inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The sides must either be buried two (2) feet into the ground, sunken into a concrete pad or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate to the kennel must be locked. (c)  Failure to keep any dog confined or under restraint as provided for in this section shall be unlawful. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-10), 5-24-93) 
Sec. 4-11. - Same—Off owner's property. (a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog or anyone having possession of any dog to keep the dog under restraint and control at all times while the dog is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor, or custodian. (b)  For the purposes of this section, a dog is deemed under control when it is: (1)  Securely confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion; (2)  Properly confined within a secure enclosure with the permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located; or (3)  Securely restrained by a leash or other device held by a person competent to maintain control. (c)  Additional requirements for precautions to be taken by owners of dangerous dogs are that, except when being transported in and securely confined within a vehicle, no dangerous dog shall be permitted off the property of its owner, except when it is: (1)  Attended by its owner; (2)  Restrained by secure collar and leash (not to exceed six (6) feet in length), both collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape; and held by a person competent to maintain control; and (3)  Muzzled by any means sufficient to prevent biting other persons or domestic animals. (d)  Failure to keep any dog under restraint or control as provided for in this section shall be unlawful. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-11), 5-24-93) 
Sec. 4-12. - Rabies vaccination; rabies tag; registration with county. (a)  All dogs and cats three (3) months of age or older in the city shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a licensed veterinarian. It shall be the duty of any owner, possessor, or custodian of such dogs or cats to procure a current rabies vaccination from a licensed veterinarian. (b)  It shall be the duty of any owner, possessor, or custodian of such dogs or cats to register these animals with the county by providing proof of current rabies vaccination and paying a fee to the county in the amount established by the county. (c)  It shall be the duty of each dog or cat owner, possessor or custodian to provide a collar for such dog or cat to which the rabies inoculation tag shall be attached. The collar, together with the tag, shall be worn by the dog or cat if the animal is required to be inoculated against rabies as provided in this section. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-12), 5-24-93) State Law reference— Licensing and regulation required, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3. 
Sec. 4-13. - Rabies control.     It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, or person having possession of, or knowledge of, any animal which has bitten any person or animal, or any animal which exhibits any signs of rabies, to notify the county animal control center. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-13), 5-24-93) 
Sec. 4-14. - Abandonment or abuse.     It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon or abuse any domesticated animal within the city. Any person who knowingly abandons or abuses, or willingly permits such abandonment or abuse, or aids in the abandonment or abuse of any domesticated animal shall be guilty of an offense. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-14), 5-24-93) State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 4-15. - Training for fighting prohibited.     It shall be prohibited for any person to keep, buy, sell, trade, exchange, give, transport, or deliver any animal: (1)  For the purpose of training the animal, primarily or in part, for animal fighting; (2)  Which has been trained, primarily or in part, for animal fighting; (3)  Which has been or is intended to be engaged in any manner in animal fighting. (Ord. No. 852, § 1(4-15), 5-24-93) 
Sec. 4-16. - Unlawful to allow dogs to defecate or urinate on certain properties; removal required. (a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog, or anyone having custody of any dog, to allow it to defecate or urinate upon the private property of another. (b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog, or anyone having custody of any dog, to refuse or fail to immediately remove any feces deposited by such dog upon the private property of another, public sidewalk, public verge, public street, public park, or any other public property in the city. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog or anyone having custody of any dog, to place or deposit any dog excrement on public property or in any unsanitary manner on private property. (Ord. No. 0107, §§ 1—3, 9-24-01) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, AND RELATED ACTIVITIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Creation of noise in building operation, § 12-4(10); drainage not to be obstructed, § 17-19. State Law reference— Buildings and housing, O.C.G.A. tit. 8. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 5-1. - Remedies for violations or proposed violations of chapter.     In case any building, system, appliance, or equipment is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, system, appliance, or equipment is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the building official or other duly authorized and empowered city official may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner or contractor of the violation, issue a citation for violation of the city Code requiring the presence of the violator in the municipal court; institute injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use so as to correct or abate the violation or to prevent the occupancy of the building. Where a violation of these regulations exists with respect to a building, system, appliance, or equipment, the building official may, in addition to other remedies, require that public utility service, further permits, and/or inspections be withheld therefrom until such time as the building or premises are no longer in violation of these regulations. 
Sec. 5-2. - Penalties for violation of chapter. (a)  Other remedial provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be summoned to the municipal court for each violation and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both, or by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as provided by law. (b)  The owner of a building or premises, where anything in violation of these regulations shall be effected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained, used or shall exist, or an architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person, or corporation employed in connection therewith, and who assisted in the commission of such violation, shall be charged with a separate offense. (c)  Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Sec. 5-3. - Certificate of occupancy. (a)  When required. No new residential, commercial, or industrial building or portion thereof shall be occupied or a change made in occupancy or the nature of the use of an existing building or part thereof until after a certificate of occupancy has been issued therefor. (b)  Final certificate of occupancy. A final certificate shall not be issued until all construction is complete and all final building, plumbing, HVAC, electrical, drainage, fire and health inspections have been performed and approved by the city and/or by the county as appropriate. Each application for a final certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied by a final site plan and one copy of the as-built plans. (c)  Temporary certificate of occupancy. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for nonresidential buildings or portions thereof for a specified period of time when it has been determined by the building official that no outstanding code violations or deficiencies exist and the building may be safely occupied for the use requested. Requests for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building official. Temporary certificates of occupancy are issued for stated purposes only when construction has not been fully completed and all final inspections have not been performed. This certificate shall not be construed otherwise. The final certificate of occupancy shall be issued as specified in subsection (b) of this section. Temporary certificates of occupancy may be revoked at the option of the city for the following reasons: (1)  Violation of any building, plumbing, HVAC, electrical, fire safety, or site development codes or regulations. (2)  Failure to complete any stage of construction and/or site improvements required by the city in a timely manner consistent with good development practices. (3)  Unauthorized occupancy or use of any part of the structure or building other than the space for which a temporary occupancy permit has been granted. (4)  Any other condition that may affect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property. (d)  Fee. The fee for a final certificate of occupancy shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
Sec. 5-4. - Utility service connections. (a)  Permanent electrical service connection. Permanent electrical service connection and meter shall not be authorized by the county until all required final building, plumbing, HVAC, electrical, drainage, fire and health inspections have been performed and approved by the city and/or by the county as appropriate. (b)  Permanent gas service connection. Permanent gas service connection and meter shall not be authorized until the gas supply house line has been tested and approved and all connected appliances and equipment have been inspected and approved. (c)  Temporary electrical service connection. Temporary electrical service connection and meter may be authorized by the county for a specified period of time when the system and building have been inspected and found to be safe for the use authorized. Such temporary service connection shall be authorized only for the following reasons: (1)  Testing of appliances and equipment. (2)  To provide heat during the winter months to prevent freeze damage to water systems and equipment and including, but not limited to, painting or installing wallpaper. (3)  Temporary occupancy of the building by no more than ten (10) employees for training of employees or stocking of merchandise. Single-tenant occupancy buildings and portions of multitenant occupancy buildings for which temporary electrical service connections have been authorized by the county shall not be allowed access by the general public or used for business activity other than allowed in this section. Application for temporary electrical service connection and meter shall be made on such form as prescribed by the county. 
Sec. 5-5. - Demolition of structures. (a)  Demolition of any structure shall not begin until all of the following conditions are satisfied: (1)  A permit for demolition has been secured from the city. (2)  The county health department has inspected the premises and accepted an appropriate vermin and rat extermination plan. (3)  All utilities are cut off and capped at the street. (b)  Within the time specified in the demolition permit the following shall be completed: (1)  All debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and foundation exposed above the ground level shall be removed from the premises. (2)  Any excavation or other depression must be filled to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than twenty-five (25) percent stone or masonry and all filled areas must be adequately sloped and drained. 
Secs. 5-6—5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING OFFICIAL 
Sec. 5-21. - Office of building official. (a)  The city manager shall designate one (1) or more qualified persons to perform the duties of the office of building official pursuant to this Code of Ordinances. (b)  Any person designated as a building official by the city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. (c)  A building official need not be an employee of the city. The city may contract with any qualified person or entity to perform some or all of the duties of the building official. (Code 1973, § 2-719; Ord. No. 13-04, § 1, 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 5-22. - Powers and duties—Building construction generally. (a)  The building official shall receive applications required of such official by this chapter, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. The building official shall examine premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that construction is completed safely. The building official shall enforce all provisions of the building codes. The building official shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in the codes adopted in this chapter and render written reports on the same. The building official shall enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, secure the necessary safeguards during construction, require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, and issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. (b)  Inspections required under the provisions of the codes adopted herein shall be made by the building official or such official's qualified representative. The building official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of the codes shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible officer of such service. (c)  The building official shall make written reports to the city manager as requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated. (d)  The building official may request and shall receive so far as may be necessary, in the discharge of his official duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the city. (e)  The building official, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. (Code 1973, §§ 2-721(a), (b), (e), 2-723, 2-724) 
Sec. 5-23. - Same—Public improvements, public recreation, etc.     Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters, the building official shall manage and have charge of the construction, improvement, repair and maintenance of streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, bridges, viaducts and other public highways; of all municipally owned sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, canals, streams, and watercourses; of all public buildings; of boulevards, squares, and other public places and grounds belonging to the city dedicated to public use, including recreational facilities and parks and playgrounds. The building official shall have charge of the enforcement of all obligations of privately owned or operated public utilities enforceable by the city. The building official shall have charge of the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings. (Code 1973, §§ 2-367, 2-374) 
Sec. 5-24. - Records and plans. (a)  Maintenance and retention. The building official shall keep and maintain comprehensive records of applications, permits issued, inspections made, certificates of occupancy issued, reports rendered, and of notices and orders issued. He shall retain on file copies of required plans and documents relating to buildings, equipment, appliances or systems for which a permit has been issued so long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence. (b)  Public inspection. All such records and plans shall be open to public inspection during the building official's normal office hours but shall not be removed from their place of keeping. 
Sec. 5-25. - Appeals from decision of building official. (a)  Basis for appeal. When the building official shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of work proposed or performed, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the codes adopted in section 5-41 do not apply, or that an equally good or desirable form, method or process can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the codes adopted in section 5-41 or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the permittee or contractor may appeal from the decision of the building official to the city's board of appeals. (b)  Time limitation for appeals; exception. Appeals shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the decision is rendered by the building official. In case a building, system, appliance or equipment is unsafe or dangerous in the opinion of the building official, he may, in his order or decision, limit the time of such appeal to a shorter period. 
Sec. 5-26. - Liability. (a)  An employee of the city designated as building official and acting in such capacity in good faith and without malice is hereby relieved of all personal liability for his official acts. (b)  Any suit brought against such an employee acting in good faith for any official act or omission in the performance of his duty as building official shall be defended by the city. (Code 1973, § 2-722; Ord. No. 13-04, § 2, 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 5-27. - Contracting with county if position not occupied. (a)  If the position of building official is not occupied or if the governing body concludes that it would be more efficient, the city may elect to contract with the county for the provision of plans review, issuance of building, plumbing, HVAC, and electrical permits, and inspections of same within the city pursuant to the following: (1)  A resolution shall be adopted by the governing body. (2)  The city shall review all plans for compliance with the city's zoning requirements, development standards, and other ordinances. (3)  An application form for any planned construction involving new structures or additions to existing structures shall be completed by the city and when signed by an authorized city official shall signify to the county that the plans are in compliance with the city's zoning requirements, development standards, and other ordinances. (4)  An application/authorization fee shall be charged by the city in an amount as determined by the city manager. (5)  Only those state codes and amendments adopted by the county shall be enforced in the city by the county. (6)  The fees charged for such permits issued by the county shall be in accordance with those adopted by the county and such fees shall be retained by the county. (7)  Code violations found and not corrected during the normal inspections process shall be referred to and prosecuted by the city. County inspection staff may appear as expert witnesses for the city. (8)  The county shall issue a certification of completion when all final inspections have been performed and approved. (9)  A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city upon receipt of a certification of completion and verification that the completed work is in compliance with the city's zoning requirements, development standards, and other ordinances. (b)  An authorization/building permit shall be required in situations where a permit is not required by the county if a review of plans for compliance with the city's zoning requirements, development standards, and other ordinances is necessary (e.g., fencing). The fee for such authorization/building permit shall be in accordance with the building permit fee specified in article III. 
Secs. 5-28—5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARD/TECHNICAL CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 5-41. - Adoption of state minimum standard codes. (a)  The editions of the following state minimum standard codes adopted by the state department of community affairs are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full herein: (1)  International Building Code (ICC); (2)  National Electrical Code (NFPA); (3)  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC); (4)  International Mechanical Code (ICC); (5)  International Plumbing Code (ICC); (6)  International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC); (7)  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC); (8)  International Fire Code (ICC); (9)  International Existing Building Code (ICC); (10)  International Property Maintenance Code (ICC). (b)  Any future amendments and revisions, including adoptions of new additions, to the state minimum standard codes by the state shall so amend the pertinent provisions of this chapter without any action by the governing body of the city being required. (c)  Each of the codes adopted in this section, hereinafter referred to as "these codes" or "this code," shall be maintained in the office of the building official or the employee charged with the enforcement of these codes as part of the public record and be accessible to members of the public. (d)  The provisions, requirements, powers, remedies, and other matters enumerated in such codes are cumulative of the provisions, requirements, powers, remedies and other matters contained elsewhere in this chapter and in other existing ordinances of the city. If in conflict, the express subsequent provisions of this chapter shall prevail over those contained in the various standard codes. (Code 1973, §§ 2-716, 2-718, 2-7216, 2-7283; Ord. No. 824, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-89; Ord. No. 13-04, § 3, 12-16-2013) Cross reference— Fire prevention code adopted, § 10-1. State Law reference— Required minimum standards, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 
Sec. 5-42. - Provisions of codes remedial. (a)  Generally. These codes are hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure and provide minimum standards and regulations to safeguard life, limb, health, property and general welfare of the citizens of the city. (b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of these codes except as it relates to the purpose stated in this chapter. (c)  Permitting and inspections. The permitting or inspections of any building or plans, under the requirements of these codes, shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building or the adequacy of such plan. The city or any employee thereof shall not be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building or plan, or for any failure of any component of such building, which may occur subsequent to such inspections or permitting. 
Sec. 5-43. - Scope. (a)  Applicability. The provisions of these codes shall apply to the construction of any building or swimming pool, erection of any fence, installation of any plumbing, HVAC (mechanical and gas) or electrical systems, appliances or equipment. (b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of these codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing body having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of these codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
Sec. 5-44. - All work to conform. (a)  No building, system, appliance, or equipment, as specified in this article, shall be constructed, erected, installed, altered or repaired except in conformity with the provisions of these codes. (b)  The provisions of these codes shall not apply to the installation, alteration or repair of services up to and including the meters where such work is performed by or is an integral part of the system owned or operated by a public utility service corporation, water department, gas company, railroad company, pipeline company, or other public utility in the exercise of its normal functions or in rendering its duly authorized service as such. 
Sec. 5-45. - Unsafe systems, appliances or equipment. (a)  Use and maintenance. It shall be unlawful to maintain, use, repair, or alter any system, appliance, or equipment that has been or will be installed, after the adoption of these codes that is in violation or will violate the provisions as specified in this chapter. No system, appliance, or equipment, as hereinafter specified in this chapter, shall be used unless it is in a safe condition. (b)  Unsafe building, systems, appliances, or equipment. Systems, appliances, or equipment covered by this Code that may be or shall be found upon inspection to have become dangerous or unsafe shall, unless made safe and so certified by the building official, be removed or the use of same discontinued. The term "dangerous or unsafe systems, appliances or equipment" shall include systems, appliances or equipment structurally unsafe, unstable or unsanitary; constituting a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use to which they are put; constituting a hazard to health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence; or otherwise dangerous to life or property. (c)  Notice of unsafe systems, appliances or equipment. Upon receipt of information that systems, appliances or equipment covered by this code are unsafe, the building official shall make or cause to be made an inspection and, if it is found that an unsafe condition exists, he shall serve or cause to be served on the owner, or someone of the owner, executors, administrator, agents, lessees or other persons who may have a vested or contingent interest in the same, a written notice containing a description of the particulars in which the systems, appliances, or equipment are unsafe, and an order requiring the same to be made safe, as may be deemed necessary. If the owner, executor, administrator, agent, lessee, or other person cannot be found after diligent search, then such notice and order shall be sent by certified mail to the last known address of such person; and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate notice. (d)  Disregard of notice. If the person served with a notice or order fails to remove, repair, or replace the unsafe condition of the system, appliance, or equipment or fails to discontinue the use of same, within a reasonable time as set by the building official, the building official shall institute appropriate legal action to compel compliance. In addition, he is authorized to withhold issuance of any additional permits to any contractor who has not complied with any notice or order to remove or repair any defective work installed under the provisions of these codes. 
Secs. 5-46—5-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FLOW RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES 
Sec. 5-61. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commercial building, as referred to in this division, means any type of building other than residential.     Plumbing fixtures means any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators.     Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel.     Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat used for the disposal of human waste.     Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 5-62. - Standards.     No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the Standard Plumbing Code with state amendments, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in the following exceptions: (1)  All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to above shall not exceed the following maximum water use rates: a. Toilets ..... 1.6 gallons per flush b. Urinals ..... 1.0 gallons per flush c. Showerheads ..... 2.5 gallons per minute, at 60 psi gauge pressure d. Kitchen faucets ..... 2.5 gallons per minute e. Bathroom and lavatory faucets ..... 2.0 gallons per minute  (2)  The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (1) of this section. (3)  Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (1) of this section. (4)  The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.1M-1989 Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in subsection (1) of this section. (5)  All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for "low consumption" water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME A112.19.6-1990 Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended. 
Sec. 5-63. - Product certification.     The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards listed in section 5-62 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described in this section and providing upon request appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the building official. All toilets, urinals, showerheads, or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in that standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
Sec. 5-64. - Exceptions. (a)  The following fixture uses or applications shall be exempt from the standards established in section 5-62: (1)  Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc. (2)  Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for the physically handicapped. (3)  Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in a correctional institution which may require more water for proper operation. (4)  Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes which cannot be accommodated by existing technology. (b)  Permission for the exceptions listed in subsection (a) of this section must be obtained from the building official. 
Sec. 5-65. - Compliance and enforcement.     In addition to the penalty provided in section 5-66, the city may take any of the following actions to compel compliance and may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this section: (1)  Compliance with the requirements for installation and labeling at the time of installation as provided in sections 5-62 and 5-63 shall be determined by the building official in cases of new or replacement plumbing fixture installations and compliance shall be a condition for receipt of any occupancy permit. (2)  The county water department may deny any service connection to an establishment which does not comply with section 5-62. (3)  Compliance with section 5-63 regarding the labeling of plumbing fixtures offered for retail sale shall be determined by the building official. The building official shall have access to all establishments located in the city which offer for sale or sell these plumbing fixtures for purposes of determining compliance. 
Sec. 5-66. - Penalty for violation of division.     Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, any building or plumbing contractor, developer, etc., who violates the provisions of this division shall be subject to suspension of his license for a period of up to ninety (90) days. 
Secs. 5-67—5-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 
Sec. 5-71. - Required. (a)  It shall be unlawful to construct, alter or repair any building, structure, or fence or to construct, erect, install, alter or repair, or to commence the construction, erection, installation or alteration of any system, appliance, or equipment provided for in these codes without first filing an application with the city and obtaining a permit in conformity with this section. (b)  Permits shall be obtained at least four (4) hours before beginning work on new jobs or alterations. Permits for emergency work shall be obtained within twenty-four (24) hours after beginning work. 
Sec. 5-72. - Building permit.     No new construction, alterations or repairs shall be begun, the cost of which exceeds three hundred dollars ($300.00), or for which structural alterations or fencing are proposed regardless of cost, without first obtaining a building permit from the city. 
Sec. 5-73. - Application. (a)  Forms. (1)  An application for a permit shall be submitted on such form as provided by the city. (2)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to see that a permit is obtained by any contractor before any work is started. (3)  The application shall contain the full names and addresses of the applicant/contractors and of the owners. (4)  The application shall contain all information that may be required by the city for an intelligent understanding of the work to be performed. (b)  Plans and specifications to be submitted. A site plan, construction plans or mechanical and/or plumbing plans, and specifications shall accompany each application for permit. Plans shall be drawn to scale and of such clarity and detail to fully show the nature and character of the work. Such plans and specifications shall contain the name and address and professional seal of the architect, engineer and/or designer and information in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with these codes. Such information shall be specific, and these codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. No major change shall be made in the work done or the installation which shall vary from the plans unless the plans are first resubmitted to the building official for approval. A copy of the approved plans for the work under construction or installation shall be on the job site and available to the building official during inspections or conferences at the site. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction and basis of calculations and they shall bear the signature of the person responsible for the design. (c)  Approval or rejection. Applications for permits shall be examined within a reasonable time after filing. If after examination, which shall include the review of any required plans and specifications, no objection is found to the application and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with these codes and ordinances applicable thereto, the application shall be approved and a permit issued. If examination and review reveals that the proposed work does not comply with these codes and ordinances, such application shall be rejected. 
Sec. 5-74. - Issuance not construed to be approval for any violation. (a)  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit or approval for any violation of any of the provisions of these codes. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of these codes shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful. (b)  The issuance of a permit based on applications, plans or specifications shall not prevent the city from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in such applications, plans, or specifications or from preventing the work from being carried on thereunder when in violation of these codes or other ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 5-75. - Conditions; registration of contractors. (a)  All work performed under a permit issued shall conform to the approved application and plans and all codes or ordinances governing the work. All work shall be performed by an individual (contractor, firm or corporation) licensed by the state to perform such work except when performed by an individual constructing, installing, erecting, altering or repairing mechanical, plumbing, or electrical services in a single-family dwelling owned and occupied by him. Permits for such work in owner-occupied single-family dwellings shall be issued only upon demonstration by the owner that he is competent to perform such work. (b)  All mechanical (heating, ventilation, refrigeration and air conditioning), plumbing, and electrical contractors shall hold a valid state class I or class II certificate of competency. Prior to obtaining a permit for work to be performed, a contractor shall present his valid certificate of competency and, if located in the city, shall also register with the city and pay an occupational tax in accordance with applicable provisions of chapter 14 of this Code. 
Sec. 5-76. - Expiration.     The time period under which work authorized by a building permit must be completed shall be twelve (12) months from the date of issuance. Upon application by the permittee prior to expiration of the permit, the city manager shall have the authority to extend such period for an additional one hundred eighty (180) days only when construction has begun in good faith within the initial twelve (12) month period and when the work is incomplete due to the scope of the project or factors beyond the applicant's control, including, but not limited to, weather and illness. Any building permit not so extended shall be absolutely void after twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, and fees paid shall be forfeited. If work described in the building permit has not commenced within six (6) months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. Once a permit expires, the application, plans and specifications shall be reviewed and a new permit required before work is started or resumed. (Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 5-77. - Revocation.     The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this article, where it is shown that there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to material facts in the application or plans and specifications on which the permit or approval was based or if the building covered by the permit is in violation of any of these codes or ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 5-78. - Contractor change, reissuance of permit.     No permit shall be reissued on any job for which a permit exists except after notification in writing from the owner of the change in contractors and that the new contractor is authorized by the owner to re-permit. Reissuance of a permit shall make the new contractor responsible for the complete job or system and all deficiencies, if any, as built, erected or installed by the original contractor. The contractor who permits the job must be licensed by the state and shall repay the fee required for the entire job. The original contractor, upon request, may be eligible for a refund of a portion of the original permit fee. If a refund is made, the city will also retain a service fee. 
Sec. 5-79. - Building permit and inspection fees. (a)  Fees for permits and inspections required by this chapter shall be determined by resolution of the board of mayor and commissioners. (b)  The current fee amount(s)/formula(s) established by the city pursuant to subsection (a) shall be published on the city's website and in writing at city hall. (Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 5-17-17) Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, adopted May 17, 2017, repealed former § 5-79, and enacted a new § 5-79 as set out herein. Former § 5-79 pertained to permit fees and derived from the Code of 1973. 
Secs. 5-80—5-94. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTIONS 
Sec. 5-95. - Inspections required.     All new construction of buildings, including additions, and all alterations and repairs of buildings, including additions, and all construction, installation, erection, alteration, or repairs of systems, appliances, or equipment for which a permit has been issued shall be inspected by the building official to ensure compliance with these codes and the permit issued. (Ord. No. 17-03, § 2, 5-17-17) 
Sec. 5-96. - Notice to be given when work is ready for inspection.     Building, plumbing, and HVAC contractors shall give notice to the building official when work is completed and ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the contractor to make sure that the work will stand the test prescribed before an inspection is requested. If the building official finds that the work will not pass the test, the contractor shall be required to make necessary corrections and the work shall then be resubmitted for inspection. All equipment, material, power, and labor necessary for the inspection and test shall be furnished by the contractor. (See section 5-100 pertaining to reinspection fees.) 
Sec. 5-97. - Right of entry.     Inspections required under the provisions of these codes shall be made by the building official. Upon presentation of proper credentials, he may enter at 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. any building, structure or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon him by these codes. 
Sec. 5-98. - Enforcement of standard/technical codes provisions.     The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of these codes, and is hereby invested with all police power necessary for the purposes of issuing copies of charges and prosecution of any persons, firms, or corporations as may be charged with any violation of these codes. 
Sec. 5-99. - Stop work orders.     Whenever, in the opinion of the building official, defective or illegal work in violation of any provisions of these codes exists or is being carried on, the building official shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped and may require suspension of all other work until the condition in violation has been corrected. 
Sec. 5-100. - Reinspection fees. (a)  The city manager may impose a reasonable reinspection fee of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) per reinspection when the city manager, in his discretion, determines that a permittee has conducted the permitted work in a manner that has caused unnecessary work for the building official. (b)  Circumstances that would justify a reinspection fee to be imposed by the city manager include, but are not limited to: (1)  The reinspection is required due to a failure to correct a previously noted standard/technical code violation on a prior inspection. (2)  The job is not ready for inspection when an inspection is requested and performed. (3)  The building or structure is not accessible and inspection cannot be performed. (4)  Work to be inspected has been covered and proper inspection cannot be performed. (5)  A reinspection has to be performed due to a prior issuance of a stop work order. (Ord. No. 17-03, § 3, 5-17-17) 
Sec. 5-101. - Conflict of interest.     No official or employee of the city making inspection of properties for the purpose of determining the necessity for repairs or corrections shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any repairs or corrections which may be required by this article. 
Secs. 5-102—5-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-08, §§ 1, 2(Att.), adopted Oct. 22, 2012, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 5-116—5-127, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from original codification. 
Sec. 5-116. - Purpose of article.     This article is enacted for the purpose of establishing minimum standards governing the, condition and maintenance of property, dwellings, buildings, and structures in order to make dwellings, buildings, structures, and surrounding premises safe, sanitary, and fit for human use and habitation. Further, this article will promote and protect the public health and safety through the control of weeds and grass which constitute a fire or health hazard, fixing certain responsibilities and duties of owners, operators, and occupants of dwellings and authorizing the inspection of dwellings and structures. (Ord. No. 12-08, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2012) 
Sec. 5-117. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-118. - Scope and application. (a)  Every lot, building, dwelling, and structure in the city, whether occupied or vacant, shall conform to the requirements of this article, irrespective of when such building may have been constructed, altered or repaired. Where applicable, this article also governs the condition of unimproved property. (b)  When a unit is vacant, the full application of this article may be held in abeyance for an indefinite period, provided the exterior complies with this article, the interior has been cleaned of trash, rubbish and debris, and the unit has been secured in a manner approved by the city and is maintained in a closed and inaccessible manner until it is fully repaired. (c)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any building, equipment, appliance, or system installed, altered, repaired, maintained or used in the city except as may be otherwise specifically provided for by statute or by ordinance. (d)  Where repairs, alterations, construction, maintenance, and work required to meet the provisions of this article are regulated and/or required to be permitted by other ordinances, such repairs, alterations, construction, maintenance, and work shall be done only in accordance with those ordinances. (Ord. No. 12-08, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2012) 
Sec. 5-119. - Enforcement.     The city's codes enforcement officer and city manager shall enforce the provisions of this article. They shall be authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including: (1)  Investigating the condition of all properties in the city in order to determine which lots, dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are in violation of this article. (2)  Entering upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. (3)  Exercising the police power necessary for issuing citations and for prosecuting persons charged with violating provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 12-08, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2012) 
Sec. 5-120. - Unsafe, unsanitary, etc., structures prohibited. (a)  Owning or maintaining any dwelling, building, or structure which is not in compliance with applicable codes due to dilapidation or defect increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamity shall be a violation of this article. (b)  Owning or maintaining any dwelling, building or structure that lacks adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities shall be a violation of this article. (c)  Owning or maintaining any condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation shall be a violation of this article. (Ord. No. 12-08, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2012) 
Sec. 5-121. - Windows to be kept in good repair.     It shall be a violation of this article for any owner or occupant of any building within the city to allow any window, window-pane, or portion of any window to remain cracked, missing or broken for thirty (30) consecutive days. (Ord. No. 12-08, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2012) 
Sec. 5-122. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-123. - Compliance prerequisite to utility services for substandard structure.     Electrical utility service shall not be reconnected to any vacant building which is unfit for human habitation, and has been without electrical utility service, until such building has been brought into compliance with all applicable codes. (Ord. No. 12-08, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2012) 
Sec. 5-124. - Owner's right of entry.     Every occupant of a building, dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or the owner's agents or employees, access to any part of such building, dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of maintenance, improving or making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 12-08, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2012) 
Sec. 5-125. - Inspection warrant for occupied premises. (a)  The city manager, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this section in order to inspect occupied buildings and premises. The warrant shall authorize the city manager, building official, codes enforcement officer, or agents thereof to conduct a search or inspection of property, either with or without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this section. (b)  Inspection warrants may be issued by the municipal court when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the following conditions are met: (1)  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or there is probable cause for believing there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property. (2)  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this section. (c)  The inspection warrant shall not be valid unless it meets all of the following requirements: (1)  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. (2)  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. (3)  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal. (4)  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the ordinance provisions sought to be enforced. (Ord. No. 12-08, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2012) 
Sec. 5-126. - Weeds, junk, etc., prohibited; notice of violations. (a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or occupant of any property within the city to maintain such property with vegetation, dead limbs, branches from trees, underbrush, garbage, trash, stagnant water, or other things accumulated thereon that will constitute an unsightly, unsanitary or dangerous condition, health menace or fire hazard. (b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or occupant of any property within the city to utilize the premises of such property for the open storage of any abandoned or junked motor vehicle, ice box, refrigerator, stove, other appliance, glass, building material, building rubbish, or similar vehicles, implements, or items that will constitute an unsightly, unsanitary or dangerous condition, health menace or fire hazard. For the purposes of this section, an abandoned or junked motor vehicle is defined as an automobile, truck or other vehicle that is wrecked or in a state of disrepair and incapable of being moved under its own power, or any vehicle that does not bear a current license tag. (c)  Where parking in open areas is used jointly for the benefit of two (2) or more owners or tenants, the responsibility for maintaining these parking areas free of garbage, trash, and other materials prohibited in this section shall be the joint and severable responsibility of the owners and tenants of these premises. (d)  A written warning notice shall be issued to the owner or occupant of any property maintaining such property in violation of the provisions of this section. The warning notice shall state what items constitute the unsightly, unsanitary or dangerous condition, health menace or fire hazard that must be cleared or removed from the premises. If the owner or occupant of any such property shall fail to clean the premises or remove such items within the time specified in the warning notice, such failure on the part of the owner or occupant of the property shall constitute a violation of this section. Warning notices shall be: (1)  Delivered to the owner or occupant personally or to any other person of suitable age and discretion regularly residing within the household of the occupant or owner; or (2)  Sent by regular United States mail, with sufficient postage prepaid to assure delivery, and addressed to the owner or occupant at his last known address. (e)  Any violation as defined in this section shall be punishable as other ordinance violations. A citation may be issued by any city law enforcement officer or other duly authorized and empowered city official, and service of such citation upon an owner or occupant shall be deemed sufficient if it is: (1)  Delivered to the owner or occupant personally or to any other person of suitable age and discretion regularly residing within the household of the occupant or owner; or (2)  Sent by regular and certified United States mail, return receipt requested, with sufficient postage prepaid to assure delivery, and addressed to the owner or occupant at his last known address. A failure or refusal of such addressee to accept delivery shall constitute valid service under this section. (f)  Citations issued pursuant to the provisions of this section may be so written as to reflect separate and additional violations for each and every succeeding day or portion thereof during which the unlawful conditions continue unabated. (g)  In addition to other remedies, the codes enforcement officer may make written report of his findings to the city manager with recommendation that the city have the premises cleaned and have removed therefrom such items as described in this section that constitute an unsightly, unsanitary or dangerous condition, health menace or fire hazard. When such report with recommendation has been filed: (1)  A copy of the written report aforesaid and a written notice of the time and place fixed for hearing the matter shall be served upon the owner or occupant of such property at least ten (10) but no more than thirty (30) days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, such service to be made by the codes enforcement officer or other designated officer of the city in the manner specified in subsection (e) of this section. The hearing may be continued upon request of either party for reasonable cause. (2)  The city manager shall hear the matter, including the response of such owner or occupant and witnesses introduced, and make his finding. (3)  The city manager shall have full power and authority to order that the offending premises be cleaned and to authorize entry upon such premises for such purpose and to have such premises cleaned and to have removed therefrom vegetation, dead limbs and branches from trees, underbrush, garbage, trash, stagnant water, or other things thereon that constitute an unsightly, unsanitary or dangerous condition, health menace or fire hazard, and to assess the property for cost of the cleaning and removal, and the assessment shall constitute a lien on the property until paid. An execution in favor of the city in the amount of such assessment shall be issued by the city clerk and be collected in accordance with the applicable provisions of law. (Ord. No. 12-08, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2012) State Law reference— Repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; nuisance abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 
Secs. 5-127—5-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUILDING NUMBERING 
Sec. 5-141. - Designation of street numbers.     Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public streets and street numbers or building numbers for dwelling units and places of business within developments located on private streets shall be assigned by the building official in consultation with the city clerk and the county planning department. 
Sec. 5-142. - Assigning numbers; size; when to be erected.     Street numbers will be assigned for all buildings and structures. Numbers must be erected and displayed in front of the project on a board with permanent numbers not smaller than two (2) inches. Numbers must be in place at the beginning of the job before the footing inspection is made and be continuously displayed thereafter until the job is completed and all final inspections have been made. 
Sec. 5-143. - Posting. (a)  Each one-, two-, and three-family residential unit shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing general public access, the address of such residential unit in figures at least three (3) inches high on a contrasting background. (b)  All other residential buildings shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the building, visible from the parking lot or street providing general public access, the address or number of the building in figures at least six (6) inches high on a contrasting background and each individual unit within the building shall be marked on or about its main entrance with the individual unit number and/or address in figures at least three (3) inches high on a contrasting background. In addition to the above, where such residential buildings have more than one (1) exterior entrance, each such entrance shall be marked in figures at least three (3) inches high on contrasting background with the numbers and/or address of each and every individual apartment/unit to which access is provided through that common entrance. (c)  Each place of business shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing general public access, the address of the place of business in figures at least three (3) inches high on a contrasting background. 
Secs. 5-144—5-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXISTING BUILDINGS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Fire prevention code; fire safety rules; enforcement, § 10-1. 
Sec. 5-161. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:     Enforcement authority means the safety fire commissioner, the state fire marshal, the city building official, local fire marshals, or any other state or local official responsible for the implementation, application, or enforcement of any state law or local ordinance relating to building construction, or any state or local rule or regulation relating to building construction, or any building, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, life safety or fire prevention codes, or other construction standards that apply or are intended to apply to existing buildings. The term "enforcement authority" also means any local official designated by the governing authority as the enforcement authority for the purposes of this article.     Existing building or structure means any completed building or structure which has been placed in service for a minimum of five (5) years.     Safety fire commissioner or commissioner means the office created in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-2. (Ord. No. 815, § 2, 6-27-88) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 5-162. - Authority.     This article is enacted pursuant to the Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, Ga. Laws 1984, pp. 1160—1169, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-200 through 8-2-222, as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-203. (Ord. No. 815, § 1, 6-27-88) 
Sec. 5-163. - Effect of article on local enforcement authority and appeals boards.     The enforcement authority and all appeals boards of the city shall be apprised of and shall enforce this article so that its intent may be carried into effect. (Ord. No. 815, § 3, 6-27-88) 
Sec. 5-164. - Alteration or repair without total compliance with new construction requirements.     The provisions of this article shall require any state code enforcement authority and shall permit any authorized local code enforcement authority to permit the repair, alteration, addition, or change of use or occupancy of existing buildings without total compliance with any state or local rule, regulation, code, or standard for new construction requirements under the following general conditions: (1)  All noted conditions hazardous to life, based on the provisions of applicable state and local standards or codes for existing buildings, shall be corrected to a reasonable and realistic degree as set forth in this article, with specific attention to sections 5-174 through 5-179; (2)  The existing building becomes the minimum performance standard; and (3)  The degree of compliance of the building after changes shall not be below that existing before the changes. Nothing in this article will require or prohibit compliance with requirements more stringent than those provided in this article. (Ord. No. 815, § 4, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-204. 
Sec. 5-165. - Identification and correction of certain conditions or defects.     With reference to existing buildings, authorized enforcement authorities shall give special attention to the conditions or defects described in this section in accordance with the provisions of section 5-164, so as to ensure that any such conditions or defects are identified and corrected as deemed appropriate by the enforcement authority having jurisdiction based on applicable state and local codes and through the utilization of appropriate compliance alternatives: (1)  Structural. Any building or structure or portion thereof which is in imminent danger of collapse because of, but not limited to, the following factors: a.  Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; b.  Faulty structural design or construction; c.  The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; or d.  The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of the foundation; (2)  Number of exits. Less than two (2) approved independent, remote, and properly protected exit ways serving every story of a building, except where a single exit way is permitted by the applicable state or local fire or building code or life safety code; (3)  Capacity of exits. Any required door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other required means of egress which is not of sufficient capacity to provide for the population of the portions of the building served and which is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of egress to a place of safety; and (4)  Mechanical systems. Utilities and mechanical systems not in conformance with the codes in effect at the time of construction of a building which create a serious threat of fire or threaten the safety of the occupants of the building. (Ord. No. 815, § 5, 6-27-88) 
Sec. 5-166. - Consideration of compliance alternatives.     Sections 5-167 through 5-171 contain generally acceptable compliance alternatives illustrating principles which shall be applied to the rehabilitation of existing buildings by state enforcement authorities and which may be applied by authorized local enforcement authorities in the state. It is recognized for purposes of this article that all building systems interact with each other; therefore, any consideration of compliance alternatives shall take into account all existing and proposed conditions to determine their acceptability. The compliance alternatives are not all-inclusive and do not preclude consideration and approval of other alternatives by any enforcement authority. (Ord. No. 815, § 6, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-206. 
Sec. 5-167. - Compliance alternatives for inadequate number of exits.     Compliance alternatives for an inadequate number of exits include, but are not limited to, the following: (1)  Provide connecting fire exit balconies acceptable to the enforcement authority between buildings; (2)  Provide alternate exit or egress facilities leading to safety outside the building or to a place of safe refuge in the building or an adjoining building as acceptable to the enforcement authority; (3)  Provide one (1) or more exterior fire escapes as acceptable to the enforcement authority where the providing of enclosed interior or enclosed exterior stairs is not practical; or (4)  Install early fire warning and fire suppression systems. (Ord. No. 815, § 7, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-207. 
Sec. 5-168. - Compliance alternatives for excessive travel distances to approved exit.     Compliance alternatives for excessive travel distances to an approved exit include, but are not limited to, the following: (1)  Install an approved smoke detection system throughout the building; (2)  Install an approved complete automatic fire suppression system; (3)  Subdivide the exit travel route with smokestop doors acceptable to the enforcement authority; (4)  Increase the fire resistance rating of corridor walls and doors; or (5)  Provide additional approved means of escape. (Ord. No. 815, § 8, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-208. 
Sec. 5-169. - Compliance alternatives for unenclosed or improperly enclosed exit stairways or vertical shafts.     Compliance alternatives for unenclosed or improperly enclosed exit stairways or vertical shafts include, but are not limited to, the following: (1)  Improve enclosure of exit stairway; (2)  Add a partial fire suppression system; (3)  Add a sprinkler draft curtain; or (4)  Add a smoke detection system. (Ord. No. 815, § 9, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-209. 
Sec. 5-170. - Compliance alternatives for inadequate fire partitions or walls.     Compliance alternatives for inadequate or a total lack of fire partitions or fire separation walls shall be as set forth in section 5-169. (Ord. No. 815, § 10, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-210. 
Sec. 5-171. - Compliance alternatives for lack of required protection of openings in exterior walls.     Compliance alternatives for a lack of required protection of openings in exterior walls where a fire exposure is a risk include, but are not limited to, the following: (1)  Improve fire resistance of existing openings and protect them with fire-rated windows or doors as appropriate; (2)  Seal the openings with fire-rated construction as approved by the enforcement authority; or (3)  Install an approved fire suppression system. (Ord. No. 815, § 11, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-211. 
Sec. 5-172. - Filing of approved compliance alternatives.     Whenever action is taken on any existing building to repair, make alterations, or change the use or occupancy of an existing structure and, when such action proposes the use of compliance alternatives, the authorized enforcement authority shall ensure that at least one (1) copy of the accepted compliance alternatives approved, including applicable plans, test data, or other data submitted for evaluation, be maintained on file in the office of the local enforcement authority. If such structure also falls under the jurisdiction of a state level enforcement authority, at least one (1) copy of same material shall be maintained on file with that authority. (Ord. No. 815, § 12, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-212. 
Sec. 5-173. - Final review of projects; agreement of local authorities.     Where an existing building or structure falls within the jurisdiction of both state level and local level enforcement authorities, the final review of any part of the project which is under the jurisdiction of both such enforcement authorities shall occur with the state authority; provided, however, the local fire and building authorities must agree in writing with any compliance alternatives before such can be approved by the state authority. It is the intent of this section that the state enforcement authority be very liberal in the consideration and approval of compliance alternatives which have the documented support of local enforcement authorities. (Ord. No. 815, § 13, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-213. 
Sec. 5-174. - Additions.     Additions to an existing building shall comply with the applicable requirements of state and local laws, rules, regulations, codes, and standards for new construction. Such additions shall not impose loads either vertical or horizontal which would cause the existing building to be subjected to stresses exceeding those permitted under new construction. If the existing building does not comply with the standards provided in this article and the authorized enforcement authority finds that the addition adversely affects the performance of the total building, the authorized enforcement authority may require: (1)  The new addition to be separated from the existing structure by at least a two-hour firewall with openings therein properly protected; or (2)  The installation of an approved automatic fire suppression system; or (3)  Other remedies which may be deemed appropriate by the enforcement authority. (Ord. No. 815, § 14, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-214. 
Sec. 5-175. - Minor alterations or repairs; reduction or removal of features, alteration or repair without further compliance, installation of mechanical systems.     Minor alterations or repairs to an existing building which do not adversely affect the performance or safety of the building may be made with the same or like materials. Existing buildings which, in part or as a whole, exceed the requirements of any applicable construction or fire safety code, may, in the course of compliance with this article, have reduced or removed, in part or total, features not required by such code for new construction, provided, however, that such features were not a condition of prior approval. Existing buildings and structures which, in part or as a whole, do not meet the requirements of the applicable code for new construction may be altered or repaired without further compliance to any such code by utilizing the provisions of this article, provided their present degree of compliance to any applicable construction or fire safety code is not reduced. Any new mechanical systems installed in an existing building shall conform to applicable codes for new construction to the fullest extent practical as approved by the authorized enforcement authorities. (Ord. No. 815, § 15, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-215. 
Sec. 5-176. - Continuation of legal use and occupancy.     The legal use and occupancy of any building or structure may be continued without change, except as may be provided otherwise by this article or as may be legally provided for by any applicable state or local law, ordinance, rule, regulation, code, or standard. (Ord. No. 815, § 16, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-216. 
Sec. 5-177. - Total change in use or occupancy. (a)  A total change in the use or occupancy of an existing building which would cause a greater hazard to the public shall not be made unless such building is made to comply with the requirements of the applicable state and local rules, regulations, codes, and standards for the new use or occupancy; provided, however, the compliance alternative provisions of this article may be utilized by authorized enforcement authorities where total or strict compliance with applicable state or local rules, regulations, codes, or standards is not practical. (b)  When the proposed use is of equal or lesser hazard as determined by an authorized enforcement authority, further compliance with any code for new construction is not required unless otherwise provided in this article. Alterations or repairs to an existing building or structure which do not adversely affect the performance of the building may be made with like materials. Any proposed change to the existing building or change in type of contents of the existing building shall not increase the fire hazard to adjacent buildings or structures. If the fire hazard to adjacent buildings or structures is increased, then requirements of applicable construction or fire safety codes for exterior walls shall apply. (Ord. No. 815, § 17, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-217. 
Sec. 5-178. - Change of portion of building to new use or occupancy. (a)  If a portion of a building is changed to a new use or occupancy and that portion is separated from the remainder of the building with vertical or horizontal fire separations complying with applicable state or local rules, regulations, codes, or standards or with compliance alternatives, then the portion changed shall be made to comply to the applicable requirements for the new use or occupancy to the extent noted in section 5-177 of this article. (b)  If a portion of the building is changed to a new use or occupancy and that portion is not separated from the remainder of the building as noted in subsection (a) of this section, then the provisions of the applicable state and local rules, regulations, codes, and standards applying to each use or occupancy of the building shall apply to the entire building to the extent noted in section 5-177 of this article; provided, however, if there are conflicting provisions in requirements for the various use or occupancies, the authorized enforcement authority shall apply the strictest requirements. (Ord. No. 815, § 18, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-218. 
Sec. 5-179. - Changes which increase floor loading.     Any proposed change in the use or occupancy of an existing building or portion thereof which could increase the floor loading shall be investigated by a state registered professional engineer to determine the adequacy of the existing floor system to support the increased loads. If the existing floor system is found to be inadequate, it shall be modified to support the increased loads or the proposed allowable floor loading shall be reduced by and posted by the appropriate enforcement authority. (Ord. No. 815, § 19, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-219. 
Sec. 5-180. - Rules and regulations.     The safety fire commissioner shall promulgate reasonable rules and regulations to implement and carry out the requirements of this article. (Ord. No. 815, § 20, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-220. 
Sec. 5-181. - Appeals of rulings or decisions.     Should any person be dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of the state fire marshal pursuant to the provisions of this article, the right is granted to appeal within ten (10) days to the commissioner. If the person is dissatisfied with the decision of the commissioner, appeal is authorized to the superior court within thirty (30) days in the manner provided under O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 13. In the event of such appeal, the person shall give a surety bond which will be conditioned upon compliance with the order and direction of the state fire marshal or the commissioner or both. The amount of bond shall be fixed by the commissioner in such amount as will reasonably cover the order issued by the commissioner or the state fire marshal or both. (Ord. No. 815, § 21, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-221. 
Sec. 5-182. - Immunity of state and local entities; liability of proper owner or user.     Nothing in this article shall be construed to constitute a waiver of the sovereign immunity of the state or any officer or employee thereof in carrying out the provisions of this article. Further, no action shall be maintained against the state, any municipality, county, or any duly authorized elected or appointive officer or duly authorized employee thereof, for damages sustained as a result of any fire or hazard covered by this article by reason of inspection or other action taken or not taken pursuant to this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any property owner or lessee or person in charge thereof from any legal duty, obligation, or liability incident to the ownership, maintenance, or use of such property. (Ord. No. 815, § 22, 6-27-88) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-222. 
Secs. 5-183—5-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— Former Ch. 5, Art. VII, §§ 5-201—5-209, was repealed, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, adopted July 26, 2010, as Ch. 20, Art. VI, §§ 20-301—20-308. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 0512, § 1, 11-21-05; Ord. No. 0108, § 1, 10-22-01. See also the editor's note at Ch. 5, Art. VII, and the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 5-201—5-209. - Reserved. 
Secs. 5-210—5-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Cross reference— Zoning, app. A. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 5-231. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the Avondale Estates Historic Preservation Commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a building, structure, site, object, or work of art located within a designated historic district.     Designation means a decision by the governing body to designate a property or district as a historic property or as a historic district and thereafter to prohibit all material changes in appearance of such property or within such district prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the historic preservation commission.     Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material, the type and style of all windows, doors, signs; and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing.     Historic district means a geographically definable area designated by the governing body as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 5-271.     Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, object or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper application or use thereof, designated as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 5-272.     Material change in appearance means a change that will affect only the exterior architectural features of a historic property or of any building, structure, site, object, or work of art within a historic district, such as: (1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; (2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; (3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; (4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public way on any historic property; or (5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a designated historic district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features except exterior paint alterations. (Ord. No. 806, § 2, 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-70), 9-27-93) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 5-232. - Purpose.     In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and the historic residential neighborhood and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; in order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal and state law; and in order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal and state programs to do the same, the governing body hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 806, § 1, 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-71), 9-27-93) 
Secs. 5-233—5-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
Sec. 5-246. - Creation.     There is hereby created a commission the title of which shall be "Avondale Estates Historic Preservation Commission." It is hereinafter referred to as "preservation commission." (Ord. No. 806, § 3(A), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-80), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-247. - Position within the city.     The preservation commission shall be part of the planning function of the city. (Ord. No. 806, § 3(B), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-81), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-248. - Members; number, appointment, terms, compensation. (a)  The preservation commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the governing body. All members shall be residents of the city. (b)  A majority of the members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology, or other historic preservation-related disciplines, such as urban planning, American studies, American civilization, cultural geography, cultural anthropology, real estate, law, or landscape architecture, and all shall have demonstrated special interest, competence or knowledge in historic preservation. (c)  Members shall serve three-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be one (1) member for one (1) year; two (2) members for two (2) years, and two (2) members for three (3) years. (d)  Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses at the discretion of the governing body. (Ord. No. 806, § 3(C), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 834, § 1, 9-27-90; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-82), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-249. - Powers generally.     The preservation commission shall be authorized to: (1)  Prepare an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; (2)  Recommend to the governing body specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; (3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; (4)  Recommend to the governing body that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; (5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; (6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements in accordance with the provisions of the "Georgia Uniform Conservation Act" (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1 through 44-10-8); (7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; (8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the governing body or the preservation commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of this article; (9)  Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the governing body concerning the most appropriate use of any funds acquired; (10)  Consult with historic preservation experts in the historic preservation section of the state department of natural resources or its successor, the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Inc., and other experts; (11)  Submit to the historic preservation section of the state department of natural resources, or its successor, a list of historic properties or historic districts designated as such pursuant to this article; (12)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city's historic preservation program; (13)  Solicit, on behalf of the city, donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior written approval and consent of the governing body; (14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation section of the state department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties in the city to the national register of historic places; and (15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and, with the consent of the governing body, enter into agreements to do the same. (Ord. No. 806, § 3(D), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-83), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-250. - Adoption of rules and standards; meetings. (a)  The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. (b)  The preservation commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. Such meetings shall be open to the public. The preservation commission shall select a chairman and a vice-chairman from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. (c)  Should a member fail to attend three (3) consecutive meetings, the chairman, with the concurrence of a majority of the entire preservation commission, shall recommend to the governing body that a vacancy be declared and that an appointment be made to the vacated position. (Ord. No. 806, § 3(E), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-84), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-251. - Secretary.     The city clerk shall be secretary of the preservation commission. (Ord. No. 806, § 3(I), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-85), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-252. - Records of meetings.     A public record shall be kept of the preservation commission's resolutions and formal actions. (Ord. No. 806, § 3(H), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-86), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-253. - Conflicts of interest.     No member of the preservation commission shall take part in the hearing, consideration, or determination of any case in which he has ownership or other vested interest other than answering a direct question. (Ord. No. 806, § 3(F), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-87), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-254. - Authority to receive funding from various sources.     The preservation commission shall have the authority to accept donations on behalf of the city but shall not obligate the city without prior written approval and consent of the governing body. The preservation shall ensure that donated funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. (Ord. No. 806, § 3(G), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-88), 9-27-93) 
Secs. 5-255—5-269. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECOMMENDATION AND DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND PROPERTIES 
Sec. 5-270. - Preliminary research by preservation commission. (a)  Preservation commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The preservation commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. (b)  Preservation commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the governing body. The preservation commission shall present to the governing body recommendations for historic districts and properties. (c)  Preservation commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the preservation commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the governing body, the preservation commission shall prepare a report consisting of the following: (1)  If a property, a description of the property proposed for historic designation and the name of the owner of the property; (2)  If a district, a description of the boundaries of the district proposed for historic designation and a list of each property located therein, i.e., the street address and map reference number, with the name of the owner of each property; (3)  A statement on the historic, cultural, architectural, or aesthetic significance of a district or an individual property proposed for historic designation; (4)  A statement justifying the boundaries of a property or a district proposed for historic designation; (5)  If a property, photographs of the property proposed for historic designation; if a district, representative photographs of the district proposed for historic designation; (6)  A copy of the official zoning map or map of the city with the proposed historic property or boundaries of the proposed historic district indicated thereon. (d)  Notification to historic preservation section. At least thirty (30) days prior to making a recommendation to the governing body for designation of a property or district as historic, the preservation commission shall submit the above report, exclusive of subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section, to the historic preservation section of the state department of natural resources for its review. (Ord. No. 806, § 4(A), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-90), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-271. - Criteria for designation of a historic district.     A historic district is a geographically definable area containing buildings, structures, sites, objects, works of art or a combination thereof, which: (1)  Have special character or special historical or aesthetic value or interest; (2)  Represent one (1) or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one (1) or more eras in the history of the city, county, state or region; and (3)  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city or county. (Ord. No. 806, § 4(B), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-91), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-272. - Criteria for designation of a historic property.     A historic property is a building, structure, site, object, or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of its value to the city, county, state, or region for one or more of the following reasons: (1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; (2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; (3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to the city, county, state, or region; or (4)  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, county, state or region. (Ord. No. 806, § 4(C), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-92), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-273. - Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. (a)  Application for designation of historic districts or properties. Designation may be proposed by the governing body, the preservation commission, or from any other source within the city. (b)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: (1)  Require that the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city or, in the absence of such a map, on an official map to be kept and maintained as a public record to provide notice of such designations; (2)  List each property located in a proposed historic district by street address and map reference number or describe the proposed historic property; (3)  Set forth the names of the owners of the proposed historic property or the names of the owners of each property located within a proposed historic district; and (4)  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or to any property located within a designated historic district. (c)  Required hearings. The preservation commission and the governing body shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published at least three (3) times in the principal daily newspaper of general circulation and, if not the same newspaper, once in the city's official newspaper organ; written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the preservation commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten (10), but not more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and where the property is owner-occupied, a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. (d)  Recommendation on proposed designation. A recommendation to affirm, modify, or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the preservation commission following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the governing body. (e)  Governing body action on preservation commission recommendations. Following receipt of the preservation commission's recommendation, the governing body, subject to normal processes for adoption of an ordinance by the city, may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. (f)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within thirty (30) days following the adoption by the governing body of an ordinance for designation, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the governing body, which notice shall apprise such owners and occupants of the necessity for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in the appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and, where the property is not owner-occupied a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. (g)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. Within thirty (30) days following the adoption of an ordinance for designation, the governing body shall notify the planning and zoning board, the city development authority, the city codes enforcement officer, and the city attorney. (h)  Moratorium on applications for alteration, demolition, or relocation while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the status of the involved property shall be frozen. (Ord. No. 806, § 4(D), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-93), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-274. - Designation of historic properties.     Designated properties are shown on an official map kept by the city clerk and maintained as a public record to provide such notice of designation. (Ord. No. 0408, § 1, 10-25-04) 
Sec. 5-275. - List of historic properties.     Properties within the designated historic district are listed by owner, street address and parcel id number on Exhibit B. (Ord. No. 0408, § 1, 10-25-04) 
Sec. 5-276. - Repealed. Editor's note— Ord. No. 0704, § 1, adopted August 27, 2007, repealed § 5-276, which pertained to appeal from tier designation. 
Sec. 5-277. - Requirement for certificate of appropriateness.     A certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from the preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or within a designated historic district. (Ord. No. 0408, § 1, 10-25-04) 
Sec. 5-278. - Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation.     Within thirty (30) days following the adoption of this section for designation, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the governing body, which notice shall apprise such owners and occupants of the necessity for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in the appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and, where the property is not owner-occupied a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. (Ord. No. 0408, § 1, 10-25-04) 
Sec. 5-279. - Notification of other agencies regarding designation.     Within thirty (30) days following the adoption of this section for designation, the governing body shall notify the planning and zoning board, the city development authority, the city codes enforcement office, and the city attorney. (Ord. No. 0408, § 1, 10-25-04) 
Sec. 5-280. - Exhibits made public records.     The documents referred to above as Exhibits A, B, and C are hereby made public records and shall be maintained by the clerk as such and be accessible to the general public during all normal business hours of the City of Avondale Estates. (Ord. No. 0408, § 1, 10-25-04) 
DIVISION 4. - USE OF TIER CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM BY PRESERVATION COMMISSION[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 0704, §§ 2, 3, adopted August 27, 2007, renumbered former Divisions 4 and 5 as Divisions 5 and 6 to provide for the addition of a new Division 4, §§ 5-281—5-284, as set out herein. At the editor's discretion, Division 6 has been renumbered as Division 7, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 0704. 
Sec. 5-281. - Authority for tier classification system. (a)  The preservation commission may create a tier classification system for use for use in administering historic preservation within the city. The preservation commission may assign a tier classification to any designated historic property within the city according to the property's relative architectural, historical, or cultural significance. (b)  The preservation commission may consider the tier classification of a designated historic property when reviewing an application for certificate of appropriateness pursuant to this article. (Ord. No. 0704, § 3, 8-27-07) 
Sec. 5-282. - Petition for tier change. (a)  Any owner of a designated historic property who is dissatisfied with the tier classification assigned to that owner's property may petition the preservation commission to reclassify the owner's property to another tier. (b)  Such petition for tier classification change shall be presented to the preservation commission in writing and shall set forth the grounds asserted for the proposed change. (c)  The preservation commission shall consider the petition for tier change at its next regularly scheduled meeting. (d)  The preservation commission may then change the tier classification of the property, retain the classification, or defer the petition for tier change to a date certain. (Ord. No. 0704, § 3, 8-27-07) 
Sec. 5-283. - Appeal.     If an owner is dissatisfied with the determination of the preservation commission pursuant to section 5-282(d), then the owner may appeal such determination to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from a conviction for city ordinance violations. (Ord. No. 0704, § 3, 8-27-07) 
Sec. 5-284. - Ratification of tier changes.     Only tier change petitions initiated after the effective date of this division shall be subject to the procedures herein. All tier classifications previously assigned or changed by the preservation commission prior to the effective date of this division are expressly ratified by the governing body. (Ord. No. 0704, § 3, 8-27-07) 
Secs. 5-285—5-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - APPLICATION TO PRESERVATION COMMISSION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- Note— See the editor's note at Div. 4. 
Sec. 5-291. - Approval of alterations or new construction in historic districts or involving properties.     After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of a historic property, or of a structure, site, or work of art within the historic district shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the preservation commission. (Ord. No. 806, § 5(A), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-100), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-292. - Exemptions.     The department of transportation and any contractors performing work funded by the department of transportation are exempt from this article. The city and county are exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness; provided, however, that the city and county shall notify the preservation commission forty-five (45) days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the preservation commission an opportunity to comment. (Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-101), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-293. - Submission of plans to preservation commission.     An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be required by the preservation commission. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans for the site. (Ord. No. 806, § 5(D), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-102), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-294. - Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness; notices and right to be heard. (a)  At least ten (10) days prior to review of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the preservation commission shall notify by first class mail the owners of any property likely to be affected materially by the application, and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. (b)  In cases where the preservation commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. Notice shall be given once in the city's official newspaper organ at least seven (7) days prior to such a public hearing. (Ord. No. 806, § 5(F), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-103), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-295. - Review criteria for certificates of appropriateness. (a)  In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangement or uses having no effect on exterior architectural features. (b)  The preservation commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its membership on any application. (c)  When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness for existing buildings, the secretary of interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation" shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the preservation commission; provided, however, that the preservation commission may vary this requirement where the facts and circumstances would indicate such variance is in the best interest of the city and not contrary to the intent of this article. (d)  The preservation commission shall approve an application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed new construction or material change in appearance of an existing structure would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historical, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the preservation commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance; architectural style; general design, arrangement, texture, and material of the architectural features involved; and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other structures in the immediate neighborhood. (e)  The preservation commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in appearance or the new construction would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural features of the property or the district. (Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-104), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-296. - Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. (a)  The preservation commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a structure, site, or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the preservation commission. (b)  Failure of the preservation commission to act within the forty-five-day period shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. (Ord. No. 806, § 5(I), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-105), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-297. - Action to be taken by preservation commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness.     If the preservation commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so and shall transmit by United States mail a record of such action and the reasons therefor to the applicant. The preservation commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if such applicant so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after so doing. (Ord. No. 806, § 5(J), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-106), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-298. - Notification to building inspector; issuance of building permits.     In cases of new construction or where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, no building permit for a historic property or a property within a historic district shall be issued by the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits unless a certificate of appropriateness has first been obtained from the preservation commission. (Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-107), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-299. - Undue hardship.     Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the preservation commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to such provisions, or to interpret the meaning of such provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship, provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the preservation commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. (Ord. No. 806, § 5(K), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-108), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-300. - Conformance with certificate of appropriateness. (a)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. If the work is not performed in accordance with such certificate, the preservation commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. (b)  The governing body or the preservation commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the certificate of appropriateness or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. (Ord. No. 806, § 5(L), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-109), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-301. - Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced.     Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen (18) months and are renewable. They shall become void unless construction is commenced within six (6) months from date of issuance. (Ord. No. 806, § 5(M), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-110), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-302. - Recording of applications for certificates of appropriateness.     The preservation commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all its proceedings. (Ord. No. 806, § 5(N), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-111), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-303. - Acquisition of property.     The preservation commission may, where such action is authorized by the governing body and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange or otherwise of the property or any interest therein for or on behalf of the city. (Ord. No. 806, § 5(O), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-112), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-304. - Appeals. (a)  Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the governing body. (b)  Any such appeal must be filed in writing with the governing body through the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to section 5-296(a) or, in the case of a failure of the preservation commission to act, within fifteen (15) days of the expiration of the forty-five-day period allowed for preservation commission action, section 5-296(b). (c)  The appeal will be considered at the next regular meeting of the governing body. The governing body may approve, modify and approve, defer the appeal to a date certain, or reject the determination made by the preservation commission if the governing body finds that the preservation commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. (d)  Appeals from decisions of the governing body made pursuant to this article may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from a conviction for city ordinance violations. (Ord. No. 806, § 5(P), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-113), 9-27-93) 
Secs. 5-305—5-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEMOLITION OR RELOCATION OF A HISTORIC PROPERTY OR PROPERTIES WITHIN A HISTORIC DISTRICT[8] Footnotes: --- (8) --- Note— See the editor's note at Div. 4. 
Sec. 5-321. - Authority to deny certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation.     The preservation commission shall have the authority to deny certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. (Ord. No. 806, § 6(A), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-120), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-322. - Public hearing. (a)  A public hearing shall be scheduled for each application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. (b)  Notice of the public hearing shall be published once in the city's official newspaper organ at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. No. 806, § 6(B), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-121), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-323. - Consideration of post-demolition or post-relocation plans.     The preservation commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for the site. (Ord. No. 806, § 6(C), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-122), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-324. - Demolition/relocation criteria.     Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the preservation commission shall use the criteria described in section 5-295 to determine whether to deny the application or issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. (Ord. No. 806, § 6(D), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-123), 9-27-93) 
Secs. 5-325—5-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES AND BUILDING AND ZONING CODE PROVISIONS[9] Footnotes: --- (9) --- Note— See the editor's note at Div. 4. 
Sec. 5-341. - Ordinary maintenance or repair.     Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, shall not require a certificate of appropriateness. Such determination shall be made in accordance with the published rules of the preservation commission. (Ord. No. 806, § 7(A), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-130), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-342. - Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair.     Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The preservation commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: (1)  The preservation commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Conditions such as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and/or vermin to enter, the deterioration of exterior architectural features, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. (2)  If the preservation commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the preservation commission shall notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property shall have thirty (30) days in which to reply to such notification and set forth such owner's proposed steps to remedy the situation and then six (6) months to remedy the situation. (3)  If documentation can be submitted showing cause as to why a particular situation cannot be remedied within six (6) months, the preservation commission may grant an extension not to exceed eighteen (18) months from original notification by the preservation commission. (4)  If the condition is not remedied within the prescribed time limits, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 and, where such action is authorized by the governing body, the preservation commission may perform or have performed such maintenance or repair necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The cost of such maintenance and repair shall be assessed against the property and such assessment shall constitute a lien on the property until paid. An execution in favor of the city in the amount of such assessment shall be issued by the city clerk and shall be collected in accordance with the applicable provisions of law. (Ord. No. 806, § 7(B), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-131), 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5-343. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes.     Nothing in this article shall be construed to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of such person's property not prohibited by other laws, ordinances or regulations. (Ord. No. 806, § 7(C), 7-28-86; Ord. No. 855, § 1(5-132), 9-27-93) 
Secs. 5-344—5-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING STRUCTURES[10] Footnotes: --- (10) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-08, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 27, 2010, repealed the former Art. IX, §§ 5-361—5-376, 5-380—5-383, and enacted a new Art. IX as set out herein. The former Art. IX pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 0109, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 0204, 11-25-02; Ord. No. 0307, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 0401, 3-23-04; Ord. No. 0506, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 0802, 2-25-08. See also the Code Comparative Table. Cross reference— Zoning, app. A. 
DIVISION 1. - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING STRUCTURES[11] Footnotes: --- (11) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, designated former §§ 5-361—5-377, 5-381—5-383, as Art. IX, Div. 1, as set out herein. 
Sec. 5-361. - Purpose. (a)  In order to protect the public safety, including traffic safety, to assure aesthetic harmony and compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the city, to protect the public investment in streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, and to provide for orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all its citizens, recognizing that the city is one of the country's foremost planned communities and is on the National Register of Historic Places, the governing authority finds that the improper control of signs would be detrimental to the unique characteristics of the city. The governing authority thus determines that the public health, safety and welfare require the adoption of this article. (b)  The governing authority finds that signs and advertising are proper and necessary uses of private property and can constitute a legitimate business entitled to the protection of the law. A sign by its very nature is designed to draw an individual's attention to that sign. This characteristic makes signs a valuable medium of communication; however, this same characteristic can distract motorists and pedestrians, thus creating traffic hazards. (c)  The governing authority further finds that the clutter created by an excess in number, size and height of signs creates a distraction to travelers and negatively impacts the general appearance of an area. Signs may lessen the aesthetic qualities of an area and may intrude upon the residential character of an area, as well as property values. (d)  The governing authority further finds that signs and advertising should be reasonably regulated in the interest of traffic safety, aesthetics and public welfare by the establishment of standards for the location, size, illumination, number, construction and maintenance of all signs and advertising structures in the city and to ensure that they are structurally safe and sound. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 5-362. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:     Banner sign means a strip of cloth, paper, canvas, or similar material, on which a message, slogan or emblem is painted, drawn or otherwise projected, colored or shaped for the purpose of advertising or drawing attention to a product, object, facility, or activity.     Billboard means any off-premises advertising sign with a sign face area of greater than one hundred (100) square feet.     Changeable copy panel means a sign or sign device consisting of or incorporating a panel designed specifically to allow the frequent changing of the copy thereon, by manual and/or automatic means.     Clock sign means any timepiece erected outside of any building for the purpose of advertising the business on the premises on which it is located.     Code enforcement officer means a code enforcement officer employed by the governing authority for the City of Avondale Estates or his/her designee duly authorized to enforce the sign ordinance.     Commercial (zoning) district means the O-I, NS, GC, LI, MD and CBD zoning districts of the city for the purposes of this article.     Commercial message means any message that promotes a business or attempts to generate good will for a business; any message that advertises a product or service for sale; and any message that proposes a commercial transaction. Any sign containing any commercial message shall be regulated as a commercial sign.     Copy means the wording, designs and other advertising display on the surface of a sign.     Flag means a piece of fabric or other flexible material solely containing distinctive colors, patterns, standards, words or emblems.     Freestanding sign means a sign securely affixed to a substantial support structure which contains a permanent foundation attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support. (1)  Monument sign. A freestanding sign of which the entire bottom of the sign is generally in contact with or within six (6) inches of the ground. Does not include pole or pylon signs. (2)  Pylon sign. A freestanding sign, usually double-faced, mounted on one (1) or two (2) supports above ground level. Also referred to as a pole sign.       Human operated signage means a sign held and/or movement operated by a person.     Illuminated sign means a sign designed to give forth artificial light directly or through translucent material from a source of light within such sign or a sign illuminated by an external light directed primarily toward such sign and so shielded that no direct rays from the light are visible elsewhere other than on the lot where such illumination occurs.     Instructional sign means a sign used to give direction or specific instruction to the public such as, but not limited to, "Center," "Exit," "No Parking," "Drive Through," "Restroom," and so forth. Such signs shall contain only instructional information and shall not contain a commercial message.     Major shopping/office center means two (2) or more continuous stores or office spaces containing a minimum of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of covered floor space and a minimum of one hundred (100) linear foot frontage on a principal or minor artery.     Menu sign means a sign affixed to the exterior façade of a restaurant no larger than one and one-half (1½) square feet. Such sign shall be enclosed.     Minor shopping/office center means two (2) or more continuous stores or office spaces containing less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of covered floor space or having less than one hundred (100) linear foot frontage on a principal or minor artery.     Mobile sign means any sign that is either part of or otherwise affixed to any trailer or vehicle, whether motorized or non-motorized.     Mounted sign means a sign permanently attached to a building. (1)  Canopy sign. A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of a canopy or awning. (2)  Hanging sign. A sign that hangs beneath a marquee, canopy, or awning and is perpendicular to the building face. Also known as a blade sign. (3)  Office directory sign. A sign which is surface-mounted at the ground floor level building entrance on a building containing office uses to uniformly identify any or all of the owners, occupants or tenants using that building for an office purpose. (4)  Projecting sign. Any sign which is attached perpendicular to a building or other structure and extends more than six (6) inches beyond the line of the building or structure or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached. Also called a shingle sign. (5)  Roof sign. Any sign erected upon and above a roof structure and wholly supported by the roof structure or a structure placed upon the roof. (6)  Fascia sign. Means a vertical sign attached to the front of the building that is below the top edge of a sloping roof and that extends not more than eighteen (18) inches above the lower edge of the sloping roof.     Multifamily Residential zoning district means the MFR zoning district of the city for the purpose of this article.     Neon sign means a sign made of glass tubing filled with neon or other noble gas that displays an illuminated message or design when electric current is passed through the tubing.     Non-commercial message means any message that is not a commercial message.     Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this article.     Non-residential (zoning) district is synonymous with "commercial (zoning) district" and means the O-I, NS, GC, LI, MD and CBD zoning districts of the city for the purposes of this article.     On-premises advertising sign means a sign containing a commercial message for the purpose of promoting, advertising, or selling a product or service obtainable on the premises where the sign is located.     Off-premises advertising sign means any sign containing a commercial message that is located off the premises of the business or entity indicated or advertised by such sign.     Permanent foundation means that portion of any sign structure that is attached to the ground or other structure attached to the ground through the use of concrete footings or other man-made material that is not capable of being removed without the aid of mechanical or other machinery.     Planned Development means the PD zoning district of the city for the purpose of this article.     Real estate sign means a sign erected by the owner, or the owner's agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease or sale or notifying prospective purchaser or lessors that the property has been sold or leased and identifying the owner's agent and providing contact information for same and any other information required by law.     Residential (zoning) district means the R-12 and R-24 zoning districts of the city of for purposes of this article.     Security identification sign means a sign indicating that a security system is located on the premises. The governing authority specifically finds that allowing the residents of Avondale Estates to display such security identification signs provides a health and safety benefit that justifies allowing such signs in residential and commercial zoning districts. Security identification signs may contain a message indicating that the property is protected by a security system and the number of a security company to contact in case of emergency.     Sidewalk sign means a movable sign with the structure constructed in an A-frame or easel design that is not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located by a permanent foundation. Also called a sandwich sign.     Sign means any letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, marquee sign, design, poster, pictorial, picture, stroke, stripe, line, trademark, reading matter or illuminated service, which shall be so constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever, so that the same shall be used for the attraction of the public to any place, subject, information, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or merchandise whatsoever which is displayed in any manner whatsoever whether outdoors or indoors in such a manner as to be visible from any sidewalk, public street, or right-of-way.     Sign face means the area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure or similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed; provided, however, that any open space contained within the outer limits of the display face of a sign, or between any component, panel, strip or figure of any kind composing the display face shall be included in the computation of the area of the sign face whether such open space is enclosed or not, be it a frame, border or trim. The frame, border, trim or other material that forms the continuous perimeter enclosing the sign face shall also be included in the computation of the area of the sign face. For projecting or double-faced signs each display face shall not be added together in computing the area of the sign face for that sign.     Sign structure means all portions of a sign not including the sign face.     Spectacular sign means an advertising display sign, advertising copy, or advertising device that is animated, wired for lights or luminous tubing, or both, with copy action or movement controlled by flashed circuit breakers, matographs or a mechanical inflation device. This definition does not include signs which indicate time, temperature or date, or a temporary collection of balloons of latex or Mylar construction which do not contain a commercial message.     Temporary-local directional sign (T-LDS) means short-term off-premises signs that direct attention to or convey directions through the use of words, symbols, arrows or otherwise, to a temporary or nonpermanent commercial event, such as a store opening, closing, sale or promotion at a commercial business.     Temporary on-premises advertising sign includes any sign with a commercial message, including but not limited to a banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wall board or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a short period of time only, on the lot where the commercial activity is to take place, but does not include real estate signs or signs with non-commercial messages.     Wall sign means a sign that is painted, drawn, or otherwise directly applied to the wall or exterior surface of a building. The total lettering, picture, emblem or other display on one (1) side of a building shall constitute one (1) wall sign.     Window sign means a sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 15-02, §§ 1, 2, 3-18-2015) 
Sec. 5-363. - Signs not requiring permits.     The following types of signs do not require sign permits, provided however, that these signs must comply with all applicable regulations of this article unless specifically exempted: (a)  Non-illuminated real estate signs located on the property for sale or lease, provided such signs are not located on any public right-of-way, and are limited to one (1) sign per the front of the lot as defined by the zoning ordinance. Such signs shall be removed within ten (10) days after the subject lot or building is leased or sold. (b)  Signs erected on behalf of a governmental authority in the exercise of its proper jurisdiction. Such signs are exempt from the regulations of this article. Such signs include but are not limited to safety signs, traffic signs, and street signs. (c)  Signs on private property directing traffic movement, with the total area of each sign face not exceeding two (2) square feet and a maximum of one (1) sign per road frontage, and not advertising any business, service or product. Such signs shall not be allowed on any public right-of-way. (d)  Signs containing a non-commercial message only, with the total area of each sign face not exceeding six (6) square feet as allowed by section 5-369. (e)  Security identification signs with the total area of each sign face not exceeding one (1) square foot. (f)  Seasonal decorations including, but not limited to, Halloween, Independence Day, Christmas, Hanukkah, Kwanzaa, and Easter. A seasonal decoration shall not contain any commercial message. Seasonal decorations not containing a commercial message are exempt from the limitations of this article , but shall not be allowed on the right-of-way or in the setback areas designated in subsection 5-367(a). (g)  Noncommercial announcements located within the city, including but not limited to city sponsored special events, birthday announcements, new births and anniversaries, so long as the announcements do not contain commercial messages. (h)  Flags provided, however, that such flags comply with the provisions of section 5-370. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 15-02, § 3, 3-18-2015) 
Sec. 5-364. - Sign permit—Required. (a)  Except as specifically excluded under section 5-363 of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, or erect a sign without a permit. (b)  A new sign permit is required to perform repairs to any sign or sign structure that will change the sign or sign structure appearance from its original permitted condition. A new sign permit is not required for changeable copy. Administrative review by the code enforcement officer is required for the interchange of poster panels, and painted boards. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 5-365. - Prohibited signs and sign devices.     The following types of signs or advertising devices are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city, unless otherwise indicated: (a)  Roof signs. (b)  Signs with flashing, intermittent or animated illumination or effect are prohibited; provided, however, that time and weather informational signs, and official warning or regulatory signs erected by a governing authority in the exercise of its proper jurisdiction are exempt from this restriction. (c)  Billboards. (d)  Spectacular signs. (e)  Signs and seasonal displays on public right-of-way except signs exempt under the ordinances of the City of Avondale Estates and/or placed upon the right-of-way by governmental authority. (f)  Signs which contain or are in imitation of an official traffic sign or signal and are not erected pursuant to the governing authority, excepting construction signs and barricades. (g)  Mobile sign visible from any public right-of-way, unless the trailer or vehicle is used in the normal day to day operation of the business owning and operating the mobile sign, in which case said mobile sign vehicle or trailer shall be parked in a designated parking spot to be not visible from the right-of-way, if possible, or as far from the right-of-way as possible. (h)  Snipe sign which is any sign of any material whatsoever that is attached in any way to or placed upon a utility pole, tree, or mailbox situated on public or private property. (i)  Air or gas-filled devices such as balloons or streamers containing a commercial message. (j)  Searchlights. (k)  Any sign attached to a bench or a trash can. (l)  Any sign placed on or in a vehicle advertising that vehicle for sale, lease, or trade that is parked within the City of Avondale Estates for the purpose of selling, leasing, or trading the vehicle from that location. (m)  Any permanent sign constructed of a non-durable material, including but not limited to paper, cardboard or flexible plastic. (n)  Neon signs, except as permitted by section 5-369(b)7. (o)  Human operated signs that display a commercial message. (p)  Any permanent sign constructed of glossy extruded plastic except that any existing approved sign of this type, for an existing business, with a current business license, may be replaced with an exact replica of the approved sign. (q)  Pylon signs. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 5-366. - Prohibited content of signs.     It shall be unlawful for a person to display: (a)  Any expression defined as obscene by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. (b)  Any message, communication, activity, or product prohibited by the laws or regulations of the United States, the State of Georgia, DeKalb County, or the City of Avondale Estates. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 5-367. - Prohibited methods of erection.     No sign shall be constructed, erected, used, operated or maintained: (a)  In any residential district, within ten (10) feet from the back of the sidewalk or within fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the road nearest to the sign where a sidewalk does not exist. (b)  Which is attached to or placed against a building in such a manner as to prevent ingress or egress through any door or window of any building, nor shall any sign obstruct or be attached to a fire escape. (c)  Which is affixed to the fascia of any building listed on the National Register of Historic Places. (d)  Which is attached to the wall of any building listed on the National Register of Historic Places; unless such sign is attached by a method that will avoid negative impacts to the historic building and such method is approved in advance by the city manager or his/her designee. When considering an application to attach a sign to the wall of a historic building, the city manager or designee shall consider the National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior Technical Preservation Service Preservation Brief #25, "The Preservation of Historic Signs" and any applicable section of the City of Avondale Estates Historic Preservation Guidelines. The city manager or designee may also consult with the city's historic preservation commission. Negative impacts that shall be avoided include, without limitation: physical damage to the historic building fabric; covering, obscuring or visually overpowering significant architectural features including windows; excessively shadowing or obstructing neighboring historic buildings; obscuring or disrupting vistas or views which are characteristic of the historic building or district; appearing incompatible with the historic building in matters of scale, materials or design; or any other physical or visual quality that significantly detracts from the integrity of the historic building and/or district. In evaluating proposed signage for its potential negative impacts to a historic building, the city manager or his/her designee shall consider the cumulative visual and aesthetic effects of the proposed signage in combination with all existing signage which is slated to remain on the same building. (e)  No freestanding sign shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the point where the right-of-way lines from two (2) intersecting streets or roads meet. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 15-02, § 4, 3-18-2015) 
Sec. 5-368. - Requirements for all signs. (a)  All signs shall comply with the following provisions: (1)  All sign structures shall be constructed so as to comply with the building code, as amended, unless specifically exempted by this article. Any reference in the building code or its amendments that refers to outdoor advertising displays shall be read as being applicable to all commercial sign structures. (2)  Monument signs shall be no taller than twelve (12) feet in non-residential districts, except as specifically allowed elsewhere in this article, and not taller than three (3) feet in residential districts. The sign height shall be measured in a vertical plane from ground level to the top of the sign. The level of the ground shall not be altered solely to provide additional sign height. (3)  No illuminated sign shall produce more than 2.2 foot candles of light which shall be directed away from adjacent property and the right-of-way. (4)  All signs shall be maintained so as not to constitute a health or safety hazard as defined by the rules and regulations of the DeKalb County Board of Health. (5)  No sign shall be erected which blocks from view any traffic or street sign, signal or public service sign as viewed from the right-of-way. (6)  No series, lines or rows of electric, neon or other lights shall be allowed, unless expressly permitted elsewhere by ordinance. (7)  Any sign containing a commercial message may also contain a non-commercial message. (b)  In addition to general regulations and restrictions applying to all sign classifications, freestanding signs, mounted signs and window identification signs shall comply as follows: (1)  All freestanding signs shall be constructed of masonry, including but not limited to stacked stone, brick, concrete, metal, wood or matte finished plastic. (2)  All mounted signs shall be constructed of wood, metal, or matte finished plastic or close facsimile. (3)  Shopping and office center identification. a.  Areas designated as major shopping or office centers shall be permitted one (1) monument sign being a maximum of twelve (12) feet in height and the total area of each sign face not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet. 1.  This structure shall be a type of sign that will provide space for all businesses in the center. 2.  Individual signs qualifying as wall or fascia signs may be permitted for individual businesses within the center. Square footage will be determined by the following formula: Two (2) square feet multiplied by the number of feet of frontage the store occupies within the center. This may be used up to a maximum of sixty (60) square feet. 3.  Sign letter height may not exceed three (3) feet. 4.  Window signs shall not obscure more than thirty (30) percent of the total area of any window exposed to public view. Temporary writing or graphics applied to the glass window, such as by marker, paint or other methods shall be prohibited unless exempted under section 5-363(f). 5.  Each major shopping/office center in the CBD-1 zoning district shall be permitted one (1) surface mounted office directory sign for each ground floor level building entrance that affords public access to more than one (1) office use. Office directory signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet of sign face. Office directory signs shall not be attached to, block or obscure any window. Office directory signs may identify any or all of the owners, occupants or tenants using that building for an office purpose and the service(s) they offer but shall not display any other advertising. b.  Areas designated as minor shopping or office centers shall be permitted one (1) monument sign being a maximum of twelve (12) feet in height and the total area of each sign face not exceeding eighty (80) square feet. 1.  This structure shall be a type of sign that will provide space for all businesses in the center. 2.  Individual signs qualifying as wall or fascia signs may be permitted for individual businesses within the center. Their square footage will be determined by the formula as prescribed in subsection (b)(3)(a)(2), of this section. 3.  Sign letter height may not exceed three (3) feet. 4.  Window Signs shall not obscure more than thirty (30) percent of the total area of any window exposed to public view. Temporary writing or graphics applied to the glass window, such as by marker, paint or other methods shall be prohibited unless exempted by section 5-363(f). (4)  Commercial identification not within a major or minor shopping or office center. a.  Two (2) signs displaying a commercial message are allowed for each business or office building not located within a major or minor shopping/office center. Each such building is allowed a maximum of one (1) monument sign, except as indicated in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. b.  Commercial signs shall be limited to two (2) square feet of sign face for each linear foot of road frontage not to exceed sixty (60) square feet for each sign face as determined by the street adjacent to where the sign is to be located. c.  On parcels located at the intersection of two (2) roadways, each building will be allowed a sign on each frontage. However, the aggregate sign face square footage shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet for any such parcel. d.  On parcels located in such a manner as to have frontage on two (2) nonintersecting roads, each building will be permitted two (2) signs on each road frontage. However, the aggregate sign face square footage shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet for any such parcel. e.  No lot or parcel shall be allowed more than a combined total of two (2) monument signs, even if more than two (2) buildings are located upon said lot or parcel. f.  If two (2) monument sign structures are constructed on a single parcel or lot there must be fifty (50) feet of distance between each sign structure. g.  Window signs shall not obscure more than thirty (30) percent of the total area of any window exposed to public view. Temporary writing or graphics applied to the glass window, such as by marker, paint or other methods shall be prohibited unless exempted by section [5-]363(f). (5)  Regulation and restrictions applicable to instructional signs. a.  Such signs shall contain only instructional information and shall not be used for the purpose of business name and/or advertisement or contain a commercial message. b.  Signs limited to traffic direction and services shall be limited to one (1) at each vehicular entrance to the property. (c)  Monument signs shall be installed perpendicular to the street adjacent to the property, except that one (1) sign, upon submission and approval of installation, may be used in place of two (2) separate signs on corner lots. Plans for said signs shall be submitted to the code enforcement officer. The edge of every such sign must be at least ten (10) feet from the right-of-way in all authorized zones. (d)  No sign shall be located on any building, fence or other property belonging to another person without written consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this section. (e)  Every sign structure located adjacent or above any walkway, including sidewalks, shall be placed so that the bottom of the sign is at least eight (8) feet above the walkway over which it is erected. Every such sign must be installed within three (3) feet from the face of the wall to which it is attached as measured from the wall to the point of the sign nearest thereto. No such sign shall extend to within one (1) foot of the nearest curb, as measured from the point of the sign nearest thereto. (f)  No wall sign shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet of sign face area. (g)  No projecting sign shall exceed six (6) square feet. (h)  Menu signs shall not exceed one and one-half (1½) square feet. Such signs shall be enclosed within a frame constructed of wood metal or other sturdy material. Such signs shall only be allowed for businesses which are licensed to serve food or drink and no such business shall have more than one (1) menu sign. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 12-02, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 15-02, § 5, 3-18-2015) 
Sec. 5-369. - Signs allowed in zoning districts.     If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically allowed in a zoning district as provided under this section shall be prohibited in that district, except as otherwise provided for under this article. (a)  Residential zoning districts. The following signs are allowed in residential districts. 1.  No signage other than house number, original house designation, street identification number, real estate sign, security identification sign, yard sale sign, or sign containing a non-commercial message shall be allowed on any residential property in the city. No sign with the total area of each sign face greater than six (6) square feet shall be allowed on any residential property in the city. No other signs containing commercial messages shall be allowed on any residential property in the city. 2.  There shall be a limit of one (1) real estate sign per residential lot. It shall be subject to the same size, setback and height provisions governing signs on residential lots. However, a separate sign structure containing literature packets or ancillary information such that pertaining to reduced price, under contract or sold status may be placed on a lot, provided that it otherwise meets the size, height and setback provisions for signs on said lot. Real estate signs and ancillary real estate signs shall be removed within five (5) days of the sale or lease of the property upon which they are situated. 3.  For all property located in a residential district, there shall be a total maximum of twelve (12) square feet of sign face per lot. For projecting or double-faced signs each display face shall not be added together in computing the area of the sign face for that sign. 4.  In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares that the provisions of subsection (a)3. as applied to political or campaign signs is unconstitutional or invalid by judgment or decree, it is the intention of the governing authority that said subsection shall be considered severed from this section as applied to political or campaign signs, but the provisions of subsection (a)3. shall continue to apply to all other signs. 5.  One (1) yard sale, garage sale, or estate sale sign, subject to the size, height, and setback restrictions provided elsewhere for signs on residential lots, may be displayed on the premises where a yard sale is to be conducted beginning five (5) days before the date of the sale. Said signs must be removed when the sale is terminated. The governing authority considers such sales to be a part of the incidental occupation of the residential property and permissible limited commercial activity under this ordinance. (b)  Non-residential zoning districts. The following shall be allowed in all non-residential zoning districts. 1.  Any sign allowed in a residential district. 2.  Permanent signs containing a commercial message with an area of each sign face not larger than the square footage as determined in section 5-368. a.  Monument sign. b.  Canopy sign. c.  Hanging sign. d.  Projecting sign. e.  Fascia sign. f.  Wall sign. g.  Window sign. h.  Menu sign. 3.  Temporary signs conforming to the following restrictions: a.  Temporary on-premises advertising signs, including banners, relating to the initial opening or final closing of a business, provided the area of each sign face shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet and only one (1) sign shall be permitted. Such signs shall be approved by the code enforcement officer for a maximum period of sixty (60) days, after which they shall be removed. b.  Temporary on-premises advertising signs, including banners, related to a sale or markdown of merchandise or services, provided the area of each sign face shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet. Such signs shall be approved by the code enforcement officer for a maximum of fifteen (15) days, and such sign shall be removed upon expiration of the approved time. No business may receive more than four (4) permits in any one (1) calendar year under this subsection. No business may display more than two (2) of these signs at any given time. c.  Temporary on-premises advertising signs, including banners, related to a special event or festival, provided the area of each sign face shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. Such signs shall be approved by the code enforcement officer for a maximum of fifteen (15) days, and such sign shall be removed upon expiration of the approved time. No business may receive more than four (4) permits in any one (1) calendar year under this subsection. No business may display more than two (2) of these signs at any given time. d.  Temporary-local directional signs (T-LDS). i.  Zoning districts. T-LDS shall be allowed in all commercial zoning districts. No T-LDS shall direct traffic to or refer to a sale or event taking place in a residential district, and no T-LDS shall be placed in a residential district. ii.  Such signs shall be approved by the code enforcement officer for a maximum of fifteen (15) days, and such sign shall be removed upon expiration of the approved time. No business may receive more than four (4) permits in any one (1) calendar year under this subsection. No business may display more than four (4) of these signs at any given time. A maximum of one (1) T-LDS per event may be located upon any one (1) lot. It shall be the sign owner's responsibility to remove the sign. iii.  Sign area. T-LDS may be single or double faced. Each face may be up to six (6) square feet. iv.  Height. T-LDS shall not exceed three (3) feet in height as measured from the ground to top of sign. v.  Construction. T-LDS shall be mounted on an independent single or double pole device. T-LDS shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, streetlight poles, utility poles, federal, state or county signs or poles, or other permanent signs or sign structures. T-LDS shall be made of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard or some other durable and waterproof material. No such sign shall be made of paper. vi.  Location. No T-LDS shall be located closer than one (1) foot from the right-of-way. T-LDS must be on private property with permission of the owner. vii.  Identification on sign. Each T-LDS shall be legibly marked with the sign permit and name and telephone number of the sign owner. This information must be written in weatherproof ink or paint upon at least one (1) face of the T-LDS and in letters of at least one-half (½) inch in height. All T-LDS shall display legibly the date and address of the activity and/or event. Any T-LDS that does not contain the above information shall be subject to immediate removal by code enforcement personnel and/or other such remedies provided by this article. 4.  Sidewalk signs will be allowed in commercial districts. One (1) on-premises, non-illuminated sign per business, either A-frame, chalkboard or easel structure, placed on the sidewalk, exterior wall or window sill during business hours and kept inside the business premises during non-business hours. Said sign shall be located in immediate proximity to the entrance of the business and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height nor six (6) square feet per sign face, nor placed in a manner which reduces the clear, continuous sidewalk width to less than five (5) feet. 5.  Any sign containing a commercial message may also contain a non-commercial message. 6.  One (1) real estate sign not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in size. A separate sign structure containing literature packets, or ancillary information such as that pertaining to reduced price or under contract status may be placed on a commercial lot as long as it does not exceed the size and height of the real estate sign. Real estate signs and ancillary real estate signs shall be removed within five (5) days of the sale or lease of the property upon, which they are situated. 7.  Each business within the city shall be permitted to display one (1) neon sign with a sign face area not to exceed four (4) square feet. a.  A neon sign permitted by this section shall not be counted against the maximum sign face area allowed under section 5-368(b) of this article. b.  Any nonconforming neon sign in existence on the date of this amendment shall be allowed to continue as a nonconforming use upon enactment of this section, except that the nonconforming sign shall be subject to the provisions of section 5-371(a)—(e) and section 5-372(d) of this article. (c)  Multifamily zoning districts. The following shall be allowed in all multifamily zoning districts. 1.  Any sign allowed in a residential district. 2.  Permanent monument sign or fascia sign identifying only the name of the development The sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height, if a monument sign, with a sign face area not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. (d)  Planned development zoning districts. The following shall be allowed in all planned development zoning districts. 1.  A master signage plan shall be submitted and approved by the board of mayor and commissioners as required in Article 11, Section 1105 [City of Avondale Estates Zoning Ordinance]. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 5-370. - Flags. (a)  All flags shall be displayed on purpose-built, professionally fabricated flagpoles. In non-residential districts, flagpoles shall not exceed the allowed height provided for a structure or building in the applicable zoning district, or sixty (60) feet, whichever is less. Flagpoles in residential districts shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height or the height of the primary structure on the lot, whichever is less. (b)  The maximum dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height such that the hoist side of the flag shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the vertical height. In addition, the maximum dimensions of any flag shall comply with the following limitations: Flagpole Height Maximum Flag Size (total square feet) Up to 25 feet 24 square feet 25 to 39 feet 40 square feet 40 to 49 feet 60 square feet 50 to 60 feet 96 square feet  (c)  Each lot shall be allowed a maximum of two (2) flagpoles unless a special land use permit or variance is obtained pursuant to the zoning ordinance. (d)  A maximum of two (2) flags shall be allowed per flagpole. (e)  Flags displaying a logo, message, statement or expression relating to commercial interests, and banners not meeting the definition of a flag contained in section 5-362 must conform to all applicable ordinances pertaining to signs. (f)  A vertical flagpole must be set back from the property boundaries a distance which is at least equal to the height of the flagpole. (g)  The flags and flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, and to the extent applicable shall be in compliance with the building code or its amendments as adopted by the governing authority. Flagpoles with broken halyards shall not by used and flags which have torn or frayed shall not be displayed. (h)  On officially designated county, state or federal holidays, there shall be no maximum flag size or number or other limitations of display. (i)  Nothing contained in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict the right to display eligible flags as banners or non-commercial signage as allowed elsewhere in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Avondale Estates. (j)  References to the number of flags and flagpoles in this section and flag dimensions refer to both vertical flagpoles and mast arm flagpoles (for example, staffs extending at an angle from a building). However, the hoist side of flags attached to mast arm flagpoles may be sixty (60) percent of the length of the flagpole. References in this section to flagpole height refer to vertical flagpoles. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 5-371. - Nonconforming signs.     Signs lawfully existing on the effective date of the ordinance, as established in section 5-383, from which this article is derived which do not conform to the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be non-conforming signs and may remain, except as otherwise specifically qualified by this article. (a)  A non-conforming sign shall not be replaced by another non-conforming sign, or enlarged or altered such that the square footage of the sign face is increased. The substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, changeable copy or de-mountable material on non-conforming signs shall be permitted. (b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent keeping in good repair a nonconforming sign. Minor repairs and maintenance of non-conforming signs such as electrical repairs or lettering repair shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of a non-conforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this chapter. No repairs requiring a permit pursuant to section 5-364 shall be allowed except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article. (c)  All nonconforming signs must be in such condition so that they do not constitute a safety hazard as determined by the building code or its amendments as adopted by the governing authority, unless specifically exempted by this article. (d)  Action to bring into compliance any non-conforming sign must be initiated with the City of Avondale Estates within thirty (30) days after a change of ownership or discontinuance of operation of the commercial entity. After a change in ownership, the new owner is responsible for bringing all signage into compliance with this article. In the case of discontinuance of operation of the commercial entity, the previous business owner is responsible for bringing all signage into compliance with this article. (e)  Any fascia sign that is attached to any Historic Landmark building shall be removed within thirty (30) days after a change of ownership of the building or discontinuance of operation of the commercial operation shown on the sign. The governing authority recognizes that fascia signs violate the standards applicable to historic places and detract from the historic and aesthetic nature of such property. (f)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall be grounds for the code enforcement officer to issue notice of violation and proceed with steps to remove the sign in violation as allowed under this article. (g)  To the extent that this section conflicts with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-83 and Ga. Const. Art 3, § 6 Par. 4(a), this section shall be deemed to provide the affected parties the minimum protections provided by O.C.G.A. § 32-6-83 and Ga. Const. Art. 3, § 6, Par. 4(a), as they may be amended. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 5-372. - Removal of signs. (a)  Any sign, except as otherwise exempted, that violates the requirements of this article shall be subject to removal and all other penalties as provided by this article. (b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) for all signs in violation of this article: (1)  The code enforcement officer shall send written notice of the violation by regular mail to the contact person listed on the sign permit application or to the property owner on which the sign structure is located if no sign permit application has been completed for the sign in violation. (2)  The notice shall indicate that the contact person or property owner shall have ten (10) days to appeal the decision of the code enforcement officer to remove the sign from the date of mailing of the written notice. (3)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the code enforcement officer with regard to removal of a sign may appeal the decision to the zoning board of appeals for a hearing regarding the violation. At the hearing the appellant and the city shall be allowed to present evidence pursuant to the rules for hearings adopted by the zoning board of appeals. The board of appeals may reverse the decision of the code enforcement officer by the concurring vote of three (3) of its members. (4)  Failure to appeal the notice of violation within ten (10) days of mailing of the notice of violation shall be deemed an admission of the violation and the sign shall be subject to removal. (c)  The code enforcement officer may remove or direct the removal of any sign in violation of this article, without giving notice to any party, if such sign: (1)  Is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or (2)  Poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public; or (3)  The sign does not have a permit and is in violation of this article. (d)  Any commercial sign not currently in compliance with this article must be brought into compliance within thirty (30) days after a change of ownership or discontinuance of operation of the commercial entity. After a change in ownership, the new owner is responsible for bringing all signage into compliance with this article. In the case of discontinuance of operation of the commercial entity, the previous business owner is responsible for bringing all signage into compliance with this article. (e)  Any fascia sign that is attached to any historic landmark building shall be removed within thirty (30) days after a change of ownership of the building or discontinuance of operation of the commercial operation shown on the sign. The governing authority recognizes that fascia signs violate the standards applicable to historic places and detract from the historic and aesthetic nature of such property. (f)  Lawful removal of any sign in violation of this ordinance, as provided in this article, shall be without liability to the governing authority, its officers, agents, servants, and employees. The permit holder shall be responsible for the costs of removal. If there is no permit holder, then the sign owner shall be responsible. If there is no permit holder and the sign owner cannot be found, then costs of removal shall be the responsibility of the property owner where the sign structure was located. (g)  The city clerk or his/her designee shall certify the amount for the cost of removal to the city attorney if the cost of removal is not paid by one of the responsible parties. (h)  The city is authorized to take such action as allowed under law to collect the cost of removal. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 12-02, § 3, 4-16-2012) 
Sec. 5-373. - Sign permit—Application. (a)  The sign owner or the sign owner's agent shall file applications for sign permits with city staff upon forms furnished by the governing authority. City staff shall forward the application through the appropriate course of review as established by the City Code of Ordinances. Such application shall describe and set forth the following: (1)  The type of sign structure to be constructed showing that it satisfies the requirements of the building code, as amended, unless specifically exempted by this article. Any reference in the building code or its amendments that refers to outdoor advertising displays shall be read as being applicable to all sign structures to be permitted. (2)  Engineering drawings, drawn to a scale, of the sign structure signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed and registered in the State of Georgia when the sign permit requested is for a new mounted sign or freestanding sign. A sign permit for a wall sign, window sign or menu sign is required to be drawn to scale. (3)  The construction cost of the sign. (4)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located, a diagram of the proposed location of the sign on the property, and the size of the property on which the sign structure is to be located. (5)  The square footage of each sign face. (6)  The number of sign faces. (7)  The names and addresses of the owners of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. (8)  Written consent of the owner of the real property, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement and maintenance of subject sign. (9)  Name, address, and phone number of the sign contractor. (10)  Signed agreement by the applicant to maintain the sign in a safe condition and to indemnify the City of Avondale Estates for any injury to person or property which might be caused by the sign for which a permit is sought. (11)  Name, address, and phone number of a contact person in case of emergency. (12)  The distance from the proposed sign structure to the closest adjacent sign structure. (13)  Material samples. (b)  The applicant for a sign permit must provide proof that all other required permits for the construction of the sign have been obtained at the time that the sign permit application is made. (c)  Within fifteen (15) days of change of ownership of a sign, a sign owner notification notice must be filed with the code enforcement officer. Such notification notice form shall be available from the governing authority. (d)  The governing authority shall rely upon the contact person provided in the sign application for purposes of notice to the permit holder concerning the sign. (e)  Failure to obtain a sign permit as required shall be grounds for removal of the sign pursuant to this article. (f)  Any sign permit application that is incomplete, fails to comply with the provisions of this article, or contains false statements shall be denied. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 5-374. - Same—Fees.     No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with and the required fee amount has been paid to the city clerk as provided in the signage fee schedule available at city hall. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 12-02, § 4, 4-16-2012) 
Sec. 5-375. - Same—Application review process. (a)  Permanent signs. The city will process all permanent sign permit applications within forty-five (45) calendar days of the actual receipt of a completed application and sign permit fee. Applications will be administratively reviewed and approved or denied by the city manager or his designee. If the city manager determines that the application does not meet all requirements of Article IX, Signs and Advertising Structures and the Zoning Ordinance, the city manager or his designee shall notify the applicant of the specific provisions that have not been met. The city manager or his designee shall give notice to the applicant of the decision to approve or deny the application by hand delivery or by mailing a notice to the address on the sign permit application on or before the 45th calendar day after receipt of the completed application for a permanent sign. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the city manager fails to act within forty-five (45) days, the sign permit shall be deemed to have been granted. (b)  Temporary signs. The city manager will process all temporary sign permit applications within ten (10) calendar days of the actual receipt of a completed application and sign permit fee. Applications will be administratively reviewed and approved or denied by the city manager or his designee. If the city manager determines that the application does not meet all requirements of Article IX, Signs and Advertising Structures and the Zoning Ordinance, the city manager or his designee shall notify the applicant of the specific provisions that have not been met. The city manager or his designee shall give notice to the applicant of the decision to approve or deny the application by hand delivery or by mailing a notice to the address on the sign permit application on or before the 10th calendar day after receipt of the completed application for a permanent sign. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the city manager fails to act within ten (10) days, the sign permit shall be deemed to have been granted. (c)  When a permit is sought to erect a sign within the historic district, city staff will review the application to ensure that it complies with the design guidelines promulgated by the city's architectural review board. If the application complies with the design guidelines and all other applicable regulations a permit will be issued. If staff determines that the application does not comply with the design guidelines, staff will not issue a permit but will place the application on the agenda for the next meeting of the historic preservation commission that allows for proper notice. At such meeting, the historic preservation commission may issue a certificate of appropriateness to allow the sign to be permitted if it complies with all other applicable regulations. (d)  Waiver of application fee for re-submittal. When the city manager denies a sign permit application because it does not conform with the requirements of the City Code, the city manager may, at his discretion, waive the application fee for re-submittal of an application for a similar sign at the same location that does comply with the City Code. (e)  Appeal. An applicant may appeal any denied sign application by petition to the architectural review board pursuant to Code subsection 5-381(c). (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 12-02, §§ 5, 6, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 15-02, § 6, 3-18-2015) 
Sec. 5-376. - Same—Revocation.     The code enforcement officer is authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued under this article upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with any provision of this article. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 5-377. - Inspection.     A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and inspection requested within six (6) months after the date of issuance. (a)  The holder of the sign permit shall be responsible for contacting the code enforcement officer to arrange inspection of the sign within the six-month period. (b)  The inspection shall be conducted by the code enforcement officer or his/her designee pursuant to the provisions of the building code or its amendments as adopted by the governing authority and other applicable ordinances. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
Secs. 5-378—5-380. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-381. - Administration; enforcement; remedies; appeals. (a)  Enforcement and administration. This article shall be administered by the city manager and enforced by the code enforcement officer, or any other personnel authorized by the governing authority. (b)  Remedies. (1)  The code enforcement officer, or other personnel authorized by the governing authority, is authorized to issue a citation for violation of this article and/or to remove the sign pursuant to section 5-372, and/or proceed with other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the violation of this ordinance. a.  Any citation issued for violation of this ordinance shall be taken to the municipal court of the City of Avondale Estates and prosecuted as any other criminal citation within the municipal court. b.  The maximum punishment imposed for a violation of this article shall not exceed a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or six (6) months imprisonment or both. c.  The governing authority may elect to file a suit for injunctive relief in the Superior Court of DeKalb County to force compliance with the city sign ordinance. (2)  Any citation, injunction, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the violation of this article may be taken against the owner or erector of the sign, the owner of the property on which the sign is located, and/or any other person or entity that has an ownership interest in the sign or property. (3)  Each day such violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (4)  All remedies and penalties specified in this article are cumulative. (c)  Appeals. (1)  An aggrieved party whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal such decision to the architectural review board by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager within ten (10) business days of the decision appealed from. (2)  Such appeal shall be considered by the architectural review board at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided that such notice of appeal is received a minimum of two (2) business days prior to the meeting. In the event the notice of appeal is received less than two (2) business days prior to the next meeting of the architectural review board, the appeal shall be considered within thirty-five (35) days after receipt by the city manager of the written notice of appeal. (3)  City staff shall present evidence before the architectural review board supporting the denial of the permit application or revocation of the sign permit at the hearing. The appellant may also present evidence before the architectural review board at the hearing. If no hearing concerning the appeal is held within thirty-five (35) days of receipt by the city manager of written notice of appeal, the appeal shall be deemed granted. (4)  The appeal hearing shall be conducted according to rules and procedures adopted by the architectural review board for public hearings. The architectural review board shall determine a ruling on the appeal within ten (10) business days of the appeal hearing and send written notice to the appellant of the architectural review board's decision. If no decision is reached within ten (10) business days of the hearing, the appeal shall be deemed granted. (5)  In the event an individual whose permit has been denied or whose sign permit has been revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the architectural review board, that individual may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. Writ of certiorari shall be the exclusive remedy for any party aggrieved by the appeal decision of the architectural review board. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 12-02, § 7, 4-16-2012) 
Sec. 5-382. - Severability and amendments. (a)  It is hereby declared to the be the intention of the governing authority that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of the sign ordinance are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph shall be struck and the remaining, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections shall be effective as if the unconstitutional or invalid portion had not existed. (b)  If any provision of this article conflicts with any other provision of this article, any provision of the building code or its amendments as adopted by the governing authority, any other applicable ordinance, statute, or law, the provision that contains the more stringent regulation shall be enforced. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 5-383. - Effective date of this article.     The effective date of this article shall be immediately upon passage by the governing authority. All ordinances and parts of ordinances concerning signs in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. (Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
DIVISION 2. - COVINGTON HIGHWAY SIGN OVERLAY DISTRICT 
Sec. 5-384. - Definitions.     When terms defined by section 5-362 of this Code of Ordinances are used in this division, they shall have the meaning as defined by section 5-362.     As used in this division, the term "Sign Measurement" shall mean the total area within a continuous perimeter surrounding the highest point, lowest point, leftmost point, and rightmost point of a sign. The continuous perimeter shall encompass all aspects of the sign, including the writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed, as illustrated in Diagram 1. Diagram 1: Sign Measurement(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 5-385. - Establishment of Covington Highway Sign Overlay District.     The Covington Highway Sign Overlay District is hereby established and consists of those parcels or lots that are located within the General Commercial (GC) zoning district of the city, as indicated on the Official Zoning Map, as amended, and have frontage on Covington Highway, also known as U.S. Highway 278 and Georgia State Route 12. (Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 5-386. - Construction with Division 1 of the Sign Ordinance.     The provisions of Division 1 of Article IX, Chapter 5 of the Code of Ordinances (the Sign Ordinance of general applicability) shall continue to apply to properties within the Covington Highway Sign Overlay District, except that, wherever the provisions of Division 1 and this Division 2 are in conflict, the more liberal or less restrictive provision shall apply within the Covington Highway Sign Overlay District. (Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 5-387. - Architectural design guideline review.     The architectural review board design guidelines shall be applied to all applications for sign permits pursuant to section 5-375 of this Code of Ordinances. Said design guidelines are on file with the city clerk and available for public inspection. (Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 5-388. - Covington Highway Sign Overlay District regulations.     Properties within the Covington Highway Sign Overlay District shall be permitted to erect and display signs in accordance with the following: (1)  One (1) monument sign per road frontage, with each such sign not to exceed twenty (20) feet in height and not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet of sign measurement. (2)  An unlimited number of wall signs and mounted signs may be displayed on a building within the Covington Highway Sign Overlay District. However, the aggregate total sign measurement for all wall and mounted signs on a given building, including existing signage to be retained and the proposed signage, shall not exceed the number of square feet equal to the number of linear feet of building frontage visible from a public right-of-way. Regardless of the size of the building, no building within the Covington Highway Sign Overlay District may display more than three hundred (300) square feet of wall signs and mounted signs as measured in aggregate total sign measurement. No individual sign may exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet of sign measurement. (3)  No individual letter on any sign may exceed three (3) feet in height. (Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-13-2010) 
Secs. 5-389—5-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION[12] Footnotes: --- (12) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-05, § 1—3, adopted Oct. 22, 2018, repealed the former Art. X, §§ 5-406—5-417, and enacted a new Art. X as set out herein. The former Art. X pertained to tree protection and preservation and derived from Ord. No. 861, § 1(5-180—5-190), (app. A), adopted Jan. 17, 1994. 
DIVISION 1. - TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION IN SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Sec. 5-401. - Purpose and intent of this division. (a)  Trees are declared to be beneficial public resources, deterring soil erosion, increasing air purification, aiding in abatement of noise, glare, and heat, enhancing property values, beautifying residential property, providing shelter for birds and wildlife, and contributing to the general health, safety, and well-being of the community and its citizens. The existing tree canopy is also a hallmark of the residential areas of Avondale Estates, contributing to the city's sense of place and identity. (b)  The purpose and intent of this division is to prevent the loss of the city's existing healthy tree canopy, lessen the impact of tree removal, educate citizens and property owners on the value and methods of tree protection, and provide recourse to the city and its citizens for the unauthorized removal of healthy specimen trees in the residential areas of the city. (c)  For the above reasons, it shall be unlawful to cut down, damage, poison or in any manner destroy or cause to be destroyed any tree covered by this division, except in accordance with the provisions of this division. (Ord. No. 18-05, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2018) 
Sec. 5-402. - Applicability of this division. (a)  This division applies only to private property in the City of Avondale Estates within the following zoning districts of the city: (1)  R-12 Low density single family detached residential. (2)  R-24 Very low density single family detached residential. (b)  Exemptions. (1)  Property in zoning districts not zoned R-12 or R-24. (2)  Removal of trees for any purpose that does not require a land disturbance permit in accordance with section 20-304 of the City Code or a building permit in accordance with Section 1403 of the Zoning Ordinance. (3)  Projects for which a land disturbance permit and building permit were issued prior to the effective date of this division. (4)  The routine or seasonal pruning or transplanting of trees. (5)  In an emergency situation, such as a severe storm or fire, the city manager, a public safety officer, or utility company representative may remove, or authorize removal of trees that pose an imminent danger to life, property, or safe access/egress to or from public streets or private property. (6)  Interior renovations that do not involve land disturbance and do not require a permit in accordance with section 20-304 of the City Code. (Ord. No. 18-05, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2018) 
Sec. 5-403. - Definitions.     Arborist means a professional qualified as a certified arborist in the State of Georgia.     Boundary tree means a tree growing on a property boundary line between two (2) lots resulting in joint ownership by the adjacent property owners when the trunk exists on each property, or a tree that has twenty (20) percent or more of its critical root zone extending across a property boundary and into an adjacent property.     City Manager means the city manager of the City of Avondale Estates, or his/her designee.     City tree official means the person designated by the City of Avondale Estates to administer this division of the City Code.     Critical root zone (CRZ) means the area beneath a tree represented by a circle centered on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to the number of inches of the trunk diameter (DBH). For example, the CRZ of a tree that has a trunk diameter of twenty (20) inches (DBH) is twenty (20) feet.     Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) means the diameter of a tree's trunk measured between four (4) to four and one-half (4.5) feet above grade for a single-trunked tree that is not forked below four and one-half (4.5) feet; measured at the smallest diameter of the trunk below a fork located below four and one-half (4.5) feet; the diameter of the largest stem of a multi-stemmed tree as described above for non-forked and forked trunks.     Dead or diseased tree means a tree that has certain infestation or defects so that it would not be classified as a healthy tree. (See definition of healthy tree, below).     Hardwood tree, for purposes of this division, means a tree that is not a pine tree.     Healthy tree means a tree that could be classified as being in fair or better condition with a life expectancy of at least fifteen (15) years; a relatively sound and solid trunk without extensive decay or hollow; less than twenty (20) percent radial trunk dieback; no more than one (1) major and several minor dead limbs; and no major insect or pathological problems.     Impervious surface means a surface that is composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, decks, tennis courts, swimming pools and similar structures, compacted gravel and any concrete or asphalt surface.     Land-disturbing activity means any activity that results in land or vegetation change including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating.     Overlapping tree(s) means one (1) or more trees that are part of a stand of trees growing close enough that their tree canopies join or overlap.     Net site area means the total area of the site, according to the approved building permit plans, after excluding street rights-of-way, areas permanently covered by water, and detention ponds.     New tree or newly planted tree means a tree being at least three (3) inches (DBH) and proposed to be planted on a property in order to meet the standards of section 5-404 of this division. Newly planted trees must be of a species listed in section 5-404(b)(5) of this division and meet the standards of section 5-404(c).     Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity, other than the City of Avondale Estates, including the plural as well as singular, including utility companies, all tree removal companies, and anyone removing trees on behalf of others.     Pine tree means a cone-bearing tree with evergreen needle leaves of genus pinus, including, but not limited to pine, juniper, and cedar species.     Project means the building and/or site work activity on a site that requires a land disturbance permit and a building permit and ultimately requires a certificate of occupancy to use the improved site.     Public tree means a publicly-owned tree, including trees growing within the right-of-way or other City property.     Specimen tree means a canopy hardwood tree, other than a pine tree, thirty (30) inches or more (DBH), a pine tree thirty-six (36) inches or more in diameter (DBH), or a dogwood or redbud tree that is ten (10) inches or more (DBH). In order to be classed a specimen, the tree must also be in fair or better condition.     Tree means a self-supporting, perennial woody plant with a diameter of at least two (2) inches (DBH) and that would grow to be at least fifteen (15) feet tall at maturity.     Tree canopy means the area of ground within the critical root zone (CRZ) of a tree at its maturity. For newly planted trees refer to section 5-404(c)(7) for a listing of tree canopy for permitted species of trees.     Tree canopy coverage means the area of ground within the critical root zone (CRZ) of a tree or the combined CRZ's of a stand of trees and measured to determine fulfillment of section 5-404(a) of this division. For purposes of this division, refer to section 5-404(b) for a more detailed description of how tree canopy coverage is measured.     Tree removal permit means a permit issued by the City of Avondale Estates indicating a property owner has complied with the requirements of this division as they existed at the time that a complete tree permit application with fee was received by the City of Avondale Estates. (Ord. No. 18-05, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2018) 
Sec. 5-404. - Standards of tree preservation and replacement. (a)  Minimum required canopy coverage. A property where a project is undertaken is required to achieve a minimum of forty (40) percent coverage of the subject property by healthy, mature trees after construction is complete. (b)  Measurement of tree canopy. The calculation of percentage of tree canopy coverage is based on the ratio of A/B x 100, where "A" is the area of healthy tree canopy provided by existing and new trees, and "B" is the net site area of the property where a project is undertaken. The term "B", the net site area of the subject property, is the total area of the site, according to the approved building permit plans, after excluding street rights-of-way, areas permanently covered by water, and detention ponds. The calculation of "A" is based on the sum of existing and proposed new trees, using the following methods for measurement: (1)  Existing trees. The tree canopy of existing trees is measured from a tree survey as provided in section 5-405(c). The existing tree canopy is the amount of ground within the critical root zone (CRZ) of existing healthy trees on a property that is the site of a project. Dead or diseased trees cannot be included in the tree canopy measurement. (2)  Overlapping trees. If the distance between two (2) trees is less than the sum of the CRZ's of the two (2) trees, then these are overlapping trees. The tree canopy of existing overlapping trees is determined from a drawing showing the outer perimeter of the CRZs of the group of overlapping trees within the subject property. An estimate of the outer perimeter of the CRZ may be made using grid paper or other method acceptable to the city tree official. See example below: EXAMPLE OF CANOPY CALCULATION FOR 3 OVERLAPPING TREES (3)  Boundary trees. The portion of the critical root zone of healthy boundary trees that is within the property where a project is undertaken is included in the measurement of tree canopy on the subject property. (4)  Public trees. The portion of the tree canopy of public trees that is within the property where a project is undertaken is included in the measurement of tree canopy on the subject property. (5)  New trees. The tree canopy of a new tree is based on the expected critical root zone of a mature tree of a certain species, without consideration of the amount of overlap. See section 5-404(c)(7) for the canopy coverage value of permitted species of trees. In order to be included in the forty (40) percent canopy coverage, a new tree must meet all the standards provided in section 5-404(c). (6)  Trees impacted by land disturbance. If land-disturbing activity in connection with a project impacts more than twenty (20) percent of a tree's critical root zone, that tree's canopy cannot be included in the tree canopy calculations above. (c)  New trees. Newly planted trees must meet the following standards in order to be included in the calculation of tree canopy coverage. (1)  Minimum 3-inch (DBH) at time of planting. (2)  Meet or exceed the standards of ANSI Z60.1 Standards for Nursery Stock. (3)  Meet or exceed minimum tree spacing standards of section 5-404(c)(8). (4)  Conform to planting methods shown in City of Avondale Administrative Guidelines and Standard Details for the Tree Preservation Ordinance, current ANSI A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations, and ANSI Z133 Safety Standards. (5)  Be a permitted tree species identified by the city on a list or approved in writing by the city tree official. (6)  A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of newly planted trees shall be hardwood species. (7)  Credit towards meeting tree canopy coverage shall be determined based on the species of tree, according to a list adopted by resolution of the board of mayor and commissioners and maintained at city hall. a.  Greater canopy trees. Newly planted trees of the greater canopy species provide one thousand nine hundred (1,900) square feet of tree canopy coverage credit. b.  Lesser canopy trees. Newly planted trees of the lesser canopy species provide one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of tree canopy coverage credit. (8)  Minimum tree spacing requirements. a.  In order to receive credit for tree canopy coverage, newly planted trees shall meet the following spacing standards: i.  Minimum spacing (centerline to centerline) of newly planted greater canopy tree from nearest existing or newly planted tree: Forty (40) feet. ii.  Minimum spacing (centerline to centerline) of newly planted lesser canopy tree from nearest existing or newly planted tree: Twenty (20) feet. iii.  Minimum set back measured from centerline of newly planted tree to nearest point of buildings, structures, above ground utilities, and easements for underground utilities: Ten (10) feet. iv.  Minimum set back measured from centerline of newly planted tree to nearest edge of paved or other impervious surfaces: Five (5) ft. v.  Minimum area of pervious surface surrounding each newly planted tree: Three hundred sixty (360) square feet. b.  When the city tree official determines that a project cannot meet these standards to achieve a minimum forty (40) percent tree canopy coverage as provided in section 5-404(a), the project shall comply through the property owner making a contribution to the City of Avondale Estates Tree Bank, as provided in section 5-406(a). (d)  Critical root zone protection. (1)  In order to prevent harm or damage of trees during development activity, temporary tree protection fencing shall be installed during construction. Tree protection fencing shall surround the critical root zones of existing trees that are outside the limits of approved land disturbance. (2)  In addition, placement of toxic substances, solvents, building material, construction machinery or temporary soil deposits shall be prohibited within the critical root zones of trees that are to remain on the property after construction. (3)  Excavation, trenching for utilities or drainage, trenching for silt fence, parking, material storage or other construction activities are prohibited within the critical root zones of trees that are to remain on the property after construction. The maximum encroachment of such activities shall be twenty (20) percent of the critical root zone (CRZ). (4)  The following activities would not violate this sub-section (d): a.  Removal and replacement of driveway or sidewalk pavement within the same footprint, provided that no additional excavation is permitted. b.  Construction of structures over existing foundations. c.  Installation of permanent fences, where posts are spaced at least six (6) feet apart. d.  Use of staked hay bales or compost filter socks for erosion control during construction. e.  Jack-and-bore utility construction. (e)  Specimen tree recompense. (1)  Projects shall not result in the loss, nor removal, of a specimen tree located outside the approved land disturbance area. Loss or removal of a public tree or boundary tree that is a specimen is included in this prohibition. (2)  Unauthorized loss or removal of a specimen tree resulting from development activity in connection with a project shall require the property owner to pay the following amounts to the City of Avondale Estates Tree Bank prior to approval of a certificate of occupancy for the project: a.  One hundred dollars ($100.00), plus thirty dollars ($30.00) per diameter inch (DBH) per specimen pine tree. b.  One hundred dollars ($100.00), plus sixty dollars ($60.00) per diameter inch (DBH) per specimen tree that is not a pine tree. (3)  Land disturbance that encroaches on more than twenty (20) percent of the critical root zone of a specimen tree shall be considered loss of the tree and subject the owner to the penalty provided in paragraph (2), above. (f)  Tree maintenance requirements. Applicants for a tree removal permit shall sign a tree maintenance agreement provided by the City of Avondale Estates as evidence that they agree to comply with the following tree maintenance requirements: (1)  All newly planted trees shall be maintained in accordance with current ANSI A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations, ANSI Z133 Safety Standards. (2)  Planted trees shall be maintained in a healthy state throughout a two-year establishment period. Maintenance shall include at a minimum, watering, mulching, and pruning. (3)  If a tree that is part of an approved plan subject to a tree preservation and replacement plan dies or becomes diseased within two (2) years of approval of the certificate of occupancy, the city tree official may notify the owner, and the owner shall replace the tree with an approved tree within thirty (30) days of receiving the notice. (Ord. No. 18-05, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2018) 
Sec. 5-405. - Administration of this division. (a)  When a tree removal permit is required. (1)  A tree removal permit is required in addition to other required permits, such as land disturbance or building permits, for any component part of a project. (2)  Applications for a tree removal permit shall be submitted to the city tree official using forms and fees established from time to time by the board of mayor and commissioners. (3)  Each application for a tree removal permit shall include a tree survey, a tree preservation and replacement plan and other appropriate documentation established by the city tree official. (4)  No land disturbance, demolition, or other construction activity may occur on the property prior to review and approval of the tree preservation and replacement plan and posting of the tree removal permit on the property. (5)  The tree removal permit shall have the same terms of expiration and renewal as the associated building permit. (b)  Display of permit. Before any work has commenced, but no later than forty-eight (48) hours after permit issuance, the tree removal permit shall be posted on the property along with the land disturbance permit or building permit in a location that is plainly visible from the adjacent street. On a corner lot, the permit shall be posted on the street opposite the front yard of the property. The tree removal permit shall remain posted until a certificate of occupancy is granted to the applicant. (c)  Tree survey. An application for a tree removal permit shall be accompanied by a tree survey of the subject property. When proposed construction requires land disturbance of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of the subject property, the tree survey shall be prepared by a professional arborist or registered landscape architect on an accurately scaled site plan drawing that contains a current and accurate survey data prepared by a registered land surveyor. The tree survey shall indicate the following information: (1)  Surveyed property boundaries, including any proposed lot subdivision or lot combination that is part of the development plan. (2)  Location and areal extent of surface water, and detention ponds. (3)  Location of required zoning buffers and stream buffers, if any on the subject property. (4)  Calculation of net site area of the property, in accordance with Section 5-404(b). (5)  Areas of proposed land disturbance shown graphically on the tree survey drawing. (6)  Accurate location and dimensions of existing and proposed structures, buildings, driveways, parking lots and other impervious surfaces. (7)  Approximate location of each existing tree that is larger than two (2) inches (DBH) with a description of the size and species of each such tree. Dead and diseased trees should be noted as such. Include boundary trees and public trees if a portion of the canopy area lies over the subject property. Note location of specimen trees. (8)  Tree canopy coverage area of all existing trees, including public trees and boundary trees, if applicable, shown graphically with an estimate of the land area of tree canopy coverage on the subject property. See section 5-404(b) for methods of measuring tree canopy for existing trees. (9)  Percentage of tree canopy coverage of the existing property, consistent with section 5-404(b) of this division. (d)  Tree preservation and replacement plan. A complete application for a tree removal permit shall include a scaled drawing that represents a tree preservation and replacement plan for the subject property. When proposed construction requires land disturbance of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of the subject property, the tree preservation and replacement plan shall be prepared by a professional arborist or registered landscape architect on an accurately scaled site plan drawing that contains current and accurate survey data prepared by a registered land surveyor. The tree preservation and replacement plan shall indicate the following information: (1)  All information provided on the tree survey. (2)  Location, species and diameter (DBH) of trees that are intended to be removed. (3)  Critical root zone of any trees where the CRZ falls within the area of proposed land disturbance and a calculation of the extent of encroachment of land disturbance within the CRZ. (4)  Methods of tree protection for trees to be preserved on the property in accordance with section 5-404(d). (5)  Location, species, diameter (DBH), spacing and setback of each proposed new tree in accordance with section 5-404(c). (6)  Graphic depiction and calculation of tree canopy coverage area after construction is completed in accordance with section 5-404(b). (7)  Calculation of tree canopy coverage area of trees to remain on the site along with any proposed new trees, including public trees and boundary trees, if applicable, shown graphically on the tree preservation and replacement plan. (8)  Percentage of tree canopy coverage of the existing property, consistent with section 5-404(b) of this division. (9)  Tree planting methods in accordance with section 5-404(c)(4). (10)  Tree maintenance methods in accordance with section 5-404(f). (11)  Proposed contribution to City of Avondale Tree Bank, if any, with calculations of how the amount of contribution was determined. See section 5-404(a) for details. See also section 5-406, Compliance. (e)  Plan review and approval. (1)  The city tree official shall review the tree removal permit, tree survey, tree preservation and replacement plan, and related documentation in order to ensure consistency of these application documents with the building permit application, standards and requirements of this division, and other City ordinances and regulations. (2)  In this review, the city tree official may consult with the City of Avondale Tree Board, landscape architects, foresters, arborists, and others as he/she may deem appropriate. (3)  The city tree official may suggest alternative site plans to the applicant that would minimize the loss of trees and may disapprove a proposed site plan that fails to take adequate care to preserve existing healthy specimen trees, including boundary trees and public trees. (4)  Following review, the city tree official shall approve or disapprove the tree removal permit application and related documentation and notify the applicant of the status of the submitted application. (5)  If the permit is substantially compliant with only minor exceptions, the city tree official may approve the permit conditionally, subject to incorporation of comments noted and provided to the applicant. (6)  If the tree removal plan is approved, the city tree official may issue the permit along with any related soil erosion control plans, stormwater management plans, and land disturbance permits to allow site development activity to commence, pending review and approval of the building permit. (7)  If the tree removal permit is disapproved, the city tree official shall provide review comments to the applicant, noting the reasons for disapproval. If the plans were disapproved, the applicant may resubmit with a revised permit application and documentation that addresses all comments, and the city tree official shall repeat the plan review process until the plan satisfies paragraph (1) of this sub-section. (f)  Inspections and enforcement. (1)  An application for a tree removal permit is deemed to constitute consent from the applicant to allow the city tree official to enter the subject property to conduct inspections before, during, and after permitting and construction. (2)  At a minimum, the city tree official shall inspect the property prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy in order to ensure that the constructed project fully complies with this division and other city permitting requirements. (3)  When the city tree official determines that the completed project complies with this division he/she shall provide written notice to the applicant. (4)  If the city tree official finds that the project does not meet the requirements of this division he/she shall withhold approval of the certificate of occupancy and notify the applicant of the deficiencies. (g)  Administrative guidelines and standard details. The installation and protection of trees shall be in accordance with the "City of Avondale Administrative Guidelines and Standard Details for the Tree Preservation Ordinance" that are available during regular office hours of city hall and made part of this division by reference. (Ord. No. 18-05, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2018) 
Sec. 5-406. - Compliance. (a)  Alternative compliance and tree bank fund. (1)  Applicants who cannot meet the requirement of section 5-404(a) tree canopy coverage on a residential property that is the site of a project shall comply through contributions to the City of Avondale Estates Tree Bank, as provided in section 5-406(a)(2) and section 5-406(a)(3). (2)  The amount of such contributions shall be adequate to pay the average cost of installation and maintenance of new trees of a size and species comparable to those of trees that were not adequately planted on a property that is the site of a project in accordance with the standards of section 5-404(c) of this division. The appropriate cost shall be determined by the city based on a published schedule of installation and maintenance costs (labor and materials) for permitted trees that shall be updated from time to time by the city tree official and provided to applicants upon request. Maintenance costs shall be based on the average cost of maintenance of a newly planted tree for a two-year period using the standards of section 5-404(f) of this division. (3)  There is hereby established a tree bank fund to be maintained by the city. Such fund shall be used solely for the purchase, placement and care of trees in the City of Avondale Estates and for studies, inventories, plans and educational efforts related to the protection and expansion of the tree canopy and the related benefits to the city. (4)  The city shall be responsible for selecting the size, species and location of trees purchased with tree bank funds. Such trees shall be planted on property within the city that is under the control of the city or another governmental entity. The precise timing and location of plantings shall be determined at the discretion of the city manager. (b)  Variance from the provisions of this division shall not be available pursuant to Section 1610 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Avondale Estates. (c)  Appeals. (1)  Any person adversely affected by a final decision of the city tree official in the administration of this division may appeal such decision to the board of appeals. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice thereof with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the appellant receives a decision of the city tree official. Each appeal shall be accompanied by the fee established for appeals to said board under Article 16 of the City's Zoning Ordinance, and shall be conducted pursuant to the rules and procedures for such appeals. (2)  If the appellant or the city manager is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of appeals, such decision may be appealed to DeKalb County Superior Court by writ of certiorari. In such event, no permit shall issue pursuant to this division until such appeal is finally resolved. (d)  Violations and penalties. Certificate of occupancy will be withheld for any project that does not comply with this division. In addition, any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in municipal court, shall be subject to the penalties as provided in this division. When this division does not specify a penalty, the penalty upon conviction shall be imposed pursuant to section 1-8 of the City Code. In addition, such person may be enjoined from continuing the violation. Each tree cut, damaged or poisoned shall constitute a separate offense. (e)  Fees. The fee schedule to review applications for a tree removal permit shall be established by a resolution of the board of mayor and commissioners maintained at city hall. (Ord. No. 18-05, § 2(Att.), 10-22-2018) 
Sec. 5-407—5-409. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION IN NON-SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Sec. 5-410. - Purpose and intent of this division. (a)  Trees are declared to be beneficial public resources, deterring soil erosion, increasing air purification, aiding in abatement of noise, glare, and heat, enhancing property values, beautifying residential and commercial property, providing shelter for birds and wildlife, and contributing to the general health, safety, and well-being of the community and its citizens. (b)  The purpose and intent of this division is to prevent the loss of the City's existing healthy tree canopy, lessen the impact of tree removal, educate citizens and property owners on the value and methods of tree protection, and provide recourse to the city and its citizens for the unauthorized removal of healthy tree canopy within the non-residential areas of the city. (c)  The downtown master plan sets forth a unique pedestrian-oriented town center with tree-lined streets, pocket parks and plazas. Therefore, this division places priority on maintaining the existing healthy tree canopy in the city's commercial areas and establishing a new extensive network of tree canopy. (d)  For the above reasons, it shall be unlawful to cut down, damage, poison or in any manner destroy or cause to be destroyed any tree covered by this division, except in accordance with the provisions of this division. (Ord. No. 18-05, § 3(Att.), 10-22-2018) 
Sec. 5-411. - Applicability of this division. (a)  This division applies to all property in the City of Avondale Estates that is not within the following zoning districts of the city: (1)  R-12 Low density single family detached residential. (2)  R-24 Very low density single family detached residential. (b)  Exemptions. (1)  Property in zoning districts zoned R-12 or R-24. (2)  Removal of trees for any purpose that does not require a land disturbance permit required in section 20-304. (3)  Projects for which a valid land disturbance permit was issued prior to the effective date of this division. (4)  The routine or seasonal pruning or transplanting of trees. (5)  In an emergency situation, such as a severe storm or fire, the City Manager, a public safety officer, or utility company representative may remove, or authorize removal of trees that pose an imminent danger to life, property, or safe access/egress to or from public streets or private property. (Ord. No. 18-05, § 3(Att.), 10-22-2018) 
Sec. 5-412. - Definitions.     Arborist means a professional qualified as a certified arborist in the State of Georgia.     Boundary tree means a tree growing on a property boundary line between two (2) lots resulting in joint ownership by the adjacent property owners when the trunk exists on each property, or a tree that has twenty (20) percent or more of its critical root zone extending across a property boundary and into an adjacent property.     City manager means the city manager of the City of Avondale Estates, or his/her designee.     City tree official means the person designated by the City of Avondale Estates to administer this division of the City Code.     Critical root zone (CRZ) means the area beneath a tree represented by a circle centered on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to the number of inches of the trunk diameter (DBH). For example, the CRZ of a tree that has a trunk diameter of twenty (20) inches (DBH) is twenty (20) feet.     Diameter at breast height (DBH) means the diameter of a tree's trunk measured between four (4) to four and one-half (4.5) feet above grade for a single-trunked tree that is not forked below four and one-half (4.5) feet; measured at the smallest diameter of the trunk below a fork located below four and one-half (4.5) feet; the diameter of the largest stem of a multi-stemmed tree as described above for non-forked and forked trunks.     Dead or diseased tree means a tree that has certain infestation or defects so that it would not be classified as a healthy tree. (See definition of healthy tree, below).     Hardwood tree, for purposes of this division, means a tree that is not a pine tree.     Healthy tree means a tree that could be classified as being in fair or better condition with a life expectancy of at least fifteen (15) years; a relatively sound and solid trunk without extensive decay or hollow; less than twenty (20) percent radial trunk dieback; no more than one (1) major and several minor dead limbs; and no major insect or pathological problems.     Impervious surface means a surface that is composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, decks, tennis courts, swimming pools and similar structures, compacted gravel and any concrete or asphalt surface.     Land-disturbing activity means any activity that results in land or vegetation change including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating.     New tree, or newly planted tree means a tree being at least three (3) inches (DBH) and proposed to be planted on a property in order to meet the standards of section 5-413(a) of this division. Newly planted trees must meet the standards of section 5-413(c) of this division.     Overlapping tree(s) means one (1) or more trees that are part of a stand of trees growing close enough that their tree canopies join or overlap.     Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity, other than the City of Avondale Estates, including the plural as well as singular, including utility companies, all tree removal companies, and anyone removing trees on behalf of others.     Pine tree means a cone-bearing tree with evergreen needle leaves of genus pinus, including, but not limited to pine, juniper, and cedar species.     Project means building and/or site work activity on a site that requires a land disturbance permit and a building permit and ultimately requires a certificate of occupancy to use the improved site.     Public tree means a publicly-owned tree, including trees growing within the right-of-way or other city property.     Protected lot area means the portion of a lot or parcel subject to a land disturbance permit that is used to measure required tree canopy on a property that is subject to this division. The protected area includes all portions of a lot located a distance of five (5) feet outside the perimeter of proposed structures and any existing structures that are proposed to remain except detention ponds, surface water, and utility easements. Consequently, the protected area includes approved yards, open space, buffers, parking lots, aisles, driveways, and sidewalks, but not buildings or other permanent structures.     Protected tree means any public tree or a tree that is required in order to achieve and maintain compliance with section 5-414 (d) or otherwise required to be planted or preserved in accordance with an approved tree preservation and replacement plan.     Specimen tree means a canopy hardwood tree, other than a pine tree, thirty (30) inches or more (DBH), a pine tree thirty-six (36) inches or more in diameter (DBH), or a dogwood or redbud tree that is ten (10) inches or more (DBH). In order to be classed a specimen, the tree must also be in fair or better condition.     Tree means a self-supporting, perennial woody plant with a diameter of at least two (2) inches (DBH) and that would grow to be at least fifteen (15) feet tall at maturity.     Tree canopy means the area of ground within the critical root zone (CRZ) of a tree at its maturity. For newly planted trees refer to section 5-413(c)(7) of this division for a listing of tree canopy for permitted species of trees.     Tree canopy coverage means the area of a lot covered by tree canopy. For purposes of this division, refer to section 5-413(b) for a more detailed description of how tree canopy coverage is measured.     Tree removal permit means a permit issued by the City of Avondale Estates indicating a property owner has complied with the requirements of this division as they existed at the time that a complete tree removal permit application with fee was received by the City. (Ord. No. 18-05, § 3(Att.), 10-22-2018) 
Sec. 5-413. - Standards of tree preservation and replacement. (a)  Minimum required canopy coverage. A property that is subject to review for a land disturbance permit required in section 20-304 is required to achieve a minimum of forty (40) percent coverage of the protected lot area of the subject property by healthy, mature trees after construction is complete. (b)  Measurement of tree canopy. The calculation of percentage of tree canopy coverage is based on the ratio of A/B x 100, where "A" is the area of healthy tree canopy provided by existing and new trees, and "B" is the protected lot area of the property subject to a land disturbance permit. The calculation of "A" is based on the sum of existing and proposed new trees, using the following methods for measurement: (1)  Existing trees. The tree canopy of existing trees is measured from a tree survey as provided in section 5-414(c). The existing tree canopy is the amount of ground within the critical root zone (CRZ) of existing healthy trees on a property that is subject to a land disturbance permit. Dead or diseased trees cannot be included in the tree canopy measurement. (2)  Overlapping trees. If the distance between two (2) trees is less than the sum of the CRZ's of the two (2) trees, then these are overlapping trees. The tree canopy of existing overlapping trees is determined from a drawing showing the outer perimeter of the CRZs of the group of overlapping trees within the subject property. An estimate of the outer perimeter of the CRZ may be made using grid paper or other method acceptable to the city tree official. EXAMPLE OF TREE CANOPY CALCULATION FOR 3 OVERLAPPING TREES (3)  Boundary trees. The portion of the critical root zone of healthy boundary trees that is within the property subject to a land disturbance permit is included in the measurement of tree canopy on the subject property. (4)  Public trees. The portion of the tree canopy of public trees that is within the property subject to a land disturbance permit is included in the measurement of tree canopy on the subject property. (5)  New trees. The tree canopy of a new tree is based on the expected critical root zone of a mature tree of a certain species, without consideration of the amount of overlap. See section 5-413(c)(7) for the canopy coverage value of permitted species of trees. In order to be included in the forty (40) percent canopy coverage, a new tree must meet all the standards provided in section 5-413(c). (6)  Trees impacted by land disturbance. If land-disturbing activity authorized pursuant to the subject land disturbance permit impacts more than twenty (20) percent of a tree's critical root zone, that tree's canopy cannot be included in the tree canopy calculations above. (c)  New trees. Newly planted trees must meet the following standards in order to be included in the calculation of tree canopy coverage. (1)  Minimum three-inch (DBH) at time of planting. (2)  Meet or exceed the standards of ANSI Z60.1 Standards for Nursery Stock. (3)  Meet or exceed minimum tree spacing standards of section 5-413(c)(8). (4)  Conform to planting methods shown in City of Avondale Administrative Guidelines and Standard Details for the Tree Preservation Ordinance, current ANSI A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations, and ANSI Z133 Safety Standards. (5)  Be a permitted tree species that appears in section 5-413(c)(7). Other species of trees may be accepted if approved in writing by the city tree official. (6)  A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of newly planted trees shall be hardwood species. (7)  Credit towards meeting tree canopy coverage shall be determined based on the species of tree, in accordance with a list adopted by resolution of the board of mayor and commissioners and made available at city hall. a.  Greater canopy trees. Newly planted trees of greater canopy species provide one thousand nine hundred (1,900) square feet of tree canopy coverage credit. b.  Lesser canopy trees. Newly planted trees of lesser canopy species provide one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of tree canopy coverage credit. (8)  Minimum tree spacing requirements. a.  In order to receive credit for tree canopy coverage, a newly planted tree shall meet the following spacing standards: i.  Minimum spacing (centerline to centerline) of newly planted greater canopy tree species from nearest existing or newly planted tree: Forty (40) feet. ii.  Minimum spacing (centerline to centerline) of newly planted lesser canopy tree species from nearest existing or newly planted tree: Twenty (20) feet. iii.  Minimum set back measured from centerline of newly planted tree to nearest point of buildings, structures, above ground utilities, and easements for underground utilities: Ten (10) feet. iv.  Minimum set back measured from centerline of newly planted tree to nearest edge of paved or other impervious surfaces: Five (5) feet. b.  Applicants who cannot meet these standards to achieve a minimum forty (40) percent tree canopy coverage as provided in section 5-413(a) shall comply through contributions to the City of Avondale Estates Tree Bank, as provided in section 5-416(a) of this division. (d)  Parking lot landscaping. (1)  Parking lots shall be landscaped to maximize shading and minimize heat island effects. (2)  No less than ten (10) percent of the interior area of a parking lot shall be landscaped pervious areas consisting of trees, shrubbery, ground cover, sod and mulch. (3)  Trees of a greater canopy species shall be required to be preserved or planted within the interior or along the perimeter and driveways of the parking lot so that at maturity they will provide shade for no less than forty (40) percent of the impervious areas of the parking lot, aisles, sidewalks and driveways. (4)  The tree canopy cover of existing, preserved boundary trees, public trees, and other protected trees that project over the parking lot, aisles, driveways and sidewalks may be counted for meeting tree canopy cover requirements. (e)  Critical root zone (CRZ) protection. (1)  In order to prevent harm or damage of trees during development activity, temporary tree protection fencing shall be installed during construction. Tree protection fencing shall surround the critical root zones of existing trees that are outside the limits of approved land disturbance. (2)  In addition, placement of toxic substances, solvents, building material, construction machinery or temporary soil deposits shall be prohibited within the critical root zones of trees that are to remain on the property after construction. (3)  Excavation, trenching for utilities or drainage, trenching for silt fence, parking, material storage or other construction activities are prohibited within the critical root zones of trees that are to remain on the property after construction. The maximum encroachment of such activities shall be twenty (20) percent of the critical root zone. (4)  The following activities would not violate section 5-413(e) of this division: a.  Removal and replacement of driveway or sidewalk pavement within the same footprint, provided that no additional excavation is permitted. b.  Construction of structures over existing foundations. c.  Installation of permanent fences, where posts are spaced at least six (6) feet apart. d.  Use of staked hay bales or compost filter socks for erosion control during construction. e.  Jack-and-bore utility construction. (f)  Specimen trees and recompense. (1)  Development activities that require a land disturbance permit shall not result in the loss, nor removal, of a specimen tree located outside the approved land disturbance area. Loss or removal of a public tree or boundary tree that is a specimen is included in this prohibition. (2)  Unauthorized loss or removal of a specimen tree resulting from development activity that requires a land disturbance permit shall require the property owner to pay the following amounts to the City of Avondale Estates Tree Bank prior to approval of a certificate of occupancy for work that is subject to said land disturbance permit: a.  One hundred dollars ($100.00), plus thirty ($30.00) per diameter inch (DBH) per specimen pine tree. b.  One hundred dollars ($100.00), plus sixty ($60.00) per diameter inch (DBH) per specimen tree that is not a pine tree. (3)  Land disturbance that encroaches on more than twenty (20) percent of the critical root zone of a specimen tree shall be considered loss of the tree and may subject the owner to the penalty provided in section 5-416(d) of this division. (g)  Tree maintenance requirements. Applicants for a tree removal permit shall sign a tree maintenance agreement provided by the City of Avondale Estates as evidence that they agree to comply with the following tree maintenance requirements: (1)  All newly planted trees shall be maintained in accordance with current ANSI A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations, ANSI Z133 Safety Standards. (2)  Planted trees shall be maintained in a healthy state throughout a two-year establishment period. Maintenance shall include at a minimum, watering, mulching, and pruning. (3)  If a tree that is part of an approved plan subject to a tree preservation and replacement plan dies or becomes diseased within two (2) years of approval of the Certificate of Occupancy, the City Tree Official may notify the owner, and the owner shall replace the tree with an approved tree within thirty (30) days of receiving the notice. (4)  See the following relevant provisions of the City Code of Ordinances: a.  Section 17-49, Pruning and removal of vegetation. b.  Section 17-50, Removal on private property. (h)  Public trees. (1)  Public trees are protected from disturbance or removal by development on private property except when necessary for land disturbance that has been approved by the city subject to a tree removal permit. (2)  Removal of a public tree or disturbance of more than twenty (20) percent of the CRZ of a public tree requires approval of a tree removal permit and contribution to the city tree bank as provided in section 5-416(a). Failure to receive a tree removal permit for such disturbance or to contribute to the city tree bank shall be considered a violation subject to the provisions of section 5-416(d). (3)  See also City Code of Ordinances, Subdivision Regulations, section 20-73, Sidewalks and planting strip. (i)  Tree trimming. See the relevant provisions of the following portions of the City Code of Ordinances: (1)  Section 17-47, Planting, maintaining, removing trees, plants. (2)  Section 17-48, Tree topping. (3)  Section 17-51, Removal of stumps. (j)  Utility company requirements. (1)  All work performed by utility companies that impact protected trees shall be done in accordance with current ANSI A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations, ANSI Z133 Safety Standards and industry best management practices. (2)  Topping, tipping or heading cuts, flush cuts and stub cuts shall be prohibited. (3)  No climbing spurs or spikes shall be used in trees except when trees are to be removed or in cases of a public safety emergency, natural disaster, or aerial rescue of personnel. (Ord. No. 18-05, § 3(Att.), 10-22-2018) 
Sec. 5-414. - Administration of this division. (a)  When a tree removal permit is required. (1)  A tree removal permit is required in addition to a land disturbance permit when a land disturbance permit is necessary pursuant to section 20-304 of the City of Avondale Estates Code of Ordinances. (2)  A tree removal permit is also required in order to remove a protected tree, or when land disturbance would encroach upon more than twenty (20) percent of the critical root zone of a protected tree. (3)  Applications for a tree removal permit shall be submitted to the city tree official using forms and fees established from time to time by the board of mayor and commissioners. (4)  Each application for a tree removal permit shall include a tree survey, a tree preservation and replacement plan and other appropriate documentation established by the city tree official. (5)  No land disturbance, demolition, or other construction activity may occur on the property prior to review and approval of the tree preservation and replacement plan and posting of the tree removal permit on the property. (b)  Display of permit. Before any work has commenced, but no later than forty-eight (48) hours after permit issuance, the tree removal permit shall be posted on the property along with the land disturbance permit in a location that is plainly visible from the adjacent street. On a corner lot, the permit shall be posted on the street opposite the front yard of the property. The tree removal permit shall remain posted until a certificate of occupancy is granted to the applicant. (c)  Tree survey. An application for a tree removal permit shall be accompanied by a tree survey of the subject property. When proposed construction requires land disturbance of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. of the subject property, the tree survey shall be prepared by a professional arborist or registered landscape architect on an accurately scaled site plan drawing that contains a current and accurate survey data prepared by a registered land surveyor. The tree survey shall indicate the following information: (1)  Surveyed property boundaries, including any proposed lot subdivision or lot combination that is part of the development plan. (2)  Location and areal extent of surface water, and detention ponds. (3)  Location of required zoning buffers and stream buffers, if any on the subject property. (4)  Areas of proposed land disturbance shown graphically on the tree survey drawing. (5)  Accurate location and dimensions of existing and proposed structures, buildings, driveways, parking lots and other impervious surfaces. (6)  Approximate location of each existing tree that is larger than two (2) inches (DBH) with a description of the size and species of each such tree. Dead and diseased trees should be noted as such. Include boundary trees and public trees if a portion of the canopy area lies over the subject property. Note location of specimen trees. (7)  Tree canopy coverage area of all existing trees, including public trees and boundary trees, if applicable, shown graphically with an estimate of the land area of tree canopy coverage on the subject property. (8)  Percentage of tree canopy coverage of the existing property, consistent with section 5-413(b) of this division. (d)  Tree preservation and replacement plan. A complete application for a tree removal permit shall include a scaled drawing that represents a tree preservation and replacement plan for the subject property. When proposed construction requires land disturbance of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of the subject property, the tree preservation and replacement plan shall be prepared by a professional arborist or registered landscape architect on an accurately scaled site plan drawing that contains current and accurate survey data prepared by a registered land surveyor. The tree preservation and replacement plan shall indicate the following information: (1)  All information provided on the tree survey. (2)  Location, species and diameter (DBH) of trees that are intended to be removed. (3)  Critical root zone of any trees where the CRZ falls within the area of proposed land disturbance and a calculation of the extent of encroachment of land disturbance within the CRZ. (4)  Methods of tree protection for trees to be preserved on the property in accordance with section 5-413(e) of this division. (5)  Location, species, diameter (DBH), spacing and setback of each proposed new tree in accordance with section 5-413(c) of this division. (6)  Graphic depiction and calculation of tree canopy coverage area after construction is completed in accordance with section 5-413(b) of this division. (7)  Calculation of tree canopy coverage area of trees to remain on the site along with any proposed new trees, including public trees and boundary trees, if applicable, shown graphically on the tree preservation and replacement plan. (8)  Percentage of tree canopy coverage of the existing property, consistent with section 5-413(b) of this division. (9)  Tree planting methods in accordance with section 5-413(c) and section 5-413(d) of this division. (10)  Tree maintenance methods in accordance with section 5-413(g) of this division. (e)  Proposed contribution to City of Avondale Tree Bank, if any, with calculations of how the amount of contribution was determined. See section 5-416(a) of this division for details. (f)  Review by city tree official. (1)  The city tree official shall review the tree removal permit, tree survey, tree preservation and replacement plan, and related documentation in order to ensure consistency of these application documents with the land disturbance application, standards and requirements of this division, and other city ordinances and regulations. (2)  In this review, the city tree official may consult with the City of Avondale Tree Board, landscape architects, foresters, arborists, and others as he/she may deem appropriate. (3)  The city tree official may suggest alternative site plans to the applicant that would minimize the loss of trees and may disapprove a proposed site plan that fails to take adequate care to preserve existing healthy specimen trees, including boundary trees and public trees. (4)  Following review, the city tree official shall approve or disapprove the tree removal permit application and related documentation and notify the applicant of the status of the submitted application. (5)  If the permit is substantially compliant with only minor exceptions, the city tree official may approve the permit conditionally, subject to incorporation of comments noted and provided to the applicant. (6)  If the tree removal plan is approved, the city tree official may issue the permit along with any related soil erosion control plans, stormwater management plans, and land disturbance permits to allow site development activity to commence. (7)  If the tree removal permit is disapproved, the city tree official shall provide review comments to the applicant, noting the reasons for disapproval. If the plans were disapproved, the applicant may resubmit with a revised permit application and documentation that addresses all comments, and the city tree official shall repeat the plan review process until the plan satisfies section 5-414(e)(1). (g)  Inspections and enforcement. (1)  An application for a tree removal permit is deemed to constitute consent from the applicant to allow the city tree official to enter the subject property to conduct inspections before, during, and after permitting and construction. (2)  At a minimum, the city tree official shall inspect the property prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy in order to ensure that the constructed project fully complies with this division and other City permitting requirements. (3)  When the city tree official determines that the project complies with this division he/she shall provide written notice to the applicant. (4)  If the city tree official finds that the project does not meet the requirements of this division he/she shall withhold approval of the certificate of occupancy and notify the applicant of the deficiencies. (h)  Administrative guidelines and standard details. The installation and protection of trees shall be in accordance with the "City of Avondale Administrative Guidelines and Standard Details for the Tree Preservation Ordinance" that are available during regular office hours at city hall and made part of this division by reference. (Ord. No. 18-05, § 3(Att.), 10-22-2018) 
Sec. 5-416. - Compliance. (a)  Alternative compliance and tree bank fund. (1)  When the city tree official finds that it is necessary for an applicant for a tree removal permit to disturb a public tree or that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet the requirements of section 5-413(a) or section 5-413(h) of this division, the city tree official may provide written approval for the applicant to comply in an alternative manner through contributions to the City of Avondale Estates Tree Bank. (2)  The amount of such contributions shall be adequate to pay the average cost of installation and maintenance of new trees of a size and species comparable to those of trees that were not planted in adequate quantity in accordance with the standards of section 5-413(a) of this division. The appropriate cost shall be determined by the city based on a published schedule of installation and maintenance costs (labor and materials) for permitted trees that shall be updated from time to time by the city tree official and provided to applicants upon request. Maintenance costs shall be based on the average cost of maintenance of a newly planted tree for a two-year period using the standards of section 5-413(g) of this division. (3)  There is hereby established a tree bank fund to be maintained by the city. Such fund shall be used solely for the purchase, placement and care of trees in the City of Avondale Estates and for studies, inventories, plans and educational efforts related to the protection and expansion of the tree canopy and the related benefits to the city. (4)  The city shall be responsible for selecting the size, species and location of such trees and shall facilitate planting of trees purchased with tree bank funds. Such trees shall be located on property within the city that is under the control of the city or another governmental entity. The precise timing and location of plantings shall be determined at the discretion of the city manager. (b)  Variance from the provisions of this division in accordance with Section 1610 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Avondale Estates shall not be available. (c)  Appeals. (1)  Any person adversely affected by a final decision of the city tree official in the administration of this division may appeal such decision to the board of appeals. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice thereof with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the appellant receives a decision of the city tree official. Each appeal shall be conducted pursuant to the rules and procedures for such appeals. (2)  If the appellant or the city manager is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of appeals, such decision may be appealed to DeKalb County Superior Court by writ of certiorari. In such event, no permit shall be issued pursuant to this division until such appeal is finally resolved. (d)  Violations and penalties. (1)  A certificate of occupancy will be withheld for projects that do not comply with this division. (2)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this division shall be subject to the penalties as provided in this division. When this division does not specify a penalty, the penalty upon conviction in municipal court shall be imposed pursuant to section 1-8 of the City Code. In addition, such person may be enjoined from continuing the violation. Each tree cut, damage or poisoned shall constitute a separate offense. Examples of violations include, but are not limited to the following: a.  Removal of a protected tree or disturbance of more than twenty (20) percent of the CRZ of a protected tree other than as approved by a valid tree removal permit; b.  Land disturbance without an approved tree removal permit; c.  Failure to install or maintain tree protection; d.  Improperly installed tree protection; e.  Damage to existing or newly planted trees; f.  Damage to CRZ's of existing or newly planted trees as provided in section 5-413(e) of this division. (e)  Fees. (1)  The fee schedule to review applications for a tree removal permit shall be established by resolution of the board of mayor and commissioners. (2)  Each resubmittal for review of the same application shall be accompanied by a fee equal to the original fee. (Ord. No. 18-05, § 3(Att.), 10-22-2018) 
Sec. 5-417—5-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 
Sec. 5-431. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated below:     Alternative tower structure shall mean manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.     Antenna shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.     FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration.     FCC shall mean the Federal Communications.     Governing authority shall mean the governing authority of the City of Avondale Estates.     Pre-existing towers and antennas shall have the meaning set forth in this section.     Height shall mean, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.     Public officer as used in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-17, shall mean the city manager of City of Avondale Estates, or his appointed representative.     Tower shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. (Ord. No. 879, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 5-432. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to control the location of towers and antennas and establish height limitations in applicable zoning districts. Height restrictions applicable to buildings and structures shall not apply to towers and antennas. (Ord. No. 879, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 5-433. - Applicability.     Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city, shall be exempt from the requirements of the article. All licenses, permits and/or leases authorizing such antenna or tower must be approved by the governing authority. This article shall not govern any tower and/or in installation of any antenna, that is less than seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued, prior to the effective date of this article, shall not be obligated to meet the requirements of this article. However, subsection (e) and (f) of section 5-434, are in effect and will apply. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this article as "pre-existing towers" or "pre-existing antennas." All antenna or tower development activity shall be subject to the requirements of this article. (Ord. No. 879, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 5-434. - Guidelines and requirements. (a)  General. This article establishes the following guidelines: (1)  Location of towers shall be in nonresidential areas; (2)  The total number of towers or antennas shall be limited; (3)  Strongly encourage the joint use of new and/or existing tower or antenna sites; (4)  Strongly encourage users of towers and antennas to locate the structure in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; (5)  Strongly encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes any adverse visual impact on the city. When necessary, aesthetic camouflaging will be required. The construction and operation of these towers or antennas will enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to deliver such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. (b)  Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with existing regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, etc., the dimensions of the entire lot shall control. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. (c)  Existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower permit shall provide to the planning and zoning board an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the city or within one-quarter (¼) mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The planning and zoning board may share such information with other applicants applying for approval or a special use permit under this article or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the city, provided, however, that the planning and zoning board is not, by sharing such information, in any [way] representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. A recommendation shall be made to the board of mayor and commissioners by the planning and zoning board to either approve or deny the permit application request. The board of mayor and commissioners shall consider any recommendation by the planning and zoning board at its next regularly scheduled commission meeting. (d)  Aesthetics. The guidelines established in this paragraph shall govern the location of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, addressed by the article. (1)  Subject to applicable FAA requirements, towers shall be painted a neutral color to reduce visual obtrusiveness; (2)  The design of the tower, buildings and related structures at any given tower installation shall use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment in an aesthetically pleasing manner. (3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure. This is designed to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive. (4)  Towers will not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or some other applicable authority. If lighting is required the governing authority will review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that will be the most advantageous to the surrounding views. (e)  Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17. (f)  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner(s) shall ensure that each structure is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers, as published by the Electronic Industries Association and amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the governing authority concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards, and constitutes a danger to persons or property, notice will be given to the owner of the tower, allowing thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within the prescribed time, the governing authority may remove such tower at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17. (Ord. No. 879, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 5-435. - Permitted uses. (a)  General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted and shall not require governing authority approval or a special use permit. Nevertheless, all such uses shall comply with section 5-434 of this article and all other applicable rules and regulations. (b)  Specific uses allow. The following uses are specifically permitted: (1)  Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding nonresidential structure) that is fifty (50) feet in height or greater, so long as said additional antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing structure; and (2)  Installing an antenna on any existing tower of any height, so long as the addition of said antennas adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing tower and said existing tower is not a pre-existing tower; provided, however, that such specific permitted use shall not include the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna. (Ord. No. 879, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 5-436. - Administrative procedures. (a)  General. (1)  Each applicant for a permit to construct an antenna shall apply to the city manager's office, providing six (6) copies of the information set forth in section 5-437 of this article. (2)  Upon the submittal of all information requested by the city manager, he shall cause the application to be distributed to the planning and zoning board, schedule a public hearing and meeting where the planning and zoning board will consider such application(s). (3)  The date, time and subject of the public hearing and meeting of the planning and zoning board will be advertised in the legal organ of DeKalb County at least five (5) days prior to the public hearing. (4)  Applications together with recommendations from the planning and zoning board shall be considered at the next regularly scheduled commission meeting. The decision of the board of mayor and commissioners is final. (b)  Administratively approved uses. The following uses may be approved by the city manager after conducting an administrative review: (1)  Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding nonresidential structure) that is less than fifty (50) feet in height, so long as such addition does not add more than twenty (20) feet to the height of the existing structure; (2)  Installing an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including a pre-existing tower and further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing tower; (3)  All antenna installation applications shall have the certification of a licensed professional engineer stating that the tower can structurally accommodate the number of proposed antenna(s) in addition to the existing equipment and type of installation. (Ord. No. 879, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 5-437. - Special use permits. (a)  General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits: (1)  If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under section 5-435 or section 5-436 of this article, then a special use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in any zoning district; (2)  The procedure for a special use permit is covered in section 5-436(a); (3)  In granting a special use permit, the governing authority may impose conditions necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties; (4)  Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. (Ord. No. 879, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 5-438. - Submittal requirements. (a)  Information required. Each applicant requesting an antenna permit under this article shall submit the following: (1)  Site plan (to scale); (2)  Elevation view(s) (to scale); (3)  Supporting drawing and calculations. All documentation shall be signed and sealed by the appropriate licensed professionals and shall indicate the location and dimensions of all improvements. Submitted documentation shall clearly include information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscape, adjacent uses and other information deemed to be necessary to assess compliance. (b)  Factors to be considered. The following factors shall be considered when determining the issuance of a permit. (1)  Height of the proposed tower; (2)  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; (3)  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; (4)  Surrounding topography; (5)  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; (6)  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; (7)  Proposed ingress and egress; and (8)  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed in section 5-437(d) of this article. (d)  Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. Requests for new towers shall not be permitted until the applicant demonstrates that a tower or structure does not presently exist capable of accommodating the applicant's proposed requirements. Evidence submitted to demonstrate the lack of existing towers and/or support structures capable of accommodating the applicant's proposed antenna will consist of, but not be limited to, the following: (1)  There are no towers and/or support structures available to meet the applicant's request; (2)  All existing towers or structures do not have the height to satisfy applicant's engineering requirements. (3)  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. (4)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. (5)  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. (6)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. (e)  Setbacks and separations. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas. (1)  Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. (2)  Towers, guys and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning setback requirements. Anchors for guide supports are considered to be the same as wall construction. (3)  In zoning districts other than industrial or heavy commercial, towers over ninety (90) feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter (¼) of a mile from any existing tower that is over ninety (90) feet in height. (Ord. No. 879, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 5-439. - Security fencing.     Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height. The fence shall be wood (solid) with the finished side facing out which will also include anti-climbing design and/or devices(s). (Ord. No. 879, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 5-440. - Landscaping.     The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding the towers. (1)  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least ten (10) feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. (2)  Existing mature tree growth and natural terrain typography shall be preserved to the extent possible. Where towers are located on large wooded lots natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer for adjacent residential property. The city manager shall make this determination after the construction and all fencing has been completed. (Ord. No. 879, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 5-441. - Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.     Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said ninety (90) days the governing authority may, in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. (Ord. No. 879, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Secs. 5-442—5-449. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 
Sec. 5-450. - Title.     This article shall be known as the Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia. (Ord. No. 9902, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 5-451. - Findings and objectives. (a)  Finding of facts. In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the city and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that Avondale Estates and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. Groundwater resources are contained within aquifers, which are permeable, rock strata occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas.     Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. (b)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are: (1)  Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; (2)  Protect groundwater quality by limiting density of development; and (3)  Protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. (Ord. No. 9902, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 5-452. - Definitions.     [The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated:]     Aquifer means any stratum (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. (Note: This is the same definition used in the Groundwater Use Act).     Groundwater recharge area (synonymous with aquifer recharge area) means an area of the earth's surface where water infiltrates the ground, thereby replenishing the groundwater supplies within an aquifer.     Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations or pollution generated by other human activities.     Pollution susceptibility map(s) means maps prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that show the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential.     Significant groundwater recharge areas means areas mapped by DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of the rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of "karst" topography (sinkholes, caves and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks), and potentiometric surfaces. (Ord. No. 9902, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 5-453. - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district.     A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition or any subsequent editions thereof. (Ord. No. 9902, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 5-454. - Determination of pollution susceptibility.     Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. (Ord. No. 9902, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 5-455. - Permit requirements and enforcement.     No building permit, rezoning request or subdivision plan will be approved by the city unless the permit, request or plan is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards listed in section 5-456. (a)  Enforcement. The city, its agent, officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the city deems necessary. (1)  The codes enforcement officer is hereby designated as the administrator and enforcement officer for this article. (2)  The codes enforcement officer shall have authority to enforce this article; issue permits hereunder; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. (3)  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the codes enforcement officer in enforcement. (4)  Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. (5)  The codes enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified in section 5-457. (6)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to remove the structure. (7)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. (b)  Permit review and site plan requirement. With the exception of certain exempted activities identified in subsection 5-455(c), applications for a development permit within the groundwater recharge area district shall include a site plan. The following information is required for all site plans: (1)  A map or maps, drawn to a scale of 1 inch = 50 feet, showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, water courses and drainage ways, water lines, wastewater and stormwater facilities, and utility installations, shall be provided by the applicant. (2)  Location dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. (3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. (4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within two hundred (200) feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five (5) feet. (5)  Locations and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. (6)  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross-sectional drawings. (7)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of storm-water runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the city. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. (b)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans. (1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five (5) parcels. (2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. (3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. (c)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the codes enforcement officer and will be reviewed within thirty (30) days. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions or disapproval) by the codes enforcement officer. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the codes enforcement officer. If the review process is not completed within thirty (30) days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the codes enforcement officer may be appealed to the board of mayor and commissioners. (d)  Public notice and public hearing. Public notice of permit applications, through publication in local newspapers, is required. A public hearing on the application, to be held before the board of mayor and commissioners may be scheduled if requested by a citizen. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. A record of the proceedings shall be made and kept on file by the city clerk. Any person may testify at the hearing. Decisions of the board of mayor and commissioners may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction identified in section 5-457. (e)  Duration of permit validity. (1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. (2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire twelve (12) months after the date that work ceased. (3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the codes enforcement officer. (f)  County health department approval required. (1)  Construction will not proceed on a building, modular or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the DHR Manual and the environmental planning criteria. (Ord. No. 9902, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 5-456. - Groundwater protection standards. (a)  For all pollution susceptibility areas, new waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. (b)  New agricultural impoundments shall meet the following requirements: (1)  For areas of high susceptibility, a liner shall be provided that is approved by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service (SCS). (2)  For areas of medium susceptibility, an SCS approved liner shall be provided if the site exceeds fifteen (15) acre-feet. (3)  For areas of low susceptibility, a SCS approved liner shall be provided if the site exceeds fifty (50) acre-feet. (c)  No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. (d)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas, the handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials shall take place on an impermeable surface having spill and lead protection approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division (EPD). (e)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas, new above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than six hundred fifty (650) gallons must have secondary containment for one hundred ten (110) percent of tank volume or one hundred ten (110) percent of the largest tanks in a cluster of tanks. (f)  For high pollution susceptibility areas, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner approved by EPD. (g)  For high pollution susceptibility areas, no new stormwater infiltration basins may be constructed. (h)  For high pollution susceptibility areas, wastewater spray irrigation systems or the land spreading of wastewater sludge shall be practiced in accordance with department of natural resources criteria for slow rate land treatment. An application for a development permit for activities involving wastewater spray irrigation or land spreading of wastewater sludge must be accompanied by proof that the applicant has received a land application system permit from EPD. (i)  Minimum lot sizes and septic systems. New homes served by septic tank/drain systems shall conform to minimum lot size requirements identified in Tables 6-1 through 6-3 below. (Ord. No. 9902, 6-28-99) 
Table 6-1. - Minimum lot-size requirements. Source: DHR Manuel for On Site Sewerage Management Systems. Pollution susceptibility New homes served by septic systems New mobile homes served by septic systems High 150% of minimum lot sizes specified in Table 6-2 150% of minimum lot sizes specified in Table 6-3 Medium 125% of minimum lot sizes specified in Table 6-2 125% of minimum lot sizes specified in Table 6-3 Low 110% of minimum lot sizes specified in Table 6-2 110% of minimum lot sizes specified in Table 6-3  
Table 6-2. - Single family home minimum lot size where served by on-site septic tank systems. Source: DHR Manual for On-Site Sewerage Management systems. Slope of Lot (%) Soil grouping (See Appendix A) 1 2 3 4 5 Minimum lot size in square feet 0—5 30,000 39,000 49,000 51,000 60.000 5—15 33,000 42,000 51,000 54,000 66,000 15—25 36,000 45,000 54,000 57,000 N/A 25—35 39,000 48,000 57,000 60,000 N/A  
Table 6-3. - Mobile home minimum lot-size where served by on-site septic tank systems. Source: DHR Manual for On Site Sewerage Management Systems. Slope of Lot (%) Soil grouping (See Appendix A) 1 2 3 4 5 Minimum lot size in square feet 0—5 N/A 13,000 16,000 17,000 20,000 5—15 N/A 14,000 17,000 18,000 22,000 15—25 12,000 15,000 18,000 19,000 N/A 25—35 13,000 16,000 19,000 20,000 N/A  
Sec. 5-457. - Judicial review. (a)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the Board of Mayor and Commissioners concerning denial, approval, or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in DeKalb County Superior Court. (b)  Alternative Actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the Board of Mayor and Commissioners may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: (1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; (2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or (3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the Board of Mayor and Commissioners. (Ord. No. 9902, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 5-458. - Amendments.     These regulations may, from time to time, be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. (Ord. No. 9902, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 5-459. - Assessment relief.     Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. (Ord. No. 9902, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 5-460. - Separability and abrogation.     All sections and subsections of this ordinance are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this article be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph or part of this article. All ordinances and regulations in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. (Ord. No. 9902, 6-28-99) APPENDIX A Soil Groupings for Use with Minimum Lot Size Tables Group 1 (Well drained to excessive drained soils with percolation rates from <5 to 10 min./in.) Ailey Americus Blaney Blanton Bonitay Bonneau Cainhoy (Galestown, Palm Beach) Eustis Flornation Foxworth Fripp Fuquay (Norfolk and Tifton thick surface; Lakewood shallow) Haywood Kershaw Lakeland (Huckabee) Louisburg Lucy Molena Paola Troup Valdosta Wagram Wicksburg Group 2 (Well drained to moderately well drained soils with percolation rates from 10 to 30 min./in.) Allen Bodine Brevard Brookshire Cahaba Chandler Citico Clarendon DeKalb Edneyville Etowah (Nollchucky) Euharlee Eunola Evard Faceville Fullerton Goldsboro Haywood Irvington Izagora Jefferson Johns Kalmia Linker Lockhart Louisa Lowndes Masada Maxton Nella Norfolk Orangeburg Porters Red Bay (Ruston) Sequatchie Stilson Tifton Tusquitee Wedowee Wickham Group 3 (Well drained to moderately well drained soils with percolation rates from 30 to 60 min./in. Also includes somewhat poorly drained soils with percolation rates from 5 to 30 min./in.) Albany Ardilla Bartha Braddock Bradson Capshaw Carnegie Centenary Chipley Decatur Dillard Dothan Durham Echaw Fannin Greenville (Magnolia) Grover Holston Hornsville Kanapana Leefield Leesburg Locust Lynchburg Ocilla Minvale Mountview Olustee (Ona) Pattsburg Rigdon Rome Seneca Shack (Clarksville) Shelocta Shouns Suffolk Tate Tatum Tellico Tidings Varina Group 4 (Well drained to moderately well drained soils with percolation rates from 60 to 90 min./in. Also poorly drained soils with percolation rates from 10 to 15 min./in.) Chestatee Colbert Cowarts Cunningham Cuthbert Davidson Dewey (Muse) Dogue Duplin Dyke Enders Enon Farragut Georgeville Gilead Hayesville Herndon Hulett Kolomoki Leon Litz Lynn Haven Madarin Mascotte Nankin Nason Rabun Sapelo Sawyer St. Johns Sequoia Shabuta Steekee Waynesboro Group 5 (Poorly drained soils that have watertables very near the surface with percolation rates from 5 to 10 min./in.) Alapaha Pelham Plummer Riceboro (Ord. No. 9902, 6-28-99) 
Secs. 5-461—5-469. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - GRAFFITI 
Sec. 5-470. - Purpose.     The Board of Mayor and Commissioners of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, finds and determines that graffiti, as defined by this article, is a public nuisance that is destructive of property values, invasive of property rights, and generally deleterious to the public welfare. (Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 10-26-09) 
Sec. 5-471. - Definitions.     Graffiti, as used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed by O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2, to-wit: "any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface."     Owner, as used in this article, shall include the record owner of the property and also, where the record owner of the property may not be located, any person operating, managing, residing at, or otherwise having control over the property. (Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 10-26-09) 
Sec. 5-472. - Prohibited acts. (a)  Defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to apply graffiti to any property. (b)  Failure to remediate. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property within the city to allow any graffiti that is visible from the street or other public or private property to remain upon any building, structure, appurtenance, equipment, any container used for storage of commercial refuse, recyclables or litter, or any fixed or portable box, container or storage unit, any sign, any surface, paving or similar feature located, installed, used or maintained on such property for more than fifteen (15) days after receipt of a notice to remove graffiti as provided for by this article. A separate violation shall be deemed to occur for each and every day after the expiration of the fifteen-day period that the graffiti remains visible. (Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 10-26-09) 
Sec. 5-473. - Penalty. (a)  Any person who is convicted of defacement pursuant to subsection 5-472(a) of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or both fine and imprisonment in combination. In addition to such punishment, the court may, in imposing sentence, order the defendant to restore the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed, to pay restitution for the actual reasonable cost of removal of the graffiti, and/or may require the defendant to perform up to forty (40) hours of community service as the court deems appropriate. (b)  When an owner is convicted of violating subsection 5-472(b) of this article, the court may require the owner to pay restitution for the actual reasonable cost of removal of the graffiti. (Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 10-26-09) 
Sec. 5-474. - Notice to remove graffiti.     Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti on any property within the city, the city shall give or cause to be given notice to the property owner to remove such graffiti therefrom. Such notice shall be in writing and have substantially the following form: NOTICE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI To the Owner of the property hereinafter described: Your attention is hereby directed to the provisions of Ordinance Number _____ on file in the office of the City Clerk in the City Hall, Avondale Estates, Georgia. Pursuant thereto, you are hereby notified that graffiti described as ___________ exists on premises known as ___________, which injures neighboring property and public health, safety and welfare. You are therefore notified to remove such graffiti at once, and in any event within fifteen (15) days from the date of this notice, from the property and thereafter to keep the property free therefrom. In the event you fail to complete such work within the time set forth herein then you shall be in violation of City Ordinance and may be cited accordingly. In addition, the City may cause the graffiti to be removed from your property and the costs of such removal may be considered by the court in determining the penalty for violation of the City's Graffiti Ordinance upon conviction. Dated at Avondale Estates, Georgia this _____ day of ________, 20___. _____Officer     The notice required by this section shall be served by personal service on the owner, wherever possible. If the owner cannot be located then notice shall be accomplished by sending the same by registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of said owner. If the owner's address is unknown, the notice may be tacked to the door of the property. (Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 10-26-09) 
Secs. 5-475—5-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT 
Sec. 5-501. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. (a)  The board of mayor and commissioners of the city finds and declares that within the city limits of the city there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or other applicable building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city, or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. (b)  The board of mayor and commissioners of the city further finds and declares that within the limits of the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. (c)  The board of mayor and commissioners of the city further finds and declares that there exist within the limits of the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; and (d)  The board of mayor and commissioners of the city further finds and declares that there exist within the limits of the city vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of such dwellings, buildings and structures. (Ord. No. 12-06, § 1, 8-20-2012) Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-06, § 1, adopted Aug. 20, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as Art. XIV, § 5-201. To preserve the existing section numbering, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. XIV, § 5-501. 
Sec. 5-502. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances.     It is the intent of the board of mayor and commissioners that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. (Ord. No. 12-07, § 1(Att.), 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 5-503. - Definitions.     [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:]     Applicable codes means: (1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated ("O.C.G.A.") as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of O.C.G.A.; and (3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of O.C.G.A. after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law.     Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry.     Drug crime means an act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of O.C.G.A., known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act.     Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term dwellings, buildings or structures shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products.     Governing authority means the Board of Mayor and Commissioners of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia.     Interested parties means: (1)  Owner; (2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; (3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; (4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner of records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected; and (5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises.     Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record.     Public authority means the city manager or the building inspector or their respective designees, and any officer of the City of Avondale Estates, DeKalb County, Georgia or the State of Georgia with responsibilities relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings or structures in the City of Avondale Estates, specifically including the DeKalb County Fire Marshal, the city police chief, and the city codes enforcement officers.     Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers.     Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with all applicable codes and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated, which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure.     Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. (Ord. No. 12-07, § 1(Att.), 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 5-504. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. (a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building or structure, or property within the city limits of the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances that regulate and prohibit activities on property and that declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances; (b)  The city manager, the building official, and each of their designees, are designated as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article; (c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building or structure, or property. If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may direct the city attorney to issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists, and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the Municipal Court of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing; (d)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: (1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or (2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property.     For purpose of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia Appraiser Classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 41 of O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the city. (e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within two hundred seventy (270) days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such abatement action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or by any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the two hundred seventy (270) days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." (f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer, the city commissioners of the city, and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; (g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city manager, or his or her designee, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. (h)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building or structure finds that it is in such condition as to make it imminently dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, the public officer shall order that such dwelling, building or structure be vacated. (Ord. No. 12-07, § 1(Att.), 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 5-505. - Collection of lien. (a)  The lien provided for in paragraph (g) of section 5-504 shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of DeKalb County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required by section 5-512. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of DeKalb County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. (b)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this section, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this section shall transmit to the city manager, or his or her designee, a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within ninety (90) days of completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the city manager, or his or her designee, to collect the amount of the lien, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of O.C.G.A.; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall remit the amount collected to the board of mayor and commissioners. (c)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the city manager, or his or her designee, of the final determination of costs in accordance with this section. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this section. (d)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section, together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the city manager, or his or her designee, in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. (e)  The board of mayor and commissioners may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city, agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. (Ord. No. 12-07, § 1(Att.), 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 5-506. - Appeal.     Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. (Ord. No. 12-07, § 1(Att.), 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 5-507. - Other citations.     The public officers designated in subsection 5-504(b), and any designated agent of such officers, may issue citations to the owner, occupants, and/or persons in possession of the property and premises for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. Any owner who fails to comply with any order issued pursuant to subsection 5-504(d) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, thereof shall be punished as provided by law. Any person removing the notice provided for in subsection 5-504(e) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by law. (Ord. No. 12-07, § 1(Att.), 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 5-508. - No limitation of other nuisance abatement powers.     Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city commissioners of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. (Ord. No. 12-07, § 1(Att.), 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 5-509. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and constitute conditions of nuisances.     The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure that are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): (1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; (2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; (3)  Dilapidation; (4)  Disrepair; (5)  Structural defects; and (6)  Uncleanliness.     The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. (Ord. No. 12-07, § 1(Att.), 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 5-510. - Powers of public officers.     The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, including the following powers in addition to others granted in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-10 and §§ 41-2-12 through 41-2-17: (1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; (2)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; (3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purpose of the article; and (4)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. (Ord. No. 12-07, § 1(Att.), 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 5-511. - Service of complaints. (a)  Complaints filed pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three (3) business days of filing the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. (b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in DeKalb County once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. (c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. (Ord. No. 12-07, § 1(Att.), 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 5-512. - Filing of lis pendens.     A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of DeKalb County at the time of filing the complaint. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. (Ord. No. 12-07, § 1(Att.), 8-20-2012) 
Chapter 6 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions may include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. (Ord. No. 842, § 1(6-1), 11-25-91) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - DeKalb County emergency management unit—Director. (a)  Appointment. It is the desire and intent of the mayor and board of commissioners that the city be a part of the county emergency management unit. The chief executive officer of the county shall nominate for appointment by the governor of the state a director of emergency management for the entire county. (b)  Duties. When appointed, the emergency management director shall be charged with the following duties: (1)  To represent the governing body of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. (2)  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. (3)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county emergency and disaster operations plan emergency functions set forth in section 6-1. The plan shall be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing bodies of the county and the cities therein for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. (4)  To maintain the emergency management office and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. (5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc. (6)  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. (7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. (Ord. No. 842, § 1(6-2), 11-25-91) State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-3. - Same—Composition.     The county emergency management unit shall be established around existing city and county departments and the emergency functions described in section 6-1 are assigned as follows: Department/agency Functions Mayor County chief executive officer and commissioners Direction and control City and county police departments County sheriff's department Communications and warning Police services Evacuation County emergency management office Public information State military support Training Preliminary damage assessment and reporting Public property assistance Attack preparedness Specific hazards County fire department Search, rescue and recovery Fire services Hazardous materials Radiological protection County department of public works Engineering Petroleum and solid fuel services Utilities County school system Transportation services Food services County board of health Health and medical services County department of family and children's services Social services Shelter and temporary housing  (Ord. No. 842, § 1(6-3), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 6-4. - Powers during an emergency or disaster.     In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor of the city, separately or jointly with the county chief executive officer, the county commissioners, or in their absences, their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise, for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers to: (1)  Enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; (2)  Seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public; (3)  Sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and (4)  Perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. (Ord. No. 842, § 1(6-4), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 6-5. - Volunteers.     All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. (Ord. No. 842, § 1(6-5), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 6-6. - Penalties.     Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished for committing a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 842, § 1(6-6), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 6-7. - Liberality of construction.     This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. (Ord. No. 842, § 1(6-7), 11-25-91) 
Chapter 7 - COURT AND CRIMINAL PROCEDURE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Court established, § 1-801; jurisdiction, § 1-803. 
Sec. 7-1. - Office of municipal judge; fees; convening; continuances. (a)  The municipal judge shall be the presiding officer with full power to try all offenses against the city and exercise all jurisdiction conferred by law. (b)  Upon good cause shown, the judge may, in such officer's discretion, continue as provided by law the hearing of any case pending in the court. (Code 1973, § 2-401) General penalty, § 1-8. State Law reference— Powers of judge in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3. 
Sec. 7-2. - Service of process on corporation.     When any corporation is charged with violation of the ordinances of the city, the warrant or process shall be served upon the highest officer or agent of the corporation. (Code 1973, § 2-793) 
Sec. 7-3. - Regular term.     Regular sessions of the municipal court shall be held each month as determined by the municipal judge. (Code 1973, § 2-408) 
Sec. 7-4. - Special terms. (a)  In addition to the regular monthly term of municipal court, the municipal judge is hereby authorized and empowered to hold special terms to hear and determine cases in which the defendant has been confined to jail because of inability to give bond for appearance. (b)  The judge is further authorized and empowered in such official's discretion to hold special terms of court for the trial of cases when an unusual burden would be imposed upon the defendant to attend a regular term of court. (Code 1973, § 2-409) 
Sec. 7-5. - Judge pro tem.     In the absence of or during the disability of the judge, the governing body shall appoint a municipal judge pro tempore who, while so acting, shall be clothed with all the powers and authority vested in the judge of the municipal court. (Code 1973, § 2-410(a)) 
Sec. 7-6. - Intoxicated defendants.     If in the opinion of the municipal judge, any person brought before him to answer any charge is too intoxicated to understand such person's situation, or properly attend the trial, the judge may commit such person to jail. (Code 1973, § 2-402) 
Sec. 7-7. - Cash bonds. (a)  All persons charged with a violation of the ordinances of the city shall have the right to give bond for their personal appearance before the municipal court to answer the charges preferred against them in such an amount as may be designated by the municipal judge. (b)  Any person charged with a violation of the ordinances of the city may give bond as now provided by law, and such person shall have a right to give a cash bond in such amount as may be designated by the municipal judge, and upon failure to give such bond at the time of arrest, such person shall have the right to give the bond to the jailor in charge of the county jail in such amount as may be assessed by the municipal judge. (c)  The city clerk, or court clerk, or an assistant of either, arresting officer or officer on duty, chief of police, city manager or the jailor on duty at the jail is hereby authorized to accept cash bonds, upon delivery of a proper receipt from an authorized numbered receipt book, as provided in this section. (d)  Cash bonds when so accepted shall be delivered to the court clerk who shall, in turn, remit to the city treasurer, and shall be refunded or applied to any fine as authorized by law. Any person charged with a violation of an ordinance of the city or other offense against the city who has given a cash bond for his personal appearance in court at a designated time and place and who fails to appear at said time and place shall forfeit the cash bond upon the call of the case for trial. A forfeiture of bond shall not be a bar to the rearrest and subsequent prosecution of the accused for the violation. (Code 1973, § 2-403; Ord. No. 788, § 3, 3-28-83) State Law reference— Cash bonds, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-10. 
Sec. 7-8. - Bond forfeiture—When occurring. (a)  A bond forfeiture occurs at the end of the municipal court day upon the failure of appearance of a principal of any bond or recognizance given for the appearance of that person. (b)  An appearance bond shall not be forfeited unless the clerk of the court gave the surety at least seventy-two (72) hours' written notice, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, before the time of the required appearance of the principal. Notice shall not be necessary if the time for appearance is within seventy-two (72) hours from the time of arrest, provided the time for appearance is stated on the bond, or where the principal is given actual notice in open court. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70. 
Sec. 7-9. - Same—Execution hearing on failure of principal to appear. (a)  The municipal judge shall, at the end of the municipal court day, upon the failure of the principal to appear, forfeit the bond and order an execution hearing not sooner than one hundred twenty (120) days but not later than one hundred fifty (150) days after such failure to appear. Notice of the execution hearing shall be served within ten (10) days of such failure to appear by certified mail to the surety at the address listed on the bond or by personal service to the surety within ten (10) days of such failure to appear at its home office or to its designated registered agent. Service shall be considered complete upon the mailing of such certified notice. (b)  If at the execution hearing it is determined that judgment should be entered, the municipal judge shall so order and a writ of fieri facias shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the court. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-71. 
Sec. 7-10. - Same—Conditions not warranting forfeiture for failure to appear; remission. (a)  No judgment shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the municipal court by the written statement of a licensed physician that the principal on the bond was prevented from attending by some mental or physical disability. (b)  No judgment shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the municipal court that the principal on the bond was prevented from attending because he was detained by reason of arrest, sentence, or confinement in a penal institution or jail in the state, or so detained in another jurisdiction, or because he was involuntarily confined or detained pursuant to court order in a mental institution in the state or in another jurisdiction. An official written notice of the holding institution in which the principal is being detained or confined shall be considered proof of the principal's detention or confinement and such notice may be sent from the holding institution by mail or delivered by hand or by facsimile machine. Upon the presentation of such written notice to the clerk of the court and the prosecuting attorney having jurisdiction over the case, along with the tender of costs by the surety to the sheriff or other law enforcement officer necessary for the return of the principal, such notice shall serve as the surety's request for a detainer to be placed on the principal. Should there be a failure to place a detainer within thirty (30) days, Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays included, after such presentation and tender of costs, the surety shall then be relieved of liability for the appearance bond. (c)  No judgment shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the municipal court that prior to the entry of the judgment on the forfeiture the principal on the bond is in the custody of the sheriff or other responsible law enforcement agency. A written notice of the sheriff or other responsible law enforcement having custody or detention of the principal shall be considered adequate proof of such custody or detention. Except in cases where the principal on the bond is in the custody of the sheriff or other responsible law enforcement agency of the jurisdiction in which forfeiture proceedings were commenced pursuant to section 7-8, presentation of such official written notice to the court clerk and the prosecuting attorney having jurisdiction of the case along with tender of the estimated cost necessary to return the principal shall act as a request that a detainer be placed against the principal. Upon the sheriff or other officer of the jurisdiction where the case is pending assuming custody of the principal, the surety shall be relieved of the bond obligation. Should the state fail to place a detainer within thirty (30) days, Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays included, and after presentation and the tender of the estimated cost necessary to return the principal, the surety shall be relieved of the bond obligation. (d)  In cases in which subsection (d)(3) of this section is not applicable, on application filed within one hundred twenty (120) days from the payment of judgment, the municipal court shall order remission under the following conditions: (1)  Provided the bond amount has been paid at any time within one hundred twenty (120) days after judgment and the delay has not prevented the proper prosecution of the principal, upon application to the municipal court with prior notice to the prosecuting attorney of such application, the municipal court shall direct remission of ninety-five (95) percent of the bond amount remitted to the surety if the surety locates the principal causing the return of the principal to the city, apprehends, surrenders, or produces the principal, if the apprehension or surrender of the principal was substantially procured or caused by the surety, or if the location of the principal by the surety causes the adjudication of the principal by the municipal court. Should the surety, within two (2) years of the failure to appear, locate the principal causing the return of the principal to the city, apprehend, surrender, produce, or substantially cause the apprehension or surrender of the principal, or if the location of the principal by the surety causes the adjudication of the principal in the city the surety shall be entitled to a refund of fifty (50) percent of the bond payment. The application for fifty-percent remission shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days following the expiration of the two-year period following the date of judgment; (2)  Remission shall be granted upon condition of the payment of court costs and of the expenses of returning the principal to the jurisdiction by the surety; or (3)  If, within one hundred twenty (120) days after judgment, the surety surrenders the principal to the sheriff or responsible law enforcement officer, or the surrender has been denied by the sheriff or responsible law enforcement officer, or surety locates the principal in custody in another jurisdiction, the surety shall only be required to pay costs and five (5) percent of the face amount of the bond. If it is shown to the satisfaction of the municipal court, by the presentation of competent evidence from the sheriff or the holding institution, that the surrender has been made or denied or that the principal is in custody in another jurisdiction or that the surrender has been made and that five (5) percent of the bond amount and all costs have been tendered to the sheriff, the municipal court shall be authorized to direct that the judgment be marked satisfied and that the writ of execution (fi. fa.) be canceled. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-72. 
Sec. 7-11. - Appeals.     In cases wherein a defendant has been convicted of any offense against the ordinances of the city and fined therefor and appeals from such convictions but fails to give bond for appearance at the court to which such person appeals, such person may be confined until the appeal is disposed of. (Code 1973, § 2-404) Charter reference— Certiorari, § 1-804. 
Sec. 7-12. - Attendance of witnesses. (a)  Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the court to establish any fact, the municipal judge or clerk of court or any member of the police force shall issue a subpoena directed to the witness stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case which shall be served as other process by the chief of police, or any other member of the police force, or any person authorized to serve subpoenas under state law. (b)  If any person summoned as a witness shall fail, neglect or refuse to attend the trial, or render an excuse sufficient in the judgment of the court, such defaulting witness shall be liable to a fine not exceeding charter provisions and, if the cause shall be continued on account of the absence of the witness, the court may issue an attachment against such witness requiring such witness to show cause on the day appointed for trial why such witness should not be further dealt with for contempt; and the chief of police or other member of the police force shall, by virtue of such attachment, arrest such witness and shall confine such witness, so as to have such witness before the court at such time as may be appointed for the further hearing of the original complaint; provided, the witness may give bond for personal appearance as in other cases before the court. (Code 1973, §§ 2-412, 2-416) 
Sec. 7-13. - Contempt—In presence of court.     Any person who during a sitting of the municipal court shall be guilty of contempt of court in the presence of the court or who shall refuse to abide any sentence or order of court shall be punished as provided in the charter and ordinances. (Code 1973, § 2-414) 
Sec. 7-14. - Same—For failure to appear.     Any person summoned to appear before the municipal court who shall fail, neglect or refuse to appear or make a satisfactory showing for such failure, neglect, or refusal to appear and answer the charges specified shall be guilty of contempt of court and may be punished as provided in the charter and ordinances. The cause may be continued until such time as the court may direct, and the court shall issue an order requiring the chief of police, or other member of the police force, to arrest the offender and bring the offender before the court to answer the contempt; and it shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep the offender in custody until the offender is brought before the court, unless the offender gives bond for appearance as provided by law. (Code 1973, § 2-411) 
Sec. 7-15. - Same—Trial.     Any person charged with the offense of contempt of court shall have the right to a fair and speedy trial, compulsory process, and be confronted with the witnesses against such person, and the right to be heard in person or by counsel, or both, as to such person shall seem proper. (Code 1973, § 2-415) 
Sec. 7-16. - Same—Punishment.     Any person who, during a sitting of the municipal court, shall be guilty of contempt of court in the presence of the court, or who shall refuse to abide any sentence or order of court shall be fined by the municipal judge in a sum not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and cost or punishment by confinement for a period of not longer than sixty (60) days, or both, within the discretion of the municipal judge. (Code 1973, § 2-414; Ord. No. 788, § 4, 3-28-83) Charter reference— Punishment for contempt, § 1-803. 
Sec. 7-17. - Seizure of unlawful weapon or device; punishment. (a)  Whenever any person is arrested by any lawful officer of the city and such person is found to have on or about the person any unlawful weapon, such as a bowie knife, Arkansas toothpick, black-jack, knuckles, sling shot, pistol, burglar tools, or any other weapon or device which is so denominated or which shall hereafter be denominated as unlawful by general law and the ordinances of the city, the unlawful weapon or device weapon shall become the property of the city. (b)  All such weapons and devices may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of under the supervision and order of the judge before the person arrested is tried, but it is expressly provided that in no event shall such weapon or device be returned to the person arrested or any of such person's relatives or friends; and it is expressly provided that they shall not be sold or offered for sale in any part of the city. (c)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall subject the defendant to punishment as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1973, §§ 2-417, 2-418) 
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Regulation of elections, § 1-208. Cross reference— Election date, § 2-12. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 8-1. - Election officials.     The following offices are created for the city: (1)  The board of mayor and commissioners shall appoint a municipal election superintendent who shall receive such compensation as provided by the board. The superintendent shall exercise the powers and duties set forth in the Georgia Municipal Election Code. The election superintendent shall attend biennially the minimum hours of training as required by state law and as selected by the secretary of state. (2)  A chief manager and two (2) assistant managers for each election district shall be appointed by the board and shall receive such compensation as provided by the board. The election managers shall exercise the powers and duties set forth in the Municipal Election Code. No member of the board of mayor and commissioners and no employee of the city shall serve as an election manager. (3)  At each election, prior to the opening of the polls, the board of mayor and commissioners shall appoint a sufficient number of clerks to serve at each election. The clerks shall receive such compensation as provided by the board and shall exercise the powers and duties set forth in the Municipal Election Code. (Code 1973, § 2-501) State Law reference— Such code is O.C.G.A. ch. 21-3. 
Sec. 8-2. - Expenses.     The election superintendent is authorized to incur expenses in the preparation and conduct of an election including the cost of printing of ballots and the purchasing of all other supplies necessary for the conduct of an election. The superintendent is further authorized to incur all necessary expenses to provide voting booths for the proper conduct of all elections. (Code 1973, § 2-502) 
Sec. 8-3. - Election districts and polling places.     All the territory within the corporate limits of the city shall constitute one (1) election district, and all qualified electors residing in the city shall vote at the polling place selected by the board. The superintendent shall cause such polling place to be provided with sufficient light and heat. (Code 1973, § 2-503) 
Sec. 8-4. - Registration of electors; challenge. (a)  Any person who is a resident of the city prior to any municipal election, and who is registered as an elector with the board of registrars of the county shall be eligible to vote in any election of the city. (b)  Any elector of the city shall be allowed to challenge the right of registration of any person whose name appears upon the electors' list. The elector making the challenge shall appear before the superintendent on or before election day and state the grounds for the challenge in writing. The initial decision shall be made forthwith by the superintendent with a right of appeal to the board. If possible, the superintendent will notify the challenged elector and provide such elector with an opportunity to answer the challenge. If the superintendent does not find probable cause for sustaining the challenge, the challenged elector will be given the right to vote. If in doubt as to the merit of a challenge, the superintendent shall notify the chief manager and the challenged elector shall be allowed to cast a challenged ballot. (Code 1973, § 2-504) 
Sec. 8-5. - Nomination of candidates.     Each candidate, or the candidate's agent, shall file notice of the candidacy for municipal office as authorized by general law. (Code 1973, § 2-505) State Law reference— See O.C.G.A. § 21-3-91. 
Sec. 8-6. - Qualification fees.     The board may fix a qualification fee as authorized by general law, to be paid by candidates seeking election. (Code 1973, § 2-506) State Law reference— See O.C.G.A. § 21-3-90. 
Sec. 8-7. - Absentee ballots.     Absentee ballots may be used in all municipal elections under the provisions of the Municipal Election Code. (Code 1973, § 2-507) 
Sec. 8-8. - Vote required for election.     A candidate for municipal office may be elected in a general election by receiving a plurality of the votes cast to fill such office. (Code 1973, § 2-508) 
Secs. 8-9—8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONTESTED ELECTIONS 
Sec. 8-31. - Grounds.     Any person who was a candidate in an election or any aggrieved elector shall be permitted to contest the election of any candidate upon any of the following grounds: (1)  Misconduct, fraud, or irregularity by any election official sufficient to change or place in doubt the result. (2)  Ineligibility of the candidate for the office in dispute. (3)  Illegal votes received, or legal votes rejected, sufficient to change or place in doubt the result of the election. (4)  An error in counting the votes or in declaring the result of an election, if such error would change the result of the election. (5)  Any other cause which shows that another was the person legally elected. (Code 1973, § 2-509) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-422. 
Sec. 8-32. - Jurisdiction; presiding judge. (a)  A contest case governed by this article shall be tried and determined by the superior court of the county. (b)  The superior court shall be presided over by a superior court judge or senior judge. The superior court judge or senior judge who presides over the contest shall be selected as set out in subsection (c) of this section. (c)  Upon the filing of a contest petition, the clerk of the superior court shall immediately notify the administrative judge for the judicial administrative district, or the district court administrator, who shall immediately notify the administrative judge, of the institution of proceedings under this article. If the county is not in the circuit of the administrative judge, the administrative judge shall select a superior court judge from within the district, but not from the circuit in which the proceeding was instituted, or a senior judge not a resident of the circuit in which the proceeding was instituted, to preside over the contest. (d)  If the administrative judge is a member of the circuit, or if the other judges of the district are unable or are unwilling to preside over the proceeding, or if the other judges of the district are judges of the circuit, then the administrative judge shall select an administrative judge of an adjoining district to select a superior court judge from that district, or a superior court judge from the district, but not the circuit, or a senior judge who is not a resident of the circuit. (e)  After a judge has agreed to preside over the case, the administrative judge who selected the judge to hear the matter shall enter an order in the superior court appointing such judge, and such judge shall promptly begin presiding over such proceedings in such court and shall determine same as soon as practicable. Such judge shall be reimbursed for his actual expenses for food and lodging and shall receive the same mileage as any other state officials and employees. Senior judges shall be entitled to compensation and reimbursement as the law provides for senior judge service. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-423. 
Sec. 8-33. - Petition to contest results. (a)  A petition to contest the result of a primary or election shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court within five (5) days after the official consolidation of the returns of that particular office or question and certification thereof by the election official having responsibility for taking such action under this chapter or within five (5) days after the official consolidation and certification of the returns of that particular office or question by the election official having responsibility for taking such action under this chapter following a recount pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-3-405 and shall allege the following: (1)  The contestant's qualification to institute the contest; (2)  The contestant's desire to contest the result of such primary or election and the name of the nomination, office, or question involved in the contest; (3)  The name of the defendant; (4)  The name of each person who was a candidate at such primary or election for such nomination or office in the case of a contest involving same; (5)  Each ground of contest; (6)  The date of the official certification of the result in dispute; (7)  The relief sought; and (8)  Such other facts as are necessary to provide a full, particular, and explicit statement of the cause of contest. (b)  The state election board shall be served with a copy of the petition, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, by serving the same on the chairman thereof, by mailing a copy to the chairman by certified or registered mail; and a certificate that such service has been made shall be filed by the plaintiff or his attorney. (c)  When an error in the counting of votes is alleged as a ground of contest, it is sufficient for the contestant to state generally that he believes that error was committed in the counting of the votes cast for the filling of the nomination or office in dispute, or for or against the question in dispute, in one (1) or more specified precincts; and it shall not be necessary for the contestant to offer evidence to substantiate such allegation. If a recount of the votes casting any precinct shall change the result in dispute, any aggrieved litigant may require a recount of the votes affecting such result, which were cast in any other precinct, by amending his pleadings and requesting such relief. (d)  The petition shall be verified by the affidavit of each contestant. Such affidavit shall be taken and subscribed before some person authorized by law to administer oaths and shall state that the contestant believes the facts alleged therein are true, that according to the best of his knowledge and belief the contested result of the primary or election is illegal and the return thereof incorrect, and that the petition to contest the same is made in good faith. (e)  A statement of the grounds of contest shall not be rejected, nor the proceedings dismissed by any court, for want of form, if the grounds of contest are alleged with such certainty as will advise the defendant of the particular proceeding or cause for which the primary or election is contested. (f)  Upon such petition being filed, the clerk of the superior court shall issue notice, in the form of special process directed to the sheriff of such county, requiring the defendant and any other person named in such petition as a candidate for such nomination or office, if any, to appear and answer such petition, on a day to be fixed in such notice, not more than ten (10) days nor less than five (5) days after the service of such notice. Such notice, with a copy of the petition attached, shall be served by the sheriff upon the defendant and any other person named therein in the same manner as petitions and process are served in other civil cases. On or before the day fixed in such notice, unless for good cause shown the presiding judge shall extend the time therefor, the defendant shall appear and answer such petition and may set up by way of answer or cross action any right of interest he may have or claim in such proceeding. Any other person who was a candidate at such primary or election for the nomination or office involved and upon whom notice was served as provided in this subsection shall be deemed a litigant to such proceeding and may set up by way of answer or cross action any right of interest or claim he may have. (g)  After filing, any petition, cross action, or answer may be amended with leave of the superior court so as to include the specification of additional grounds of contest, other relevant facts, or prayer for further relief. After each amendment, a reasonable time to respond shall be given by the court to any opposing litigant. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-424. 
Sec. 8-34. - Conduct of hearing. (a)  Within twenty (20) days after the return day fixed in the notice as provided in section 8-33(a) to the defendant, the presiding judge shall fix a place and time for the hearing of the contest proceeding. Such judge may fix additional hearings at such other times and places as are necessary to decide the contest promptly. (b)  The superior court shall have plenary power to make, issue, and enforce all necessary orders, rules, processes and decrees for a full and proper understanding and final determination and enforcement of the decision of every such case, according to the course of practice in other civil cases under the laws of this state, or which may be necessary and proper to carry out this chapter. The superior court shall have authority to subpoena and to compel the attendance of any officer of the primary or election complained of, and of any person capable of testifying concerning the same; to compel the production of evidence which may be required at such hearing, in like manner and to the same extent as in other civil cases litigated before such court; to take testimony; and to proceed without delay to the hearing and determination of such contest, postponing for the purpose, if necessary, all other business. (c)  The court may, in its discretion, limit the time to be consumed in taking testimony, dividing such time equitably among all litigants concerned, with a view therein to the circumstances of the matter and to the proximity of the next succeeding primary or election. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-425. 
Sec. 8-35. - Demand for jury trial; impaneling of jury; special verdict. (a)  All issues of a contest shall be fully tried and determined by the superior court without the aid and intervention of a jury, unless a litigant to the contest shall demand a trial by jury at any time prior to the call of the case; and the superior court shall determine that it is an issue which under other laws of this state the litigant is entitled to have tried by a jury. Upon such determination, a jury shall be impaneled and the cause shall proceed according to the practice and procedure of the superior court in jury cases. (b)  The superior court may require a jury to return only a special verdict in the form of a special written finding upon each issue of fact. In a case where a special verdict is to be rendered, the superior court shall submit to the jury written questions susceptible of categorical or other brief answer or may submit written forms of the several special findings which might properly be made under the pleadings and evidence; or it may use such other method of submitting the issues and requiring the written findings thereon as it deems most appropriate. The superior court shall give to the jury such explanation and instruction concerning the matter thus submitted as may be necessary to enable the jury to make its findings upon each issue. If, in so doing, the superior court omits any issue of fact raised by the pleadings or by the evidence, each party waives his right to a trial by jury of the issue so omitted unless before the jury retires he demands its submission to the jury. As to an issue omitted without such demand, the superior court may make a finding; or, if it fails to do so, it shall be deemed to have made a finding in accord with the judgment on the special verdict. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-426. 
Sec. 8-36. - Declaration or judgment of superior court. (a)  After hearing the allegations and evidence in the contest, the superior court shall declare as nominated, elected, or as eligible to compete in a run-off primary or election that qualified candidate who received the requisite number of votes and shall pronounce judgment accordingly; and the clerk of the superior court shall certify such determination to the proper authority. In the case of a contest involving a question submitted to electors at an election, the court shall pronounce judgments as to whether the same was approved or disapproved; and the clerk of the superior court shall certify such determination to the defendant. (b)  When a defendant who has received the requisite number of votes for nomination, election, or to compete in a run-off primary or election is determined to be ineligible for the nomination or office sought, the court shall pronounce judgment declaring the primary or election invalid with regard to such nomination or office and shall call a second primary or election to fill such nomination or office. (c)  If misconduct is complained of on the part of the poll officers of any precinct, it shall not be held sufficient to set aside the contested result unless the rejection of the vote of such precinct would change such result. (d)  Whenever the superior court trying a contest shall determine that the primary or election is so defective as to the nomination, office, or eligibility in contest as to place in doubt the result of the entire primary or election for such nomination, office, or eligibility, the superior court shall declare the primary or election to be invalid with regard to such nomination, office, or eligibility and shall call for a second primary or election to be conducted among the same candidates who participated in the original primary or election to fill such nomination or office. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-427. 
Sec. 8-37. - Restrictions on settlement of case.     No settlement of any case under this article shall become effective unless: (1)  All parties to such case have been given an opportunity to object to such settlement before the superior court; and (2)  The superior court has approved such settlement. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-428. 
Sec. 8-38. - Appeals.     An appeal from the final determination of the superior court may be taken within ten (10) days from the rendition thereof to the supreme court or the court of appeals as in other civil cases. Such court shall consider applications for stays or supersedeas in such cases without regard to whether any notice of appeal has been filed or the record docketed in such cases. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-429. 
Sec. 8-39. - Costs.     The contestant and the defendant shall be liable to the officers and witnesses for the costs made by them, respectively. If the result of the primary or election is confirmed, the petition dismissed, or the prosecution fails, judgment shall be rendered against the contestant for costs; and, if the judgment is against the defendant or the result of the primary or election is set aside, he shall pay the costs at the discretion of the court. After entry of judgment, the costs may be collected by attachment or otherwise. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-430. 
Chapter 9 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Taxing authority, § 1-102(1). Cross reference— Expense reimbursement for board of mayor and commissioners, § 2-25. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 9-1. - Annual audit.     The board of mayor and commissioners shall award a contract annually to a qualified accountant or accounting firm to make a full examination and audit of the accounts and records of each city officer, agent or department having duties embracing the receipt, custody or disbursement of city funds. The accountant or accounting firm shall render its report in detail and with sufficient copies as determined by the city clerk. The city clerk shall file one (1) copy each with the state auditor, the members of the governing body, and the city manager. (Code 1973, § 2-602) 
Sec. 9-2. - Payment for fidelity bonds.     The premiums on all bonds of city officers required to give fidelity bonds shall be paid by the city out of city funds. (Code 1973, § 2-601) 
Sec. 9-3. - Official bond.     There shall be obtained by the governing body a blanket fidelity bond covering all officials and employees of the city who handle money belonging to the city, to be in such amount as prescribed in the governing body. (Code 1973, §§ 2-308, 2-314, 2-324) Charter reference— Bond required, § 1-603. 
Sec. 9-4. - Purchases and contracts; city manager's authority to reallocate departmental budget appropriations. (a)  The city manager and city clerk, upon the authorization of the city manager, are hereby authorized to purchase such supplies, materials and equipment and contract for such services as may be provided for by the appropriation ordinances of the board of mayor and commissioners. In making such purchases of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or less, the city shall procure quotations from at least three (3) vendors whenever practicable. In cases where a purchase is expected to exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), the city shall procure competitive, sealed bids from at least three (3) vendors whenever practicable. Awards hereunder shall be made to the lowest, best and most responsible bidder for the particular grade or class of material, work or service desired. Any item purchased under statewide contract established by the State of Georgia Department of Administrative Services for the benefit of government entities throughout Georgia shall be exempt from the bidding process otherwise required by this section. Nothing in this section is intended to restrict the power of the city manager, here conferred, to employ such supervisors, labor and teams as are necessary to the proper conduct of the departments of the city, and to have payment therefor made. (b)  The city manager is hereby authorized to make necessary purchases of goods and/or services not specifically enumerated in the annual budget at a cost of less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Purchases not specifically enumerated in the budget which have a cost of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more shall be made only upon specific resolution of the board of mayor and commissioners. (c)  The city manager is hereby authorized to reallocate departmental budget appropriations among the various line item expenditures of any department as the city manager deems necessary. The city manager shall also be authorized to effect interdepartmental transfers, in the same fund, not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Any such transfers shall be reported to the board of mayor and commissioners at its next regular meeting and shall be entered in the minutes. (Code 1973, § 2-309; Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 9-28-09; Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 8-22-16) Charter reference— City manager to act as purchasing agent, § 1-702(h). Cross reference— Execution of contracts, § 2-6; duties of city clerk, § 2-50 et seq. 
Secs. 9-5—9-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL INDEBTEDNESS 
Sec. 9-20. - Temporary loans—Authority; notes.     The board of mayor and commissioners may negotiate temporary loans as may be necessary to make available as needed the funds anticipated as coming into the city treasury from the sources of revenue or income shown in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget during the then current fiscal year. Such loans shall be evidenced by promissory notes issued in the name of the city by the mayor, and the mayor's signature shall be attested by the city clerk. Notes shall be issued for such amount, bear such rate of interest, and run for such periods not exceeding twelve (12) months, as may be provided by resolution of the board of mayor and commissioners. Notes issued hereunder shall not exceed in the aggregate the total uncollected portion of the revenue or income which is anticipated in their issuance. Such notes shall be paid at maturity from the receipts of the annual revenue and other income. This provision shall not prevent the issuance of such notes in short terms and their renewal at the end of such terms, provided the aggregate term covered by the original issue and all renewals thereof shall not exceed twelve (12) months. The full faith and credit of the city are hereby irrevocably pledged to the punctual payment of the principal and interest of all notes issued in conformity herewith, according to their terms. (Code 1973, § 2-605) 
Sec. 9-21. - Same—Proceeds of bond issues.     The board of mayor and commissioners may negotiate temporary loans for the purpose of making available at once a part of the proceeds of bond issues duly authorized and in process of issuance or sale and delivery. Such loans shall not in the aggregate exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total proceeds of the bond issue which their issuance anticipates; they shall be evidenced by promissory notes issued in the name of the city by the mayor and the mayor's signature shall be attested by the city clerk. Such notes shall mature and be paid within six (6) months from the proceeds of the bond issue which their issue anticipates. In other respects, their issuance shall be governed by like conditions provided for revenue loans in section 9-20. (Code 1973, § 2-606) 
Secs. 9-22—9-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY TAX[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 2, adopted June 24, 2013, repealed the former Art. III., §§ 9-41—9-47, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to property and sanitation taxes and derived from Ord. No. 0503, § 1, adopted May 23, 2005. Provisions pertaining to sanitation fees are now set forth in Art. V, §§ 9-81—9-85 of this chapter. 
Sec. 9-41. - Reserved. 
Sec. 9-42. - Property tax levied; return of property. (a)  An ad valorem tax is hereby levied on every house, building lot, and any and all other real estate within the City of Avondale Estates not exempt from taxation by law, which shall be assessed in accordance, with the City Charter and Georgia law, and on all merchandise, machinery, or special privileges, and on all personal property of every kind not otherwise exempted from personality ad valorem taxation which is held or owned by any company, firm, individual, or other person or persons, natural or created by law however held, whether individually, or as trustee, guardian, administrator, executor, receiver, assignee, agent or otherwise on January 1, 2013, and January 1 of each succeeding year. (b)  Any person, firm, or corporation, joint stock company, partnership, or other person subject to the tax levied in subsection (a) who may have held or owned any such machinery, merchandise, equipment, franchise, special privileges, boats, motors, airplanes, and other personal property on January 1, 2013, and on the first day of January of each succeeding year shall on or before the first day of March, 2013, and on the first day of March of each succeeding year, make a return to the county tax commissioner of the amount of such merchandise, machinery, franchises, special privileges, and all other personal property of every kind subject to taxation. (c)  The millage rate of ad valorem taxation pursuant to this section shall be established each year by ordinance adopted by the Board of Mayor and Commissioners in accordance with Georgia law. (Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 2, 6-24-2013) 
Sec. 9-43. - Reserved. 
Sec. 9-44. - Tangible personal property tax exemption.     In order that the reasonable cost of administering and collecting the tax does not exceed the tax that would be payable, tangible personal property of a taxpayer shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation if the actual fair market value of the total amount of taxable tangible personal property owned by the taxpayer within the city does not exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00). (Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 2, 6-24-2013) 
Sec. 9-45. - When taxes due and payable; penalty for late payment.     Taxes due the City of Avondale Estates by reason of this article shall be due and payable as follows: (a)  Real estate . The first installment shall be due and payable no later than August 15th, without discount, and shall bear interest at one (1) percent per month if not paid when due, with a minimum interest of one dollar ($1.00), plus a late payment penalty of five (5) percent of the taxes past due. The second installment shall be due and payable no later than November 15th of the year for which the tax is assessed, without discount, with interest at one (1) percent per month accumulated after the due date, with a minimum interest of one dollar ($1.00), plus a late payment penalty of five (5) percent of the taxes past due. Any period of less than one (1) month shall be considered to be one (1) month for the purposes of assessing interest on late payment of taxes. (b)  Personal property . The first installment shall be due and payable no later than August 15th, without discount, and shall bear interest at one (1) percent per month if not paid when due, with a minimum interest of one dollar ($1.00), plus a late payment penalty of five (5) percent of the taxes past due. The second installment shall be due and payable no later than November 15th of the year for which the tax is assessed, without discount, with interest at one (1) percent per month accumulated after the due date, with a minimum interest of one dollar ($1.00), plus a late payment penalty of five (5) percent of the taxes past due. Any period of less than one (1) month shall be considered to be one (1) month for the purposes of assessing interest on late payment of taxes. (Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 2, 6-24-2013) 
Sec. 9-46. - When due date falls on Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.     When the date prescribed by or imposed pursuant to this article for the filing of any return or the payment of any tax falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the deadline to file the return or to pay the tax shall be postponed until the first day following which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. If return or payment is by mail, timely return or payment will be ascertained by the postmark date. (Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 2, 6-24-2013) 
Sec. 9-47. - Default of payment.     In default of payment of any portion of taxes, the city clerk shall issue a fi. fa. no later than December 31st of the year in which tax, including penalties and accumulated interest, is due and unpaid, which may be collected as provided by law, and with costs of such fi. fa. assessed against the property owner (Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 2, 6-24-2013) 
Secs. 9-48—9-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
Sec. 9-71. - Sale at auction.     The city may sell, at public outcry, to the highest bidder for cash any and all of the articles of personal property that have come into its hands and which, after an effort has been made to ascertain the true owner thereof without success, remain unclaimed for a period of sixty (60) days. 
Sec. 9-72. - Catalog record.     It shall be the duty of the chief of police to maintain a separate and complete catalog record of all property coming into the city's hands. Such property shall be identified in detail by its usual name, make and model, manufacturer's name and serial number, if any. If no identifying name or numbers, it shall be fully described on the catalog record as to its physical properties and appearance. The record shall also show the date the property came into the hands of the city and the disposal thereof. 
Sec. 9-73. - Effort to locate owner prior to sale.     It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make an effort to find the true owner of any article of personal property coming into the city's hands and, if the owner can be found, to deliver the property to the owner. If the true owner of the article cannot be found and the property remains unclaimed for a period of not less than sixty (60) days, the city may proceed to sell the article as provided in this article. 
Sec. 9-74. - Terms of sale.     All articles sold shall be sold for cash to the highest bidder on an as-is basis and no warranties of any nature, either expressed or implied, either as to merchantable title, quality or performance are made by the city. 
Sec. 9-75. - Advertisement of sale.     The sale shall be advertised in the city's newsletter and in a newspaper of general circulation in the county for one (1) week immediately preceding the sale date. The advertisement shall state the time and place of the sale, that it shall be open to the public, that all sales are to be made to the highest bidder, that only unclaimed property which has come into the possession of the city is being sold, and that the city makes no warranties, either expressed or implied, as to merchantable title, quality or performance, and that all articles are sold as-is. 
Sec. 9-76. - Auctioneer; conduct of sale.     The city shall appoint an individual to conduct the sale authorized by this article under the guidance of an employee of the city. The individual acting as the auctioneer shall be the sole arbiter in the case of a disputed sale and shall not make a sale until all bidding on the article offered has ceased; however, there shall be no required number of bids before a sale is made. 
Sec. 9-77. - Announcement of terms to be made during sale.     It shall be the duty of the person holding the sale authorized by this article to make public announcement before opening the sale that the city does not warrant title to any article, nor is there any other warranty, either expressed or implied, as to any article sold; that all sales are final and all articles are sold as-is. It shall be the duty of the person in charge to make this announcement at intervals during the progress of the sale. 
Sec. 9-78. - Disposition of sale proceeds.     It shall be the duty of the city to make a true accounting of all the property sold and money collected from the sales conducted. Such money shall be deposited in the general fund. 
Secs. 9-79, 9-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SANITATION FEE 
Sec. 9-81. - Sanitation fee levied.     In order to offset the cost of providing sanitation services to persons and property within the city, the city hereby imposes a fee upon every lot and parcel in the city receiving such service, which shall be assessed to the real property owner each year. (Ord. No. 13-02, § 3, 6-24-2013) 
Sec. 9-82. - Sanitation fee rate. (a)  The annual sanitation fee rate shall be determined by the character and use of each parcel or lot. Every property use in the city shall be assigned to one (1) of the following four (4) categories for sanitation fee purposes: (1)  Residential means any place where persons reside, including but not limited to houses, apartments, condominiums. (2)  Heavy-usage business unit includes, without limitation, restaurants, service stations, banks, drug stores, grocery/convenience stores, veterinary hospitals, kennels, pet groomers, nurseries, post offices, shipping companies, chemical supply companies, furniture upholstery shops, television/radio repair shops, laundromats, the Avondale Swim and Tennis Club, the Avondale Community Club, and other similar volume users. (3)  Normal-usage business unit includes, without limitation, dry cleaners, printing shops, import/export companies, vehicle repair and clean-up shops, bakeries, counter/cabinet shops, electricians, plumbers, tree surgeons, florists, furniture and/or clothing stores, other retail shops, and other similar volume users. (4)  Light-usage business unit includes, without limitation, barber shops, beauty shops/hair salons, driving schools, business/religious/fraternal organizations, mail order firms, drapery workrooms, seamstresses, tailors, shoe repair shops, photography studios, insurance agencies, offices for accountants, advertising and public relations firms, architects, artists, attorneys, consultants, industrial development, realtors, administrative offices for contractors and engineers who do not generate construction-related debris, and other similar volume users. Whenever a business unit is unoccupied on January 1st of the tax year, the light-usage commercial rate will be assessed for that year. (b)  The sanitation fee shall be assessed on a per-unit basis. For residential property uses, a separate fee shall be imposed for each housing unit. For commercial property uses, a separate fee shall be imposed on each business unit. (c)  The amount of the annual per-unit sanitation fee shall be set by properly adopted resolution of the Board of Mayor and Commissioners and may be amended at the discretion of the Board of Mayor and Commissioners. (Ord. No. 13-02, § 3, 6-24-2013) 
Sec. 9-83. - Exemption where sanitation service not provided.     In those instances where the city declines or opts not to provide sanitation services due to the use of dumpsters as permitted in the city's waste management ordinance, no sanitation fee shall be assessed. A change to dumpster service may occur at any time during the year; however, the request from the property owner for such a change must be submitted to the city manager no later than December 15 of the preceding year and approved by the city manager prior to the first day of the tax year or the sanitation fee shall be assessed for that entire year. (Ord. No. 13-02, § 3, 6-24-2013) 
Sec. 9-84. - When fee due and payable. (a)  The sanitation fee shall be due and payable by November 15 th of each year, without discount, with interest at one (1) percent per month if not paid when due, with a minimum interest of one dollar ($1.00), plus a late payment penalty of five (5) percent of the taxes due. (b)  Any period of less than one (1) month shall be considered to be one (1) month for the purposes of assessing interest on late payment of the sanitation fee. (c)  When the date prescribed for payment of the sanitation fee by this section falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the payment of such fee shall be timely if paid by the first day following such due date which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. If payment is by mail, timely payment will be ascertained by the postmark date. (Ord. No. 13-02, § 3, 6-24-2013) 
Sec. 9-85. - Default of payment.     In the event that a property owner defaults on payment of the sanitation fee, the city clerk shall issue a fi, fa. no later than December 31 st of the year in which said fee, including penalties and accumulated interest, is due and unpaid, which may be collected as provided by law, and with costs of such fi, fa. assessed against the property owner. (Ord. No. 13-02, § 3, 6-24-2013) 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Interference with fire plugs, § 12-17. 
Sec. 10-1. - Fire prevention and safety inspections. (a)  The state minimum fire safety standards as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4 and adopted by the State Safety Fire Commissioner are hereby adopted by the city as if set forth in full herein. (b)  No building within the city other than single family residences shall be occupied unless it shall first be inspected and approved as in compliance with minimum fire safety standards as adopted above. Such inspections may be performed by any qualified individual designated by the city manager. (c)  Any qualified individual so designated shall administer and enforce the state minimum Fire Safety Code within the city. (d)  The state fire marshall, a deputy recognized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12.1 or the DeKalb County Fire Marshall shall investigate arson and other incendiary fires within the city. (Code 1973, § 2-7217; Ord. No. 13-05, § 1, 12-16-2013) Cross reference— Existing buildings code, § 5-161 et seq. 
Sec. 10-2. - Fireworks—Discharging.     The discharge, firing or use of firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, or other fireworks or substances designed and intended for pyrotechnic display, and of pistols, canes, cannons, or other appliances, using blank cartridges or caps containing chlorate or potash mixture, is hereby prohibited; provided, that the board of mayor and commissioners may allow the public display of fireworks by properly qualified individuals; provided also that such displays shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of the chief of the county fire department, shall not be hazardous to surrounding property or endanger any person. (Code 1973, §§ 2-801(26), 2-7252) State Law reference— Fireworks control, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-3. - Same—Sale.     The sale of fireworks at retail is prohibited. The chief of the police department may, at such chief's discretion, remove or have removed, at the owners' expense, all stocks of fireworks or other combustibles exposed for sale or held in stock in violation of this section. (Code 1973, § 2-7253) 
Sec. 10-4. - Hazardous use of buildings.     It shall be unlawful for any person to locate or install in any building within the city a business or occupancy of a hazardous nature which will, according to the classifications, rulings, and regulations of any agency of the state furnishing classifications on insurable risks for fire insurance companies doing business in the state, produce an increase in the cost of fire insurance carried on in buildings housing such hazardous business or condition, if such increase exceeds ten (10) percent of the cost of insurance before the existence of such hazard, unless the owner or operator of such hazardous business presents to the owner of the property located within thirty (30) feet of the outer walls of the building occupied by the hazardous business a satisfactory obligation and agreement to assume such additional expenses as may be entailed upon the owner and the occupant of adjoining property in carrying fire insurance. (Code 1973, § 2-732) 
Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Authority, § 1-102(22), (26). State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 11-1. - Spitting on sidewalks, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate upon the sidewalk, or upon the floor of any theater, courthouse, church, or other public building, store or office, or of any vehicle, conveyance or car. (Code 1973, § 2-801(21)) State Law reference— Spitting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-120. 
Secs. 11-2—11-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Waste management, § 13-20 et seq. State Law reference— Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; littering, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-40 et seq., 40-6-249. 
Sec. 11-20. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:     Aircraft means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.     Authorized receptacle means a litter storage and collection container constructed so to reasonably confine and retain litter and trash.     Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original copies of any matter of literature: (1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, commodity or thing; (2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; (3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit, but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incidental to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place at any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or (4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or circulated for advertising purpose, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.     Garbage means food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used for or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetables.     Litter means garbage, refuse, trash and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.     Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States postal service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year and sold to the public.     Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, or sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced or original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of commercial handbill or newspaper.     Park means a park, reservation, playground, recreation center, or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and its inhabitants and devoted to active or passive recreation.     Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure designated or used wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.     Public place means any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public way and any public park, square, space, grounds or building.     Refuse means all solid waste (except body waste) including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned motor vehicles and solid market industrial wastes.     Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, plastic and similar materials.     Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-21. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter.     The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. However, this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized receptacles for collection. (Code 1973, § 2-7243) 
Sec. 11-22. - Littering public place; placing in receptacles. (a)  No person shall throw, dump, deposit, or leave litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles or in authorized receptacles for collection. (b)  Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon private property. (Code 1973, §§ 2-7100, 2-7169) Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 17. 
Sec. 11-23. - Littering occupied private property.     No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or unoccupied private property within the city whether or not owned by such person, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place, or upon any private property. 
Sec. 11-24. - Littering private vacant lots.     No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether or not owned by such person. 
Sec. 11-25. - Sweeping litter into gutters; cleanliness of sidewalk.     No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city any litter from any building or lot or from any private or public sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (Code 1973, § 2-7193) 
Sec. 11-26. - Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter.     No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city any litter from any building or lot or from any public place or private or public sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep all premises, including sidewalks, service alleys, and parking areas of their businesses free of litter. (Code 1973, § 2-779) 
Sec. 11-27. - Littering parks.     No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
Sec. 11-28. - Littering bodies of water.     No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, stream, ditch, canal or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
Sec. 11-29. - Litter from vehicles—Throwing.     No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
Sec. 11-30. - Same—Loads causing litter; tracking mud. (a)  No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. (b)  No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. (Code 1973, § 2-7164) Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 18. 
Sec. 11-31. - Littering from aircraft.     No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object without obtaining a permit from the city. 
Sec. 11-32. - Handbills—Throwing or distributing in public places.     No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city; nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place. (Code 1973, §§ 2-703, 2-7174) Cross reference— Posting handbills on public property, §§ 12-23, 12-24. 
Sec. 11-33. - Same—Throwing on vacant private premises.     No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
Sec. 11-34. - Same—Distributing at inhabited private premises.     No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, unless requested by anyone upon such inhabited private premises not to do so, such person may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon private property. 
Sec. 11-35. - Same—Political; handing handbills to drivers.     The provisions of this article notwithstanding, political handbills or printed matter may be handed out or distributed in public places to individuals who are willing to accept same; provided, however, no handbills of a commercial, political or noncommercial nature may be handed out or distributed to any occupant of a vehicle upon the public streets, whether such vehicle is moving or stopped. Nothing herein contained shall be construed in any way to deprive any bona fide organization or its members of enjoying and exercising any rights or privileges which they have or may hereafter have under the provisions of the laws of the state or the laws or constitution of the United States. 
Sec. 11-36. - Penalties. (a)  Violations of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). (b)  In the sound discretion of the court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one (1) mile any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence. (c)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
Secs. 11-37—11-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES 
Sec. 11-61. - Enumerated.     The following conditions are specifically declared to be nuisances: (1)  Toilets, plumbing, sewers, septic tank systems, garbage containers or any other sanitary facilities in bad repair. (2)  Conditions conducive to the breeding or attraction of rodents, flies, fleas, ticks, mosquitoes or any other disease-carrying insects. (3)  Manmade or mechanically induced noxious air contaminants. (4)  Trash, garbage, refuse or any foul, decaying or putrescent material kept, used, placed or disposed of in such a manner or place as to be or to become detrimental to human health or well-being. (5)  Sewage, kitchen wastes, laundry wastes or any other wastes deposited upon or allowed to remain upon the ground surface or any other place so as to be or to become detrimental to human health or well-being. (6)  The keeping of animals or fowl unless the housing, enclosures or other areas used by the animals or fowl are kept clean, well-drained and free from accumulation of excrement. 
Sec. 11-62. - Prohibited.     No person shall create, maintain, support, aid or continue any condition declared to be a nuisance in this article. 
Chapter 12 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Parade permit, § 18-12. 
Sec. 12-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be summoned to the municipal court for each violation and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 841, § 1(14-4), 9-23-91) 
Sec. 12-2. - Refusal to obey official request at fire or other emergency; halting or impeding flow of traffic. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to obey the official request or order of a police officer or fireman to move, for the purpose of promoting the public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire or other emergency. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate with another or others in or on any public right-of-way or place so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicle or pedestrian traffic after having been directed to clear such public right-of-way or place by a police officer. State Law reference— Refusal to obey police, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-10-30, 40-6-2. 
Sec. 12-3. - Disorderly conduct.     It shall be unlawful for any person to: (1)  Disturb the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive, or obstreperous conduct or carriage; loud or unusual noises; profane, obscene or offensive language; language calculated to provoke a breach of the peace; or by assaulting, striking or fighting another. (2)  Act in a loud and boisterous, reckless, unruly or violent manner for the purpose of insulting, degrading, or inciting another or a group of individuals in a public place. (3)  Permit any such conduct in, or upon any house or premises under a person's management or control, so that others in the vicinity are disturbed thereby. (Code 1973, § 2-801(1), (2); Ord. No. 841, § 1(14-1), 9-23-91) State Law reference— Related offenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-30 et seq. 
Sec. 12-4. - Disturbing the peace; definitions.     "A" weighted sound level means the sound level reported in units of dB(A) approximating the response of human hearing when measuring sounds of low to moderate intensity as measured using the "A" weighting network with a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors.     ANSI means the American National Standards Institute.     Commercial area means any parcel of land which is not zoned for single-family residential use only.     Decibel (dB) means the unit for the measurement of sound pressure based upon a reference pressure of twenty (20) micropascals (zero decibels), i.e., the average threshold of hearing for a person with very good hearing.     Single-family residential area means any parcel of land which is zoned exclusively for single-family residential use. Under the present zoning classification system of the city, single-family residential areas are zoned R-24 and R-12.     Sound means any oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. Bass reverberations constitute sound.     Sound level meter means an instrument that conforms to ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. (Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Att.), 1-28-19) Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 2019, repealed the former § 12-4, and enacted a new § 12-4 as set out herein. The former § 12-4 pertained to disturbing the peace and derived from Code 1973, § 2-801(1), (2) and Ord. No. 841, § 1(14-2), adopted Sept. 23, 1991. 
Sec. 12-4.1. - Disturbing the peace; public streets and single family residential areas. (a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to sound originating on any public street or single-family residential area of the city. (b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city, and which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability more than fifty (50) feet from the point of origin of the sound or noise. (c)  The following acts among others are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary sound or noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: (1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city, except as a danger warning, the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of such signaling device and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity, the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of such signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason. (2)  Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of this set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the room, building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. (3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any mechanical device. (4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. (5)  Animals, birds. Anyone who keeps or maintains an animal or bird that disturbs the comfort or repose of any person because the animal or bird is emitting frequent or long-continued sound or noise, and who continues to keep, maintain or allow any animal or bird to disturb the comfort or repose of any person shall be deemed in violation of this section; provided, the person keeping or maintaining such animal or bird has been first notified in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the complaining party that the animal or bird being kept by the addressee is disturbing such person's comfort or repose. This section shall be liberally construed to accomplish the objectives thereof and the person making the written notification need not use the exact words of this section to the addressee so long as the notification sufficiently informs the addressee of the nature of the disturbing noise emitted by any animal or bird. (6)  Reserved. (7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. The use of special or modified standard equipment exhaust devices on automotive vehicles to increase or modify the sound emitted by the exhaust is prohibited. (8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. (9)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. (10)  Construction or repair of buildings. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, except that the city may determine when the loss or inconvenience that would result to any party in interest is of such nature as to warrant special consideration, then the city may grant a permit for a period not to exceed ten (10) days or less for this work to be done within the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (11)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while it is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in these streets indicating that it is a school, hospital or court street. (12)  Hawkers, peddlers, vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. (13)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. (14)  Transportation of metal rails, similar materials. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of the streets or other public places. (15)  Pile drivers, hammers, similar equipment. The operation, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual sounds or noises. (16)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden this noise. (17)  Sound trucks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes; the use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during such hours and in such places and with such volume as would constitute this use as a public nuisance. (d)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against the following: (1)  Any vehicle of the city or county while engaged in necessary public business. (2)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county, or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform this work during the day. (3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. (4)  Any event that is permitted by the city and specifically exempted from this section in advance by the city manager. (Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Att.), 1-28-19) Cross reference— Animals and fowl, ch. 4; buildings, construction, maintenance, and related activities, ch. 5. 
Sec. 12-4.2. - Disturbing the peace; commercial areas. (a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to sound originating on any property within the commercial areas of the city, excluding public streets. (b)  Prohibited sound levels during designated hours. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any source of sound on any property within any commercial area of the city that is measured in accordance with this section to be in excess of the stated limitations during the stated periods of time: (1)  Eighty (80) dB(A) between 7:01 a.m. and 10:59 p.m. every day, and between 11:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. (2)  Seventy-three (73) dB(A) between Midnight and 7:00 a.m. every day, and between 11:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. (c)  Procedures for the determination of sound levels. All sound measurements made pursuant to the enforcement of this section shall comply with the following regulations: (1)  All sound measurements shall be made upon the affected property, at a distance of twenty (20) feet from the property line of the property upon which the noise under investigation emanates. When instrumentation cannot be placed at twenty (20) feet from the property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto as possible and the location of the measurement noted on any citation issued pursuant to this section. (2)  For the purposes of this section, sound measurements are measured on the A-weighted sound scale of a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics established by ANSI and having been properly calibrated according to accepted practice established by ANSI. (3)  The sound level meter and calibrator must be recertified annually at an accredited laboratory certified to meet the requirements of ANSI Z540-1-1994, ANSI Z540-3-2006 and ANSI R205. A field check of meter calibration and batteries must be conducted before and after every set of measurements and shall be noted on any citation issued pursuant to this section. (4)  Whenever a citation is issued pursuant to this section, the officer issuing the citation shall measure the residual sound level at the same location which the offending sound was measured as soon as possible after the offending noise is silenced. The officer issuing the citation shall record such residual sound level and include this information on the citation issued. (d)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against the following: (1)  Any activity carried out by the state, city or county government while engaged in necessary public business; (2)  The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday; (3)  Any event that is permitted by the city and specifically exempted from this chapter in advance by the city manager. (Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Att.), 1-28-19) 
Sec. 12-4.3. - Disturbing the peace; violations and penalties. (a)  The provisions of this section may be enforced by police officers and/or code enforcement officers of the city. (b)  Any person found to be disturbing the peace in violation of this section for the first time within a given calendar year shall be issued a written warning by the police or code enforcement officer rather than a citation. Such warning shall be filed and indexed appropriately by such officer to facilitate the enforcement of this section. (c)  Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by this section, whom has already received a written warning for disturbing the peace during the current calendar year, shall be issued a citation by a police officer or a code enforcement officer. (d)  Where a citation is issued for disturbing the peace in violation of this section and the person so cited is convicted in municipal court for violation of this section, the municipal court shall impose the following penalties: (1)  Upon a first conviction for disturbing the peace within a given calendar year, the court shall impose a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00); (2)  Upon a second conviction for disturbing the peace within a given calendar year, the court shall impose a fine of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00); (3)  Upon a third conviction for disturbing the peace within a given calendar year, the court shall impose a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00); and (4)  Upon a fourth conviction for disturbing the peace within a given calendar year, the court shall impose a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and may also sentence the offender to up to six (6) months of confinement if the court deems appropriate. (Ord. No. 19-01, § 2(Att.), 1-28-19) 
Sec. 12-5. - Keeping disorderly house, permitting gambling.     It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a disorderly house, or to knowingly permit in any house or tenement in such person's premises any gambling table or gambling device at which any game of chance shall be played for money or property or anything representing same; or for any person to bet, win or lose, or play for money, or property or anything representing same; either in specie or by means of anything representing the same, at any such table or device, or at any game of chance. (Code 1973, § 2-801(3)) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-44, 16-12-20 et seq. 
Sec. 12-5.1. - Operation of game of chance.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of any game of chance. Each day of operation, or permission to operate, shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1973, § 2-801(57)) State Law reference— Gambling, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq. 
Sec. 12-6. - Gambling in public.     It shall be unlawful for any person to expose in any street or upon any public ground any table or device of any kind intended for playing a game of hazard or chance, or for any person to play any such game, or any other unlawful game, in any street or upon any public ground in the city. (Code 1973, § 2-801(5)) State Law reference— Gambling, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq. 
Sec. 12-7. - Public intoxication; consumption; transporting open containers of alcoholic beverages. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear on the streets and roads of the city or in any public place or place of business patronized by the public in an intoxicated condition. (b)  No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or transport open containers of alcoholic beverages on or upon public areas, except where authorized under the provisions of section 15-4 pertaining to consumption of alcoholic beverages in city parks. State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-42. 
Sec. 12-8. - Damage, etc., to utility property.     It shall be unlawful for any person to climb upon, displace, break, deface, or in any way impair or damage any poles, wires, lamps, or equipment of any electric, telephone, telegraph or other utility. (Code 1973, § 2-801(23)) State Law reference— For similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 12-9. - Damaging street signs, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface or destroy any street sign, guidepost or lamp or lantern thereon, or any tree, building, fence, post or other thing set, erected or made for the use or ornament of the city, or paint or draw any work or figure upon any curbstone or sidewalk; or deface any sign erected on any building, or written or printed notices or placards. (Code 1973, § 2-801(22)) State Law reference— Damaging property, etc., O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 12-10. - Moving into building without authority.     It shall be unlawful for any person to move into or occupy in any manner any building belonging to any person, society, or religious assembly without leave from the person in charge of such building. (Code 1973, § 2-801(41)) State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 et seq. 
Sec. 12-11. - Discharge of weapons.     It shall be unlawful for any person without legal justification to fire a gun, rifle, pistol, revolver, cannon, air rifle, or firearm of any type or shoot a slingshot or bow and arrow upon any street or highway or within one hundred (100) yards thereof, or in any building or within one hundred (100) yards of any building in the city. (Code 1973, §§ 2-801(26), (56), 2-7171) State Law reference— Discharge of guns, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103 et seq. 
Sec. 12-12. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 2013, repealed § 12-12, which pertained to regulations prohibiting the possession of knives. 
Sec. 12-13. - Entry on closed streets.     It shall be unlawful for any person, without authority, to enter or remain upon any portion of the public streets which have been enclosed, barricaded or roped off by order of the city manager, director of public works, chief of police, or county fire chief. (Code 1973, § 2-801(29), (48)) 
Sec. 12-14. - Removal of barricades, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the ropes or other guards placed across a street of the city while paving, grading or other public improvement or purpose which is in progress. (Code 1973, § 2-801(48)) 
Sec. 12-15. - Assembling or conspiring to commit crime.     It shall be unlawful to assemble with an intent, or being assembled, to mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force or violence against the property of the city, or the person or property of another, or against the peace, or to the terror of others, or to make any movement or operation therefor. (Code 1973, § 2-801(17)) State Law reference— Conspiracy, O.C.G.A. § 16-4-8; unlawful assembly, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-33. 
Sec. 12-16. - Preventing or disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings, or processions; crowding, pushing other persons. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or knowingly commit any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, or procession. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to jostle or roughly crowd or push any person in any public place. State Law reference— Disrupting lawful meeting, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 12-17. - Interference with fire plugs.     It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any fire plug in any way whatever, except for a member of the fire department in the discharge of official duty or persons authorized to repair such plugs. (Code 1973, § 2-801(30)) Cross reference— Fire protection and prevention, ch. 10. 
Sec. 12-18. - Loitering or prowling—Generally. (a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals or on the property of another without permission or legal justification under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. (b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. (Ord. No. 829, § 1, 11-6-89) State Law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 12-19. - Same—Minors.     It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the custody or control of any minor to permit, allow, or encourage such minor to violate section 12-18. 
Sec. 12-20. - Same—For purpose of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire.     It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in public for the purpose of soliciting or procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. 
Sec. 12-21. - Same—For purpose of engaging in drug-related activity. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public, or near any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any of the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13 (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq.). (b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are: (1)  Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For purposes of this chapter, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller" is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession, or sale of any controlled substance as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13 (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq.) or such person has been convicted of any violation of any of the provisions of such title and chapter of the Official Code of Georgia or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as needle tracks, burned or callused thumb and index fingers, underweight, nervous and excited behavior. (2)  Such person is currently subject to a court order prohibiting his presence in a high drug activity geographic area. (3)  Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity including, by way of example only, such person acting as a lookout or hailing or stopping cars. (4)  Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a gang, or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity. (5)  Such person transfers small objects or packages in a furtive fashion. (6)  Such person takes flight or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself upon the appearance of a police officer. (7)  Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity. (8)  Such person possesses any instrument, article, or thing whose customary or primary purpose is for the sale, administration, or use of controlled substances such as, but not limited to, crack pipes, push wires, chore boys, hand scales, hypodermic needles, razor blades, or other cutting tools. (9)  The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking. (10)  Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. 
Sec. 12-22. - Selling, soliciting, begging on city property. (a)  Without the express written consent of the city manager, it shall be unlawful for any person to beg, solicit, or sell goods, wares or other objects or services within any building, or on any grounds, sidewalks or other ways owned by or under the control of the city, its agencies, authorities, commissions, boards, bureaus, or other city entities. (b)  It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, or solicit for sale any candy, ice cream, confection or any food or beverage for human consumption from any pushcart, bicycle cart, motorized cart or other type of motor vehicle on the public streets, sidewalks, or in the public rights-of-way of the city. 
Sec. 12-23. - Advertisements—Posting bills on public property; obscene posters. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post any advertising matter upon the streets or other public places of the city; nor shall any poster or placard be posted, publicly displayed or exhibited which is lewd, indecent or vulgar, or which pictorially represents the commission of or attempt to commit any crime. (b)  Each day or part of a day that any such poster or placard remains so displayed or exhibited shall be deemed a separate offense. (c)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent anyone from displaying legitimate advertising of such person's own business in or upon such person's own premises if in conformance with the city's sign ordinance contained in chapter 5. (Code 1973, § 2-801(24)) Signs and advertising structures, § 5-361 et seq.; littering with handbills, § 11-32 et seq. 
Sec. 12-24. - Same—Posting bills on poles, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person to post upon any building, fence, tree, telegraph, telephone, or other public service pole any sign, advertisement, picture, or notice of any kind. It shall be unlawful for any person to post upon any building or other structure in the city any sign, advertisement, or notice of any kind without first having obtained permission to do so from the owner or occupant of such building or other structure, as well as from the city clerk. (Code 1973, § 2-801(43)) Cross reference— Littering with handbills, § 11-32; signs and advertising structures, § 5-361 et seq. 
Sec. 12-25. - Same—Displaying illegal matter.     It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to be displayed upon such person's premises or for any person to display in any public place any advertisement of any business, performance or attraction prohibited by any law or any city ordinances, or for any publication or advertising medium to be sold or distributed within the city which contains an advertisement of any business or performance forbidden by law or ordinance. (Code 1973, § 2-801(25)) 
Sec. 12-26. - Reckless operation of motor vehicle upon parking facility or walkway.     No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle-access, or pedestrian walkway of any parking facility by sudden starting, stopping or turning so as to endanger the person or property of another. 
Sec. 12-27. - Operation of motorized vehicles on school property.     The operation of motorized vehicles of any nature in or on any yard, campus, playing field or open area of any public school, college or institution in the city, except on those areas designated by school authorities for use of motorized vehicles, is prohibited. 
Sec. 12-28. - Fortunetelling.     It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or participate in the practice of fortunetelling, phrenology, clairvoyance, palmistry, or other kindred practices, businesses, or professions where a charge is made or a donation accepted for such services. This section does not apply to astrology. State Law reference— Authority to prohibit fortunetelling, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-15. 
Sec. 12-29. - Residential picketing prohibited. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in picketing upon, before, or about the private residence or home of any individual. (b)  Picketing shall include, but not be limited to, the following types of activities: (1)  Staging a passage to or from a residence; (2)  Promoting a strike or a boycott at a residence; (3)  Intimidating or otherwise harassing a resident. (c)  It is the purpose of this section to protect and preserve the home, inasmuch as the public health and welfare and the good order of the city require that citizens of the city enjoy a feeling of peace, well-being, and privacy in their homes at all times. 
Sec. 12-30. - Throwing objects.     No person shall recklessly or knowingly throw or propel any stone, brick, piece of wood or other object at any person, vehicle, house, building or other structure or object, or across or upon any private or public property. 
Sec. 12-31. - Defecating or urinating on public property or in certain areas.     It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate on or adjacent to any street or sidewalk, or in the halls, elevators, stairways, or any other area designated for public passage within any public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view. 
Secs. 12-32, 12-33. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 9907, § 2, adopted 11-22-99. repealed §§ 12-32, 12-33 in their entirety. Formerly, § 12-32 pertained to giving false name, address, or date of birth to a police officer and § 12-33 pertained to criminal impersonation. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 12-34. - False police alarms.     No person shall knowingly and willfully harass or attempt to harass or mislead any police officer by false alarms or unauthorized use of any device of whatever nature to summon police aid without reasonable cause. 
Sec. 12-35. - Alarm systems. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices designated and arranged to detect a fire or signal an unauthorized intrusion into premises or to signal an attempted robbery at protected premises, and, with respect to such signal, public safety officers are expected to respond.     False alarm means the activation of a fire, burglary and/or robbery alarm by other than a fire, forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no fire, burglary or robbery is being committed or attempted on the premises.     Response means the dispatch of a public safety officer to the premises where an alarm system has been activated indicating a fire, burglary and/or robbery is presently in progress on those premises. (b)  Penalty for violation of or noncompliance with section. Any person or business violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be summoned to the municipal court for each violation and noncompliance and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law. (c)  Unlawful activation; failure to notify police department of malfunction or repair work. It is unlawful for anyone to activate any fire, robbery or burglar alarm for the purpose of summoning public safety officers except in the event of an actual fire, attempted burglary or robbery, or for anyone notifying public safety of an activated alarm and having knowledge that such activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system, or was apparently caused by maintenance or service to the alarm system, to fail at the same time to notify public safety of such apparent malfunction or repair. (d)  Response to false alarm; fees; corrective action. For a public safety response to any false alarm, the city manager shall charge and collect fees from the person or business having or maintaining such fire, burglary and/or robbery alarm system on the premises owned or occupied by him as follows: (1)  For a first false alarm response to premises at which no other false alarm has occurred within a calendar year period, no fee shall be charged, but the person having or maintaining such fire, burglary and/or robbery alarm shall, within seven (7) working days after notice to do so, make a written report to the city manager on forms prescribed by him setting forth the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized serviceman, and such other information as the city manager may require to determine the cause of such false alarm and corrective action necessary. (2)  For the second false alarm response to premises after a first false alarm response within a calendar year period, no fee shall be charged, but a written report shall be required as for a first false alarm response and the city manager shall be authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected the alarm system at such premises and to prescribe necessary corrective action. (3)  For a third and a fourth false alarm response to premises after a second false alarm response within a calendar year, no fee shall be charged, but a written report shall be required as for a first false alarm response and the city manager shall be authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected the alarm system at such premises, prescribe necessary corrective action, and shall give notice to the person or business having or maintaining such alarm system of the conditions and requirements of this chapter, including the fee requirements for five (5) or more false alarm responses by the police within each calendar year. (4)  After a fourth false alarm response to premises within a calendar year, and for all succeeding false alarm responses within that calendar year, a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged and, if such false alarms are as a result of failure to take necessary corrective action prescribed by the city manager, the city manager may order the disconnection of such alarm system until such corrective action is taken; provided no disconnection shall be ordered as to any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation. (Ord. No. 840, § 1(19-1)—(19-4), 9-23-91) 
Sec. 12-36. - False information to police officer prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to give full, complete, and accurate information as to his or her own name, social security number, address, date of birth, or driver's license to a city police officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duties who is attempting to ascertain such person's true identity. (Ord. No. 99-07, § 1, 11-22-99) 
Sec. 12-37. - Possession of marijuana prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one (1) ounce or less or marijuana within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. No. 9909, § 1, 11-22-99) 
Sec. 12-38. - Motion picture, television and photographic production ordinance. (a)  Permit required. (1)  No person shall use any public or private property, building, facility or residence of producing, taking or making any motion picture, television production or photographic production without first applying for and receiving a city filming permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (b)  Exceptions. (1)  Regulation by this chapter shall not apply to: a.  Amateur photographers. b.  Reporters or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, radio or television broadcasting station engaged in on the spot broadcasting, reporting or photographing of news of general public interest. This exception is not to include magazine or documentary programs. c.  Productions which are conducted by the city or any city board or commission. (c)  Permit administrator. (1)  The city manager is hereby appointed as the permit administrator and shall issue permits as provided for in this chapter. (d)  Application for permit. (1)  Any person desiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall make application on the approved form provided by the city. The form must be signed and accompanied by all required fees, deposits, hold harmless agreement and insurance certificates required by this chapter before any permit will be considered for approval. (2)  Filming permit applications shall be submitted at least five (5) working days prior to the date on which such person desires to conduct an activity for which a permit is required. (e)  Issuance of permit; conditions; appeals. (1)  The city manager shall issue a permit as provided for in this chapter, when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, he/she finds that: a.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. Seventy-two (72) hours advance notice of any street closure request shall be provided. b.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or city operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the applicant. c.  At the determination of the city manager that such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all safety precautions will be taken as determined necessary by the city manager. (2)  The decision of the city manager to issue, conditionally issue, or deny a permit shall be final unless appealed in writing within five (5) working days of the decision to the board of mayor and commissioners. (3)  The board of mayor and commissioners shall render a decision to issue, conditionally issue or uphold the denial of a permit at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of mayor and commissioners. The decision of the board of mayor and commissioners will be final. (f)  Bond, insurance, hold harmless and indemnification. (1)  As a condition of issuing such a permit, the applicant shall furnish a bond, insurance or both in the amount to be determined by the city manager, but in no event, an amount less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), to protect the city against claims of third persons for personal injury, wrongful death and property damage and to indemnify the city for damage to city property arising out of the permittee's activities. (2)  A minimum of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) of such bond, general liability insurance coverage or both shall be required in the event aircraft, helicopters, pyrotechnics or automobile chase scenes are used in the activity. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard general liability special endorsement form mandated by this chapter. City shall be listed as additional insured and applicant shall have primary coverage. (3)  The applicant shall execute an indemnity and hold harmless agreement as provided by the city prior to the issuance of any permit that shall hold the city harmless against any claims, liability or judgments arising out of the permittee's activities. (g)  Suspension or revocation of permit. (1)  The city manager shall have the authority, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, to suspend or revoke any permit issued hereunder where the terms and conditions of said permit have been violated or ignored, including the timely payment of all required fees and deposits, or suspend or revoke any permit where the public safety or welfare is endangered by the permitted activity. Provided however, that whenever there is an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare from activities conducted by the permittee to the extent that immediate action is necessary to protect the public, the city manager shall have the authority to suspend a permit pending a hearing. (h)  Fees and costs of additional services. (1)  Each application shall be accompanied by the following non-refundable fees: a.  A processing fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) will be submitted to the city at the time of application. b.  Upon approval of an application for a city filming permit, the city manager shall provide the applicant with a statement of the estimated cost of providing police, public works and other city employees and services for public safety for the production. The cost of such services shall be borne by the applicant and shall be paid to the city prior to the conducting of a production. The amount of such fees shall be based on the city's actual cost of providing the required number of police and other city employees and services necessary to ensure the safety of both the participants of the production and the community. c.  If the actual cost of public services for the production is less than the estimated cost pursuant to subsection (h)(1)b. of this section, the permittee shall promptly be refunded the difference by the city. If the actual cost for public services is more than the estimated cost pursuant to subsection (h)(1)b. of this section, the difference shall become due and payable to the city immediately upon the permittee's receipt of a statement of actual costs by the city. d.  All fees may be waived for wholly charitable or educational purposes and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly. Tax exempt and nonprofit organizations must qualify under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and proof of such status must be provided to the city in order for said fees to be waived by the city. (i)  Regulations and conditions. (1)  The applicant shall: a.  Maintain a copy of the production permit on-site at all times. b.  Comply with any and all conditions or restrictions the city may impose as a condition to issuing a permit. No changes to the conditions or restrictions shall be made without the written approval of the city manager. c.  Have nonexclusive use of facilities and public right-of-way unless otherwise granted in writing. d.  Provide advanced notification of forty-eight (48) hours in a form approved by the city manager to adjacent properties for any production. e.  Comply with the City of Avondale Estates Noise Ordinance. (2)  The city manager may promulgate and enforce additional regulations as necessary and appropriate in the implementation and enforcement of this chapter. (j)  Filming on private property. (1)  An applicant is required to obtain the property owner's permission, consent, and/or lease for use of property not owned or controlled by the city. Written permission of the property owner must be presented at time of permit application. (2)  An applicant is required to minimize interference with the normal activities of a neighborhood or commercial area, including access to private or public property. (k)  Filming at city facilities or on the public right-of-way.     In the event that the applicant desires to locate their production event at a facility owned or managed by the city, or on the public right-of-way, the city shall charge a daily fee in an amount determined by the city manager not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. If an existing facility charge has been established by the city at a facility owned or managed by the city, that fee will be charged to the applicant. (l)  Traffic control.     The city retains the right and the authority to regulate traffic and require vehicles to be moved or towed (at the owner's expense) to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. (m)  Faithful performance bond; clean up and restoration.     To ensure clean-up and restoration of any site on public property or public right-of-way used by permittee within the city limits, said permittee may be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond (amount to be determined by the city manager) at the time the application is submitted. Upon completion of the production and upon the finding by the city that the site has been satisfactorily cleaned up and restored, the bond may be returned to the permittee. (Ord. No. 0602, § 1, 6-26-06) 
Chapter 13 - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Authority to own, etc., § 1-102(11). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 13-1. - Unauthorized sewer connections.     It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or attempt to enter or connect or attempt to connect a private drain or sewer or a building or plumbing fixture into or to any portion of the public sewer system or of any of the mains of such system unless such person is authorized to do so in the manner prescribed by law. (Code 1973, § 2-7138) 
Secs. 13-2—13-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WASTE MANAGEMENT[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Charter reference— Authority, § 1-102(19). Cross reference— Litter, § 11-20 et seq. State Law reference— Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 13-20. - Applicability.     This article applies to the preparation and storage, collection, transportation and disposal of all refuse in the area under jurisdiction of the city as presently or hereafter established. It prescribes rules and regulations therefor, regulates the private collection of garbage and refuse, provides for the licensing and regulation of private garbage and refuse collection, prescribes rules and regulations for hauling garbage, refuse and other waste material within or through the city, and prohibits the deposit of litter within the city. (Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-20), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-21. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Administrative officer means the city manager or the person authorized by the city manager, to enforce the provisions of this article.     Ashes means waste products from coal, wood and other fuels used for cooking and heating from private residences.     Building refuse means waste material resulting from construction, remodeling, repairs and demolition operations on houses, buildings and other structures, including driveways and walks and comprising waste and rejected matter such as excavated earth, stones, bricks, plaster, wallpaper, sheetrock and lathes, lumber, shingles, tile, concrete and waste parts occasioned by the installation or replacement of plumbing, heating systems, electrical work and roofing.     Commercial/industrial establishment means any hotel, motel, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than residential dwelling units.     Disposal area means a site, location, tract of land, or facility, used or intended to be used for the final disposal of solid waste, garbage, putrescible waste, hazardous waste, or other waste, except that the term shall not include the land or facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling on which the owner, occupant or lessee of such land or facility resides.     Garbage means food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used for or intended for use as food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables.     Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludges; and other waste material that the director determines to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials as provided in rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources, chapter 270-5-20, entitled "Radioactive Materials."     Industrial refuse means waste materials from factories, processing plants, wholesale establishments, assembling plants, food processing wastes, cinders and ashes, lumber scraps, excelsior, shavings, floor sweepings, metal scrap and shavings, and any other waste products from industrial and manufacturing processes.     Owner means any person, firm or corporation owning, leasing, renting or occupying any premises within the jurisdiction of the city.     Recyclable waste means all aluminum cans, newspaper print, all unbroken glass bottles, jars and containers, and all plastic bottles and containers. Recyclable waste shall also include any other items that may hereafter be designated as recyclable pursuant to the rules and regulations promulgated by the governing authority.     Rubbish means nonrecyclable, household waste derived from places of residence and includes paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, tin and other metal cans, broken glass bottles and jars, crockery, excelsior, rubber, discarded clothing and similar materials.     Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials.     Solid waste means mineral matter, metal and wooden furniture, appliances, large metal scraps and wires, automobile or other vehicle bodies, tires or parts, wooden crates, boxes or pallets, dead animals, and any other wastes in a solid or semisolid state (excluding human body excrement), not otherwise defined in this section.     Waste means any unwanted or discarded material including, but not limited to, ashes, building refuse, garbage, hazardous waste, industrial refuse, recyclable waste, rubbish, solid waste, and yard debris.     Waste management collector means any person authorized by the city to collect, recycle, and dispose of waste acceptable for collection.     Yard debris means tree limbs, branches, stumps and logs, twigs, grass and shrub trimmings and clippings, bushes, weeds, leaves and general yard and garden waste materials, excluding stone and dirt rakings and similar waste materials resulting from routine landscaping activities. (Ord. No. 765, § 1(1), 2-28-77; Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-21), 11-25-91) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-22. - Administration and enforcement of article. (a)  Responsibility for administration. In order to protect the health and safety of the people in the city, the administrative officer shall implement and enforce the provisions of this article to control the storage, collection, and disposal of solid waste in the city. Such officer shall plan, organize, procure equipment and personnel, and manage a collection and disposal service and/or establish criteria for evaluation of private collection and disposal services, make recommendations to the governing body regarding contracts for waste collection and/or disposal between it and private collectors and/or disposal site owners and/or operators, and shall regulate the establishment, maintenance and operation of public or private waste collection and/or disposal systems, methods and sites. (b)  Functions of administrative officer. Collection, transportation and disposal of waste shall be under the supervision and control of the administrative officer. Such officer shall have the authority to establish routes and days of collection, types and locations of waste containers, and such other matters pertaining to collection, transportation and disposal of waste as such officer may find necessary and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided such measures are not contrary to the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 765, § 1(2)(a), (b), 2-28-77; Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-22), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-23. - Violations; penalties. (a)  Upon determining that a violation of this article exists, the administrative officer shall cause a written notice of violation to be issued to the subject owner setting forth the condition existing and a reasonable time within which for the owner to correct the condition. (b)  Upon determining that the owner has failed to correct the subject condition within the time limit prescribed in the notice, the administrative officer shall cause a summons to be issued directing the owner to appear in the municipal court to answer the charge of violation of the appropriate section of this article. (c)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be summoned to the municipal court for each violation and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, either or both of such fines and imprisonment, or work on the streets, parks and/or public works, in the discretion of the municipal judge. Each day a violation of any provision of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-23), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-24. - Transportation of refuse; licensing of commercial sanitation firms. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person including city refuse collectors and other waste management collectors to haul, convey or cause to be conveyed any refuse, including discarded building material or discarded furniture, upon or along the public streets and roadways except when the material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent it from falling, leaking or being blown from transporting vehicles. The operator or owner of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this section. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person not approved by the city to collect and haul any refuse other than that arising from such person's own accumulation within any areas of the city in which refuse collection service is maintained by the city. An application in compliance with this section shall be submitted to the administrative officer for approval or other disposition. (1)  Each application shall have attached a list showing the type, size and location of stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers and/or industrial waste materials to be serviced by the applicant. A commercial sanitation firm applying for approval to operate stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers or industrial waste containers shall certify at the time of application that the applicant or any corporate officer of the firm is not engaged in any illegal servicing of any commercial containers or refuse collection of any type in the city. (2)  Each authorized commercial sanitation firm shall pay a monthly charge based on the size of the stationary compactor container or industrial waste container in use on the last day of each month in the amount of one dollar ($1.00) per cubic yard. This fee shall be paid on or before the fifteenth day of each succeeding month for which the service was rendered. A schedule of the location of each stationary compactor shall accompany the payment of the fees. (3)  Each stationary compactor, stationary compactor container or industrial waste container shall carry in a conspicuous location the name, telephone number and address of the firm permitted to service the stationary compactor, stationary compactor container or industrial waste container. (4)  Plans and specifications for installing a stationary compactor unit shall be approved by the city codes enforcement officer prior to the installation. All stationary compactor containers shall be installed on class A, three thousand (3,000) psi concrete pads of not less than six-inch thickness. All installations shall comply with the requirements of the city and county mechanical codes, fire code and health regulations. (5)  All stationary compactor containers shall be in good condition and repair and shall be washed and treated with appropriate chemicals as necessary to prevent nuisances. (Ord. No. 765, § 4, 2-28-77; Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-24), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-25. - Pickup routes and districts established; collection days. (a)  The administrative officer shall divide the city into pickup routes and shall prepare a list of the names of all the streets, roads, alleys, drives, highways and other public thoroughfares within each route. (b)  In residential areas not more than four (4) days, nor less than two (2) days, shall elapse between one collection and the next, and routes of collection shall be arranged so that collections shall be made on the same days of each succeeding week. From commercial areas and institutions, collections shall be made daily except Saturday, Sunday and holidays. Collections shall not be made on the following holidays unless otherwise specified by the administrative officer: New Year's Day, Observance of Martin Luther King, Jr.'s birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and the day after, and Observance of Christmas (two (2) days). (c)  It shall be the duty of the occupant of any residential or commercial/industrial unit to place refuse for collection by the city at the proper collection site prior to 7:45 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the sanitation truck. (d)  Any containers placed at curbside by the owner or occupant for collection shall be removed by the owner/occupant to a storage location located on the residential premises the day the contents are emptied and collected. (Ord. No. 765, § 4, 2-28-77; Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-25), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-26. - Collection by city; disposal of unacceptable or commercial/industrial waste.     All refuse generated or accumulated in the city shall be collected, transported and disposed of by the city through its designated agents, employees, or contract representatives. No other person shall collect, transport or dispose of any refuse generated or accumulated in the city, except that these rules and regulations shall not prohibit the producers of waste unacceptable for routine collection, producers of commercial/industrial waste or the owner of premises upon which commercial/industrial waste has accumulated from collecting, transporting and disposing of such refuse, subject to laws and regulations pertinent thereto, if such service is not provided by the city and if any such private contractor has been approved by the city to conduct such business within the city. (Ord. No. 765, § 1(2)(c), (d), 2-28-77; Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-26), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-27. - Waste acceptable for routine collection by the city. (a)  Subject to the conditions and requirements set forth in this article, garbage, recyclable waste, household rubbish and yard debris constitute waste acceptable for collection by the city's waste management collector. (b)  Small dead animals, not over thirty (30) pounds in weight, if kept separate from garbage and rubbish, will be collected without charge upon notice to the administrative officer, provided that a charge will be made for all such animals collected from animal hospitals, kennels, pet shops and the like. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. (Ord. No. 765, § 3, 2-28-77; Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-27), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-28. - Waste unacceptable for routine collection by the city. (a)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be a violation of this article to place or cause to be placed in any container or at curbside for routine collection any of the following: (1)  Building refuse; (2)  Hazardous waste; (3)  Industrial refuse; (4)  Solid waste; (5)  Yard debris, except as provided in section 12-31; (6)  Trees, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors; and (7)  Waste of any type from vacant lots unless payment of sanitation or lot upkeep tax for the current year has been made. (b)  Waste not acceptable for routine collection shall be the responsibility of the owner. It shall be the duty of each owner to make arrangements as may be necessary with the city and/or the city's waste management collector for the collection and disposal of such waste on a special fee, on-call basis. (Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-28), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-29. - Containers—Generally. (a)  Refuse containers adequate to hold the refuse normally accumulating between scheduled removals shall be provided on each premises by the owner or occupant of each residence, industry, place of business or congregation and shall be maintained in good condition. Each container shall be waterproof, galvanized metal or durable plastic of a capacity of not more than thirty-two (32) gallons, having two (2) handles on the side thereof or a bail by which it may be lifted, with a tightfitting metal or plastic top with a handle and so constructed as to permit the free discharge of its contents. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged containers shall not be acceptable. (b)  Refuse containers shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated with appropriate chemicals as necessary to prevent nuisance. Containers failing to comply with these provisions or with sharp or jagged edges or with defects liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced by the owner or occupant. (Ord. No. 765, § 3, 2-28-77; Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-29), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-30. - Same—Preparation and storage for commercial/industrial waste. (a)  Hazardous or noxious wastes shall be contained in a safe and sanitary manner. (b)  Containers shall be consolidated to minimize the number of collection sites and located so as to reasonably equalize the distance from the building spaces they serve. (c)  Containers and enclosures shall be located so as to allow ease of access for collection trucks and direct access to drive areas. Straight-in or circular drives are encouraged to reduce truck maneuvering problems. No parking or other obstructions shall be permitted in the access area for enclosures. (d)  Containers and enclosures shall be placed away from public view insofar as is practical. (e)  Containers and enclosures shall be situated so that they do not cause excessive nuisance or offense to occupants of nearby buildings. (f)  All refuse containers shall be screened with a six-foot high (minimum) fence or wall which conceals containers from all sides. (g)  Concrete pads of appropriate size and construction shall be provided for containers or groups of containers having a capacity of six (6) thirty-two-gallon cans or more. Adequate drainage shall be provided in and around the pad area. (h)  Newspapers, aluminum cans, and all other recyclable waste should be separated from waste acceptable for routine collection. For storage of these and other recyclable materials, the enclosure area and pad size shall be increased to amply accommodate the extra materials and their containers. (i)  The tops of trash enclosures which are directly visible from the second floor of any off-site building shall be screened with a roof or overhead trellis. (j)  Screening and gates shall be of a durable construction; fences, walls, footings, slabs and curbs shall meet all applicable ordinances. Gates shall be constructed of heavy-gauge metal or of a heavy-gauge metal frame with a covering of wood or other suitable material. Gates shall be secured with sturdy hinges or sliders and latches. For enclosures of six (6) cans or more and for bins, the screening shall be protected at its base by curbs. If screening is to be situated directly adjacent to parking spaces or drives, it shall be protected by a concrete-curbed buffer strip (minimum three (3) feet wide) of landscaping or pavement. (k)  The design of the screening shall be compatible with the architectural design of on-site buildings and shall be approved by the city's codes enforcement officer. Screening shall be constructed of concrete tilt-up or masonry materials or the primary material used on the on-site building walls. (l)  Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a commercial or industrial establishment, arrangements for the storage of refuse and location of containers must be approved by the city's codes enforcement officer. (m)  All garbage and rubbish shall be free of liquid and placed in watertight paper or plastic bags. The bags shall be unbroken and securely sealed and placed in the container in a manner so that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. (n)  The occupants, of commercial establishments shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding refuse containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. (Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-30), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-31. - Same—Preparation and storage of residential waste. (a)  It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to keep all refuse pending collection and disposal as follows: (1)  All waste shall be free from liquid and placed in watertight paper or plastic bags of a type, size and material designed for waste storage and disposal. The bags shall be unbroken and securely sealed and placed in the container in a manner so that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. (2)  All containers shall be stored at the side or rear of the residence for collection. (3)  Tree limbs, branches, heavy brush and other similar types of yard debris shall be cut into lengths not exceeding six (6) feet and four (4) inches in diameter, and placed in containers not over fifty (50) pounds gross weight or tied into bundles not exceeding fifty (50) pounds each for curbside pickup. (4)  Bundles or bags of yard debris shall be placed at curbside for collection and shall at no time extend into the streets, gutters, drains, walkways, alleys, rights-of-way, or other property of the city. (5)  Leaves shall be separated from other yard debris for curbside collection. (6)  Newspapers, aluminum cans, and all other recyclable waste shall be separated from other waste acceptable for routine collection for recycling collection. a.  The interior of all aluminum cans, plastic, and glass bottles shall be rinsed and drained. All lids, tops, and caps shall be removed and properly disposed of as rubbish. b.  All newspapers shall be tied or bagged for recycling collection and shall be maintained in a dry condition. (b)  Residential refuse will not be collected by the city if such refuse is contained in a locked area or where dogs are loose. (c)  Waste generated from the conduct of business or commercial enterprise carried on from residential units will not be collected by the city except on a special fee basis. (d)  Trees, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors will not be collected by the city except on a special fee basis. (e)  Waste of any type from vacant lots will not be collected unless payment of the sanitation or lot upkeep tax for the current year has been made. (Ord. No. 765, § 3, 2-28-77; Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-31), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-32. - Scavenging prohibited.     It shall be deemed a violation of this article for any person, other than the owner, the city or the city's waste management collector to remove, collect, salvage or otherwise interfere with any containerized waste pending collection. (Ord. No. 765, § 3, 2-28-77; Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-32), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-33. - Littering; accumulation prohibited. (a)  No person shall throw, discharge, discard or otherwise cause to be deposited waste of any character into the streets, gutters, drains, walkways, alleys, rights-of-way, streams, lakes or impoundment, or other property of the city. (b)  Except as otherwise set forth in this article, any accumulation of waste on any property within the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. (c)  The provisions of subsection (b) of this section do not apply to the dumping on private property with the owner's permission of sand, dirt, broken dirt, blocks, broken pavement or other suitable material for use as fill to raise the elevation of the land, provided it is not maintained in an unsightly condition and provided the owners of the property on which such material is dumped level such dumped material with appropriate grading equipment. (Ord. No. 765, § 3, 2-28-77; Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-33), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-34. - Air pollution controls; burning of combustible materials.     No person shall set fire to or burn any papers or other combustible materials in any container or on the grounds thereof except as may be permitted by county regulations at the county incinerator or at state-approved sanitary landfills. (Ord. No. 765, § 5, 2-28-77; Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-34), 11-25-91) 
Sec. 13-35. - Sanitation tax; payment thereof. (a)  The sanitation tax for the collection and disposal of waste by the city shall be as established in the city's tax ordinance, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. (b)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk to prepare and mail to each property owner a tax bill showing the amount of sanitation tax due for the calendar year. In accordance with the city's tax ordinance, a late payment penalty and an assessment of interest shall be imposed upon each account for which payment is not made within the time limits prescribed in the tax ordinance. (c)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk to prepare and maintain a complete record of the name of each owner, the address, tax map reference number, the amount due for the calendar year, and an entry showing when payment was made. This docket shall be called the sanitation tax docket. (d)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk to make an annual audit of the sanitary docket not later than December 1 of each year, and issue a fi. fa. or execution against the property served, which fi. fa. or execution shall have the same lien dignity and priority as fi. fa.'s or executions issued for city real estate taxes. (e)  On premises being assessed a sanitation tax, after the property owner has been notified that the sanitation tax is delinquent and the property owner refuses to promptly pay it, the city may refuse collection at those premises. (Ord. No. 844, § 1(12-35), 11-25-91) 
Chapter 14 - OCCUPATION AND BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES, AND REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Authority, § 1-102(20). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 14-1. - Display of merchandise outside of building; prohibited. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display merchandise for sale, lease or rental on the exterior of any building. (b)  No city license or permit shall be issued to any person who intends to display merchandise for sale, lease or rental on the exterior of any building in violation of this section. (Code 1973, § 2-7190; Ord. No. 780, § 2, 4-26-82) 
Sec. 14-2. - Weights and measures—Selling by false representation.     Any person who, personally or by servant or agent, shall sell, offer or expose for sale any quantity of any commodity which by weight, measure or numerical count is less than the quantity which such person represents same to be shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1973, § 2-7112) 
Sec. 14-3. - Same—Possession or sale of false instruments.     Any person who, personally or by servant or agent, or as the servant or agent of another, shall offer or expose for sale, sell or retain in such person's possession a false weight or measure, or weighing or measuring device, which has not been sealed by a state, county or city sealer of weights and measures within one (1) year, or use same in buying or selling of any commodity or thing or for hire or reward, or shall dispose of any condemned weight, measure, weighing device or measuring device contrary to law, or remove any tag placed thereon by any sealer of weights and measures, or shall, personally or by servant or agent, or as the servant or agent of another, offer or expose for sale, or have in such person's possession for the purpose of selling, any device or instrument to be used to or calculated to falsify weight or measure shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1973, § 2-7113) 
Sec. 14-4. - Same—Standard thereof.     The standard of weights and measures as provided in O.C.G.A. § 10-2-1 et seq. shall be the standard of weights and measures for the city. (Code 1973, § 2-7114) 
Sec. 14-5. - Street vending prohibited.     No person shall place or keep any table, stall, booth or other device, implement or structure on any street or sidewalk in the city for the sale of fruit or other thing. (Code 1973, § 2-7177) 
Secs. 14-6—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION REGISTRATION AND TAXES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 876, adopted December 17, 1996, replaced former art. II of ch. 14 in its entirety, and enacted a new art. II to read as herein set out. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter. For a detailed history of the provisions of former art. VII, see the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 14-31. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the city.     For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city with (1) a location in the city, or (2) in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state but exerting substantial efforts within the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, or (3) in the case of real estate brokers with no location in the city but transacting business within the city shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city treasurer or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city upon request. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7, 48-13-17. 
Sec. 14-32. - Construction of terms; definitions. (a)  Wherever the term "city" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia. Wherever the term "state" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. (b)  As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:     Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax.     Business means any person, sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, trade, profession, occupation, or other entity and the efforts or activities associated thereby for the purposes of raising revenue.     Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: (1)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; (2)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; (3)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; (4)  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and (5)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income.     Gross receipts shall not include the following: (1)  Sales, use, or excise tax; (2)  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; (3)  Inter-organizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2); (4)  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and (5)  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute eighty (80) percent or more of the organization's receipts.     Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project.     Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue-raising purposes.     Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees.     Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from.     Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize fifty (50) percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes.     Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 14-33. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. (a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. (b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed on those businesses listed under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b). (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-8(b), 48-13-9, 48-13-10(d). 
Sec. 14-34. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. (a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one (1) or more locations or offices in the city, and upon applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, and upon real estate brokers with no location or office in the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-17, based upon the following criteria:     Gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. (b)  Occupation tax schedule. The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city. Tax Class Profit Range Tax Rate Percent 1 00.00—00.49 0.03 2 00.50—00.99 0.04 3 01.00—01.49 0.05 4 01.50—01.99 0.06 5 02.00—02.49 0.07 6 02.50—02.99 0.08 7 03.00—03.49 0.09 8 03.50—03.99 0.10 9 04.00—04.49 0.11 10 04.50—04.99 0.12 11 05.00—05.49 0.13 12 05.50—05.99 0.14 13 06.00—06.49 0.15 14 06.50—06.99 0.16 15 07.00—07.49 0.17 16 07.50—07.99 0.18 17 08.00—08.49 0.19 18 08.50—08.99 0.20 19 09.00—09.49 0.21 20 09.50—09.99 0.22 21 10.00—10.49 0.23 22 10.50—10.99 0.24 23 11.00 and up 0.25  (c)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one (1) occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have nor shall the city require a business to pay an occupational tax for more than one hundred (100) percent of the gross receipts. (d)  The city shall not require an occupation tax on those receipts that were taxed by occupation tax in other localities or states. (e)  Real estate brokers, agents, or companies whose principal and branch offices are located outside the city shall pay an occupation tax to the city based upon gross receipts derived from real estate transactions with respect to property located in the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-17. (f)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in O.C.G.A. § 14-13-7 (see section 13-5 of this article) which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state of Georgia. (g)  For purposes of this section, prima facie evidence of gross receipts generated during any period shall be a copy of the business' federal income tax return or an affidavit of the business' accounting firm. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-7, 48-13-10, 48-13-13, 48-13-14, 48-13-17. 
Sec. 14-35. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state.     Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state of Georgia if the business' largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the City of Avondale Estates and the business or practitioner: (1)  Has one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or (2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the city. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
Sec. 14-36. - Registration of name of business; more than one line of business; payment of taxes required. (a)  No person shall be engaged in, pursue, or carry on any business within the city in any manner without having registered the name of the business with the city treasurer and either paid the taxes as provided by this article or produced evidence of occupational tax payment to another jurisdiction. (b)  At the time of business registration, such person shall also identify to the city treasurer the line or lines of business that the business conducts. Classification of businesses for occupation tax purposes shall be based on the dominant line of business conducted. (c)  Each separate business trade name shall be subject to the provisions of this article and shall fully comply with all city code requirements before engaging in, pursuing, or carrying on any business within the city. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-12. 
Sec. 14-37. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the city.     Where a person conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location or has multiple business trade names, each location or place and each trade name shall be considered to be separate for the purpose of occupation tax and the gross receipts of each will be returned on a form furnished by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-38. - Professionals. (a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one (1) of the following: (1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in this article. (2)  A fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00). Such fee is per practitioner and applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework who is licensed by the state to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. Practitioners paying according to this paragraph shall pay the administrative fee and the fee per practitioner and shall not be required to provide information relating to gross receipts of the business or practitioner. (b)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by February 1 of each year. (c)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-10(f), 48-13-13(3). 
Sec. 14-39. - Business classifications for determining tax levy. (a)  For the purpose of this article, every person engaged in business requiring the payment of occupational taxes shall be classified in accordance to the major line of business as defined in the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual, Office of Management and Budget; and profitability classes shall be assigned in accordance with Statistics of Income, Business Income Tax Returns, United States Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service. The city treasurer shall review assignment of businesses to profitability classes on a biennial basis and shall administratively reassign businesses as necessary to the then most accurate profitability class. (b)  Classifications by business profitability are incorporated herein by reference and adopted for use in the application of this article. All separate businesses engaged in more than one (1) business activity shall be classified on the basis of their dominant business activity at each location where business is done; except, that a person whose dominant business activity is legally exempt as defined by this article shall be classified according to such person's principal subsidiary business, if any, which is subject to the levy and assessment of occupation taxes. (c)  The occupation tax shall be determined by applying the business' gross receipts returned to the city to the business' profitability classification established for each business type. (d)  A copy of the business classifications shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection by all interested persons. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 14-40. - Purpose and scope of tax.     The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-41. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. (a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax for businesses continuing from the preceding year shall be due and payable January 1 of each year and shall be considered delinquent if not paid by March 15 of each year. The failure to pay the occupational taxes and administrative fees within ninety (90) days after January 1 shall subject such delinquent business to a ten (10) percent penalty of the amount of tax/or fee due. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on April 1 of the tax year. (b)  In the event that any person commences business on any date after January 1 in any year, the registration and occupational tax shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business. A ten (10) percent penalty shall be imposed for failure to pay the registration and tax when due. (c)  The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city treasurer and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the city any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be guilty of a violation of the City Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties as provided in the City Code. (d)  In addition to the above remedies, the city treasurer may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) Editor's note— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-20, 48-13-21, 48-13-26. 
Sec. 14-42. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intra- or interstate locations. (a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allocated to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one (1) jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: (1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and (2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. (b)  Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-14. 
Sec. 14-43. - Casual and isolated transactions. (a)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated commercial transactions, where they involve only personal assets and are not the principal occupation of the individual, to pay occupational tax therefor. (b)  Street vendor, transient vendor, or flea market vendor activities shall not be considered to be casual and isolated business transactions and shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-44. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. (a)  No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless fifty (50) percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. (b)  Notwithstanding any exemption from payment of city occupation taxes, an exempt person or business shall comply with the same laws and regulations as are required of other registered businesses. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-45. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. (a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. (b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep both the state license and the city registration there at all times while valid. (c)  Any transient or nonresident person doing business within the city shall carry his occupational tax receipt either upon such person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in such business, and such person shall exhibit it to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-23. 
Sec. 14-46. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable.     Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-47. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain.     All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this ordinance shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration shall be subject to the same penalties provided herein. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-48. - Change of location.     Any officer, agent, or employee of a business who moves his business, trade, or calling from one (1) location in the city to another location in the city shall notify the city treasurer of this move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the city no later than the day of the relocation. A new registration receipt for the occupational tax will be issued at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-49. - Transferability.     Occupational tax registration shall not be transferable, and a transfer of ownership shall be considered the same as the termination of the business and the establishment of a new business. A registration and a new occupational tax shall be required for the new owner of the business. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-50. - Special classifications. (a)  Registration and occupational tax payment are required from any satellite subscription television system. Satellite subscription television system means services provided to subscribers for sale where the provider of the services utilizes a master antenna type system or earth dish system designed to receive and distribute satellite television signals; particularly, a system to provide service to one (1) or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership wherein any wiring necessary to operate the system does not cross adjacent non-owned property lines and does not cross rights-of-way in the city. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to any person that is franchised by the city to own and operate a cable system in the city. (b)  Registration and occupational tax payment are required from any broadcast subscription television system. Broadcast subscription television system means services provided to subscribers for sale where the provider of the services transmits premium programming from one (1) or multiple sources by transmitting or retransmitting programs to the public. (c)  Any vendor or exhibitor who is a member of a group or collection of vendors or exhibitors that has come together at one (1) location for the purpose of selling arts, crafts, antiques, or other goods for a period not to exceed ten (10) consecutive days may be registered individually, or the group or collection may be registered as a "special event." Any applicant for a special event shall be considered as the promoter of the special event and shall be responsible for registration of the special event and paying the occupational taxes. Any special event group or collection of vendors or exhibitors shall comply with the same laws and regulations as required of other registered businesses, where applicable. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-51. - Businesses not covered by this article.     The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: (1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. (2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. (3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. (4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. (5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et. seq. (6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. (7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls). (8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. (9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. (10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. (11)  Business occupational taxes and licenses respecting retail and wholesale dealers in liquor, wine, beer, and malt beverages are provided for elsewhere in the City Code. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16. 
Sec. 14-52. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law.     An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-53. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. (a)  All occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the current calendar year. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, each business subject to the occupation tax levied in accordance with this article shall, on or before February 1, file with the city treasurer a return showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made no later than February 1 of the following year. (b)  The owner, proprietor, manager, secretary, or other officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year and on or before February 1 of the current calendar year, file with the city treasurer, on a form furnished by said officer, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current year. (c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-54. - Filing of return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. (a)  On or before February 1 of each year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the city treasurer, on a form furnished by the city, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year. (b)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in the article is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 13-23 hereof, the difference in said amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on March 15 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before that date. (c)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 13-23 hereof, the difference in said amount shall be refundable by the city to the taxpayer; or, if said business continues to be conducted in the city during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by said business for the current year. This election is to be taken by the taxpayer. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-55. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses.     In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year which was not conducted for any period of time in the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year. Estimates of business to be conducted by businesses beginning on or after January 1 of the occupation tax year shall be not more than fifteen (15) percent (15) lower than businesses of the same type, according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, that are registered with the city and are less than five (5) years old or the next closest in age, and have approximately the same number of employees within ten (10) percent. The business shall also file the required registration form and shall pay the administrative fee required by this article. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-55.1. - Returns confidential.     Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent, or clerk of the city to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of the returns shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the city using the returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classified as agents for the purposes of this article. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia, the United States, and other local governments. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-15. 
Sec. 14-55.2. - Inspections of books and records.     The city, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business (or person) for which the returns are made. The city treasurer shall have the right to inspect the books or records of the business for which the return was made and, upon demand of the city treasurer, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within thirty days. Failure of submission of such books or records within thirty days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city treasurer at his/her discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under-reporting, an additional payment of occupation taxes required to be paid under this article shall be assessed plus a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the deficiency. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-55.3. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. (a)  Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be revoked after notice and opportunity for hearing before the city treasurer, who shall provide the respondent with forty-eight (48) hours notice of such opportunity for hearing in writing at the address within the city or such other notice provided to the mailing address, business location, or other address which shall provide actual or constructive notice of such hearing. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city treasurer in accordance with provisions found in section 13-24. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. (b)  If the city treasurer refuses to issue or revokes a business occupation tax registration, the taxpayer shall have the absolute right to appeal the refusal to issue or the revocation thereof of the occupation tax registration to the governing body in accordance with the appellate process provided in this article. In all cases arising under this section, it shall be the duty of the city to prove that a person or business is in violation of the provisions of this article or ordinances of the city or laws of the state. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-55.4. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing business after tax registration revocation.     Any person, manager, agent, or employee who does business in the city after the registration for said business has been revoked, or who is required to make an occupation tax return and fails to make said return within the time and in the manner herein provided, or who refuses to amend such return so as to set forth the truth, or who makes a false return; and any person, manager, agent, or employee who refuses to permit an inspection of books in his charge when an officer, agent, employee, or representative of the city requests such inspections, during city hall's normal business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners for whom the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. The penalty shall consist of an additional ten (10) percent of the amount due. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-55.5. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax.     In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city treasurer, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent; and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution may be levied by the city treasurer upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit or illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city treasurer against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-25, 48-13-26. 
Sec. 14-55.6. - Administration; procedure for grievances.     The city treasurer shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the registration, levy, assessment, and collection of occupational taxes and penalties imposed in this article; however, any person who is of the opinion that the occupation tax has been incorrectly assessed or that the major line classification is incorrect, or that any other requirement or decision of the city treasurer is in error shall have the right to appeal as follows: (1)  The aggrieved taxpayer shall first submit in writing to the city treasurer a complaint which shall set forth in reasonable detail the matters complained of. The complaint may take letter form, and it shall be the duty of the city treasurer to review it and to issue a written reply to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the complaint. In the case of a refusal to issue a business occupation tax registration or revocation thereof where there previously has been an opportunity for a hearing before the city treasurer, this step shall be omitted. (2)  Upon receipt of the written opinion of the city treasurer, the taxpayer, should such person feel the opinion is in error, shall have the right to immediate appeal to the governing body for the purpose of resolving the issue in dispute. An appeal by the taxpayer shall be perfected by filing with the city treasurer a notice of appeal. This notice of appeal shall state in general terms the objections or exceptions taken to the opinion of the city treasurer. The notice of appeal must be filed with the city treasurer within fifteen (15) days following the date of the opinion complained of, and it shall be the duty of the city treasurer to transmit to the governing body all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The appeal shall be heard before the governing body. It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to so notify the appellant in writing of the date, time, and place when the matter shall be heard. (3)  The governing body may, in conformity with this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the opinion, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. The governing body may direct such action as it deems proper in conformity with this article and it shall be the duty of the city treasurer to carry out the decisions of the governing body. (4)  An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings with regard to the collection of the occupation tax from the taxpayer but shall not act as a supersedeas in any other respect. The appellant shall have the right to present before the governing body for its consideration any witness or other evidence at the time this matter appealed from is heard. If the city treasurer fails to render a written opinion to the taxpayer within the thirty (30) days as required above, the taxpayer shall be entitled to appeal to the governing body within the time stated above as if the city had rendered an adverse opinion with regard to the complaint. (5)  If the city treasurer deems it necessary that an audit of the books of the taxpayer be conducted, the city shall so notify the taxpayer in writing of the date, time and place when the audit shall be conducted. If the city treasurer deems it necessary to employ auditors for this purpose, he/she shall recommend it to the governing body and, if it is approved by the governing body, it shall be authorized to employ auditors to audit the books of the taxpayer with the expense of the audit to be borne by the city, if the position of the taxpayer with respect to the occupation taxes is sustained by the audit. If not, the expense of the audit shall be due and payable from the taxpayer. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-55.7. - Amendment, repeal of provision.     This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the governing body to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-55.8. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinances.     This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-55.9. - Enforcement of provisions.     It is hereby made the duty of the city treasurer to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city treasurer and his/her assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-55.10. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body.     This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the governing body. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-55.11. - Promulgation of rules, regulations.     The city treasurer shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the constitution of this state or the constitution of the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the occupational tax. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-55.12. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase.     After January 1, 1996, the governing body shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 
Sec. 14-55.13. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax.     The governing body may by resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one (1) or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 14-55.14. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions.     Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
Sec. 14-55.15. - Severability.     If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. (Ord. No. 876, § 1, 12-16-96) 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS AND DOOR-TO-DOOR SALES PERSONS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 0705, §§ I, II, adopted October 22, 2007, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 14-56—14-60 and 14-81—14-89, and enacted a new Art. III, §§ 14-56—14-60 and 14-81—14-89, as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 14-56. - Penalty for violation of article.     Any person charged with a violation of this article shall be apprehended by the police department or summoned to appear in the municipal court and, if found guilty, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisoned in the common jail of the county for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days for each offense. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Sec. 14-57. - Announced purpose of call.     At each dwelling, whether it be an apartment unit or private residence, the solicitor shall inform the occupant in unambiguous terms of the purpose of the call and shall not represent that the solicitor is participating in any contest, game, or other competitive endeavor, or that he is offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game, or competitive endeavor. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Sec. 14-58. - Decorum required.     No solicitor shall use vulgar, insulting, or threatening language which by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace in the course of any solicitation, nor shall he remain upon the premises after the occupant of the premises has verbally indicated that he does not wish to make a purchase or donation. For the purpose of this article, a solicitation shall be deemed to continue until the solicitor has left the premises. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Sec. 14-59. - Posted property.     No solicitor shall enter a dwelling except at the express invitation of the occupant. No solicitation shall be made at any dwelling or in any group of apartments where a conspicuous "No Soliciting," "No Solicitation," "No Peddlers," or other similar sign is displayed at or near the main entrance or driveway to the premises. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Sec. 14-60. - Prohibited acts.     It shall be a violation of this article: (1)  For any person, business, partnership, corporation, association, organization, or a group of persons to engage in any solicitation without first obtaining a permit or, if exempted pursuant to section 14-82, a confirmation letter; (2)  For any person to violate any of the provisions of this article or to violate any other city ordinance while engaging in any solicitation; (3)  For any person to violate any criminal law of this state or to violate any state or federal consumer protection law while engaging in any solicitation for the purpose of this section, consumer protection law includes, but is not limited to, the Georgia Fair Business Practices Act (O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.), the Georgia Home Solicitation Sales Act (O.C.G.A. § 10-1-1 et seq.), O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. (dealing with professional fund raising), and the Federal Consumer Credit Protection Act (truth-in-lending and truth-in-leasing); (4)  For any person to lend, rent, or sell his permit card to another; (5)  For any person to engage in any solicitation between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., according to the standard time in effect at the time the violation is alleged to have occurred; (6)  For any person to engage in any solicitation during a period in which his permit is in suspension or after his permit has been revoked; (7)  For more than two (2) individuals to engage in solicitation upon any premises at the same time for the same goods or services; each individual member of a group engaged in solicitation in violation of this subsection shall be deemed to have violated this subsection; (8)  For any person to make more than one (1) solicitation call at the same premises for identical goods or services within any consecutive two-week period without receiving a prior invitation therefor from the occupant of any such premises; this provision shall be construed to include solicitation upon the same premises by employees, agents, or representatives of any person more than once during the aforesaid period without a prior invitation as provided in this subsection; (9)  For any person with a criminal record as described in section 14-87, whether or not otherwise eligible for an exemption under section 14-82, to engage in any solicitation; (10)  For any person, at the time of initial contact with a prospective customer, to fail to verbally identify himself and the organization, company and product line he represents for the purpose of the solicitation; (11)  For any person engaged in solicitation to misrepresent the purpose of his solicitation or use any false or deceptive statement or misrepresentation to induce a sale or contribution, or use any plan, scheme, or ruse which misrepresents the status or purpose of the person making the call; or (12)  For any person to solicit or attempt to solicit at a place of residence at any entrance or part of the building other than the main entrance to the residence. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Secs. 14-61—14-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 
Sec. 14-81. - Definitions; permit required. (a)  For the purposes of this article, "solicitation" shall mean the act of going door-to-door or house-to-house in the residential areas of the city and engaging in any type of selling, seeking donations, or any other business, occupation or vocation which involves any attempt to obtain money, orders, donations, subscriptions or the like; whether such activity be on a temporary or permanent basis, and whether or not it be for any charitable, non-profit or profit-making organization or enterprise. (b)  "Solicitor" shall mean any person engaging in solicitation. (c)  "Solicitation permit badge" shall mean a photographic identification badge to be issued to authorized solicitors by DeKalb County after approval by the city. (d)  Any person engaged in or desiring to engage in any type of solicitation shall first register with the city clerk by completing a personal information questionnaire, submitting to a background check, and then obtaining a solicitation permit badge in accordance with the procedure described in section 14-84. (Ord. No. 825, § 1(13-81), 10-23-89; Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Sec. 14-82. - Exemptions. (a)  Persons, businesses and organizations engaging in religious, non-profit, charitable or political activities not involving solicitation, or who are otherwise exempted from local regulation by operation of state or federal law, or by the Constitution of the United States, or of the state, are exempt from the requirements of this article. (b)  Representatives or agents of charitable or nonprofit organizations, or non-profit corporations registered with the secretary of state, or tax-exempt organizations which have been recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service of the U.S. Treasury Department, which intend to engage in solicitation, shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of sections 14-81, 14-83, 14-84, 14-85, and 14-86, provided that the organization first supplies proof of the recognized status to the city clerk and has received from the city written confirmation of its exempt status. The organization shall furnish each of its agents or representatives with a copy of the confirmation letter and furnish the city with a list of such agents or representatives to include name, date of birth, race, sex, and social security number. The organization shall promptly notify the city of changes in the list. (c)  Any person who calls upon prospective customers at their prior invitation shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of sections 14-81, 14-83, 14-84, 14-85, and 14-86. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Sec. 14-83. - Application. (a)  The city clerk shall prepare a questionnaire for the purpose of obtaining pertinent information regarding the physical description, identity, and background of each applicant for a permit. The questionnaire shall include the following: (1)  Name, local address, and telephone number; (2)  Date and place of birth; (3)  Driver's license number and issuing state; (4)  Social security number; (5)  Race and sex; (6)  Height and weight; (7)  Eye color and hair color; (8)  Name, address, and telephone number of the organization represented; (9)  Name and telephone number of immediate supervisor; (10)  Product or service; and (11)  A list of all arrests, convictions and the disposition of each charge, other than minor traffic violations. (b)  The questionnaire form shall also bear the following statement: "O.C.G.A. § 16-10-71 provides that a person who makes a lawful oath or affirmation or who executes a document knowing that it purports to be an acknowledgment of a lawful oath or affirmation commits the offense of false swearing when, in any matter or thing other than a judicial proceeding, he knowingly and willfully makes a false statement." (c)  The police department shall review the application and perform a background check on the applicant for the purpose of ascertaining whether the applicant has pled to or has been convicted of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude. After ascertaining that the questionnaire has been properly completed, and that the applicant has not been disqualified by virtue of prior pleas or conviction, the city clerk shall approve the application subject to the payment of a permit fee as provided in section 14-84. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Sec. 14-84. - Fee; issuance.     Upon payment of the required permit fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) to the city clerk, the applicant shall receive a copy of his permit approval if said application is approved. He shall then carry this card of approval to the license/permits unit of the DeKalb County department of public safety (or to such other governmental unit and location as the applicant is directed by the city clerk). Upon payment by the applicant of such additional fee as may be required by DeKalb County, the applicant shall be photographed and provided with a solicitation permit badge which shall bear the applicant's photograph, name, and organization and which shall identify the applicant as a solicitor. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Sec. 14-85. - Expiration and reapplication. (a)  All permits expire sixty (60) days from the date of issuance. (b)  Each permit shall indicate thereon the expiration date. (c)  Any solicitor desiring to continue solicitation within the city after the expiration of his permit must apply for a new permit pursuant to sections 14-83 and 14-84 of this chapter. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Sec. 14-86. - Display.     Each permit holder will be furnished a device suitable for attaching the solicitation permit badge to the outer clothing of the permit holder. No solicitor shall engage in any solicitation without wearing and displaying his solicitation permit badge in a conspicuous manner. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Sec. 14-87. - Denial or revocation. (a)  No solicitor's permit shall be issued to any person who has been found guilty of any misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude any time within five (5) years prior to the date of application; nor shall a permit be issued to any person convicted of a felony, except that a permit may be issued to a convicted felon if it appears that he either has been pardoned or that he has been free from any legal restriction for a period of five (5) or more years prior to the date of his application. For the purposes of this article, the terms "conviction" and "found guilty" shall be deemed to include verdicts or pleas of guilty, entered by a court of this state, a court of any sister state, or any federal district court; any permit issued as the result of willful false statements or omissions in the solicitor's application for the permit shall be deemed null and void from the time of its issue. (b)  The permit of any solicitor who is convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or violence, shall be deemed revoked from the time of the conviction. The permit of any solicitor convicted of having violated any provision of this article after issuance of the permit shall be deemed revoked from the time of the conviction. (c)  Any revocation occurring pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be effective by operation of law, whether or not any formal notification to the solicitor is given or received. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Sec. 14-88. - Surrender. (a)  Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article for the use of any person is, and shall remain, the property of the city. Each permit holder shall surrender his solicitation permit badge to the city clerk no later than three (3) business days following the expiration or revocation of the permit. (b)  Should any permit holder be arrested and charged with violating any law while engaging in solicitation, either within the city or in any other jurisdiction, then the city police chief or his designee shall be authorized to demand the immediate surrender of such permit holder's solicitation permit badge. (c)  Any permit holder who is forced to surrender his permit pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be entitled to appeal such decision pursuant to section 14-89. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Sec. 14-89. - Appeal upon denial, surrender or revocation. (a)  In any case in which it appears to the city clerk that a solicitor's permit should not be issued to an applicant, the city clerk shall so inform the applicant and, upon the applicant's request, shall furnish the applicant with a reasonably detailed written statement of the reasons why the permit will not be issued. (b)  If the city clerk refuses to authorize the issuance of a permit, or in the event that a permit is surrendered pursuant to the provisions of section 14-88, the applicant or permit holder shall have the right of review thereof by appeal to the governing body. (c)  Such appeal shall be by written petition filed in the office of the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after notification of the action of the city clerk. (d)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of filing with the city clerk. (e)  The decision of the governing body shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of such decision by certiorari to the superior court of the county. (Ord. No. 0705, § II, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Secs. 14-90—14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE BUSINESSES 
Sec. 14-111. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Insurance company: A company which is authorized to transact classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5.     Life insurance company: A company which is authorized to transact only the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5 as class (1). (Ord. No. 839, § 1(13-30), 9-23-91) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-112. - Insurance company's license fee generally.     There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurance company doing business within the city in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00). An insurance company shall be doing business within the city if premiums are received from policies insuring persons within the city. For each separate business location in excess of one (1) operated and maintained by such company within the city, there is hereby levied an additional license fee in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00). (Ord. No. 839, § 1(13-31), 9-23-91) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(1). 
Sec. 14-113. - License fee for insurance companies insuring certain risks at additional business locations.     There is hereby levied an additional annual license fee of fourteen dollars ($14.00) upon each insurance company for each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under this section which is operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and which, in connection with the loans or sales involving term financing, offers, solicits, or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of the insurance company. (Ord. No. 839, § 1(13-32), 9-23-91) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(2). 
Sec. 14-114. - Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed.     There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each separate location within the city. (Ord. No. 839, § 1(13-33), 9-23-91) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(d). 
Sec. 14-115. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurance companies.     There is hereby levied an annual tax on each life insurance company doing business within the state based solely upon the gross direct premiums, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4, which are received during the preceding calendar year from policies insuring persons within the city. The rate of tax shall be one (1) percent of such premiums. (Ord. No. 839, § 1(13-34), 9-23-91) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 14-116. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurance companies.     There is hereby levied an annual tax upon the gross direct premiums, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, of all foreign, alien, and domestic insurance companies doing business within the state, other than life insurance companies, which are received during the preceding calendar year from policies insuring persons within the city. The rate of tax shall be two and one-half (2½) percent of such premiums. (Ord. No. 839, § 1(13-35), 9-23-91) 
Sec. 14-117. - Due date for license fees; delinquency penalties.     Any insurance company subject to payment of a license fee as imposed by this article, is given until the end of the business day on February 1 of each year to pay such license fee. If the license fee is not paid by that date, there shall be added to the license fee a penalty of ten (10) percent plus five (5) percent for each additional month or fraction thereof during which failure continues, not exceeding twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate, as a penalty for failure to pay the license fee within the time required by this section. (Ord. No. 839, § 1(13-36), 9-23-91) 
Sec. 14-118. - Administrative provisions.     A certified copy of this article, and any amendments thereto, shall be filed by the city clerk with the insurance commissioner of the state within forty-five (45) days of enactment. Such filing shall be a condition to the validity and enforceability of this article. (Ord. No. 839, § 1(13-37), 9-23-91) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 33-8-8(c), 33-8-8.1(e), 33-8-8.2(b)(1). 
Secs. 14-119—14-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Sec. 14-141. - "Gross receipts" defined.     For purposes of this article, the term "gross receipts" shall mean the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized below during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax imposed by this article is due. (Ord. No. 792, § 2, 12-19-83) 
Sec. 14-142. - Levy of business license tax.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for each year an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, state building and loan associations at a rate not to exceed that as prescribed by state law of the gross receipts of such institutions as defined. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. (Ord. No. 792, § 1, 12-19-83) 
Sec. 14-143. - Calculation of gross receipts. (a)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: (1)  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; (2)  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions; (3)  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale; (4)  Interest on other bonds, notes, and debentures, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; (5)  Dividends on stocks; (6)  Income from direct lease financing; (7)  Income from fiduciary activities; (8)  Service charges on deposit accounts; (9)  Other service charges, commissions, and fees; and (10)  Other income. (b)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: (1)  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; (2)  Interest on mortgages, participations, or mortgage-backed securities; (3)  Interest on real estate sold on contract; (4)  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; (5)  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; (6)  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; (7)  Loan fees; (8)  Loan servicing fees; (9)  Other fees and charges; (10)  Gross income from real estate owned operations; (11)  Net income from office building operations; (12)  Gross income from real estate held for investment; (13)  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; (14)  Miscellaneous operating income; (15)  Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans, and other assets; and (16)  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. (c)  The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section: (1)  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; (2)  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 7-1-730 et seq.; (3)  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions; (4)  An amount equal to a depository financial institution's gross income which is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than this state; and (5)  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (b)(2), (3), and (4) of this section, any deductions taken under subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (b)(2) through (4) of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (b)(1) through (4) of this section. (Ord. No. 792, § 2, 12-19-83) 
Sec. 14-144. - Filing of return. (a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city by March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. (b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. (Ord. No. 792, § 3, 12-19-83) 
Secs. 14-145—14-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TELEPHONE COMPANY[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Authority for Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company to use public streets of city for erecting, etc., lines, app. C, art. IV. 
Sec. 14-166. - Definition of "recurring local service revenue."     "Recurring local service revenue" as described in this article shall mean: (1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semi-public pay station services; c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and d.  Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange services. (2)  Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. (3)  All charges for local private line service (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. (Code 1973, § 2-617(b)) 
Sec. 14-167. - Levy of tax. (a)  There is hereby assessed against telephone companies doing business in the city an annual occupation license tax of three (3) percent of recurring local service revenue received by such telephone companies from subscribers located within the city. (b)  The license tax under this article shall be due on January 1 of each year, and may be paid on or after January 1 or by February 15 without interest or penalty. (Code 1973, § 2-617(a), (f)) 
Sec. 14-168. - Computation of tax.     The annual amount due may be computed by annualizing the taxable revenues billed during the month of June preceding the date of payment. (Code 1973, § 2-617(c)) 
Sec. 14-169. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. (a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in paragraphs (8) and (9) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1; provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. (b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. (Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 9-28-09) 
Sec. 14-170. - Authorized designee.     The city manager, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1, et seq. and shall perform the following duties: (1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within fifteen (15) business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. (2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the board of mayor and commissioners within sixty (60) calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. (3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this article. (4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this article. (5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. (6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. (Ord. No. 09-05, § 2, 9-28-09) 
Secs. 14-171—14-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AUCTION SALES[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- State Law reference— Municipal regulations and licensing, O.C.G.A. § 43-6-25.1. 
Sec. 14-191. - Permit; required, fee.     No person, personally or by agents or servants, shall conduct an auction sale (that is to say, a sale at which property of any kind or character whatever is exposed for sale by bid and the property is thereafter sold to the highest bidder) until after such person shall have obtained a permit from the city and shall have paid a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day or any part thereof upon which such sale is to be held. (Code 1973, § 2-717) 
Sec. 14-192. - Legitimate bidding required.     It shall be unlawful for any person, personally or by agent or servant, conducting an auction sale to have bids made by any person other than a bona fide purchaser or prospective purchaser and who has no interest in the property to be sold. (Code 1973, § 2-717) 
Sec. 14-193. - Sale to highest bidder.     All property offered at an auction sale and upon which two (2) or more bids are made shall be sold to the highest bidder. (Code 1973, § 2-717) 
Sec. 14-194. - Tents, bands, loudspeakers and prizes prohibited.     No auctioneer shall erect a tent from which to conduct a sale, shall employ the use of a band or of loudspeakers, or give prizes. (Code 1973, § 2-717) 
Sec. 14-195. - Information required to be divulged.     A clear and accurate description of all property offered for sale shall be stated prior to the acceptance of bids, and in the event of sale of real estate all encumbrances shall be stated and all building restrictions shall be clearly explained. (Code 1973, § 2-717) 
Secs. 14-196—14-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 14-216. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Luxury limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for a luxury limousine with a designed seating capacity for no more than ten (10) passengers and with a minimum of five (5) seats located behind the operator of the vehicle, and which does not have a door at the rear of the vehicle designed to allow passenger entry or exit.     Permit means the written authority granted by the city clerk to engage in the vehicles for hire business in the city.     Taxicabs and other passenger-carrying vehicles means any motor vehicle or other vehicle for hire designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers for consideration or charges which are determined by agreement, contract, mileage, or by the length of time the vehicle is used.     Vehicles for hire means taxicabs, ambulances, and other passenger-carrying vehicles, excluding luxury limousines, transporting not more than ten (10) persons for hire. Vehicles for hire in the context of this article do not include vehicles required to have a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the state public service commission. Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-217. - Compliance with provisions of article.     No person shall conduct the business of operating vehicles for hire in the city without first meeting the requirements of this article. 
Sec. 14-218. - Company permittees responsible for violations by drivers.     Company permittees under this article are responsible for violations of this article by their vehicle operators whether such operators are direct employees or independent contractors. 
Sec. 14-219. - Vehicle condition and equipment. (a)  Drivers and company permittees are responsible for maintaining each vehicle for hire in a clean and mechanically safe condition. The interior and exterior shall meet the requirements set out under inspection requirements outlined in this section. (b)  Drivers are not to drive and company permittees are not to allow drivers to operate vehicles for hire, excluding limousines, without the name and telephone number of the company indicated thereon. In addition, a taximeter and a top light as outlined in this section are required for taxicabs. Limousines shall be required to have a plate attached to their front bumper indicating the company business name, city and state of principal domicile, and company telephone number. The cost for such plate shall be the sole responsibility of the limousine company and must be placed on each vehicle prior to the vehicle being placed in service. (c)  All vehicles for hire to be used by a permittee in the city shall be inspected annually and approved by the city manager. The requirements that each vehicle must meet are as follows: (1)  Exterior inspection shall ensure that headlights, taillights, brake lights, directional signal lights, license plate lights, windshield wipers, all vehicle glass, window cranks or electric windows, doors and door locks, trunk lid, trunk, hood, door handles, exhaust system, bumpers, fenders, body, tires, and other vehicle parts are in good condition and functioning properly. There shall be no tears or rust holes in the vehicle body and no loose pieces hanging from the vehicle body. There shall be no unrepaired body damage or any body condition which would create a safety problem or interfere with the operation of the vehicle. (2)  Interior inspection shall include the rearview mirror, steering wheel, foot brakes, parking brakes, air conditioning and heating systems to ensure each item is in good operating condition. The upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels, and the trunk compartment shall be inspected to ensure there are no tears, that they are clean and have no offensive odors and that the trunk has sufficient space for passenger luggage. (3)  The vehicle shall have a spare tire and jack. Taxicabs shall have a functional two-way radio and a taximeter. The taximeter is to be positioned so that it is visible from the passenger compartment. Taximeter accuracy shall be verified according to the county public safety department's published rules and regulations for vehicles for hire. (4)  Vehicles shall be subject to random inspections at any time. Vehicles found to be substandard shall be removed from service immediately. (d)  Each vehicle operator must have in the vehicle proof of current insurance coverage. Any company letting insurance coverage lapse shall have its company permit suspended or revoked by the city clerk. Business operations shall not be resumed until proof of insurance is provided to the city clerk, the permit is reinstated, and the vehicle reinspected. (e)  No business permitted for operating vehicles for hire shall use any vehicle which has not been inspected by the city manager. 
Sec. 14-220. - Drivers smoking, playing radios, etc.     A driver while operating a vehicle for hire is not to smoke or play a radio or tape player if objected to by a passenger. 
Sec. 14-221. - Cruising.     Company permittees under this article are responsible for ensuring that no driver participates in cruising. Cruising is defined as moving about the streets of the city for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or by personal command. 
Secs. 14-222—14-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 
Sec. 14-241. - Company permit—Generally. (a)  No person shall conduct the business of operating vehicles for hire in the city without first having been issued a permit from the city clerk and paying an occupational tax as required in article II of this chapter. (b)  The permit must be posted in public view at the permitted location. (c)  Any applicant for a permit is required to submit information showing qualifications on a form provided by the city clerk and to submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation or fingerprinting. If the applicant is other than a sole proprietor, all partners, officers, managers, and stockholders holding a ten (10) percent or more interest in the company shall be subject to the provisions of this section. An applicant must: (1)  Be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. (2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. (3)  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five (5) years previous to the date of application, or for the violation of any of the following offenses of this state, of any other state, or of the United States: homicide; rape; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; child molestation; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempts to commit any of these listed offenses; any felony where a motor vehicle was used; any crime of violence or theft; any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs; moral turpitude. (4)  Show on the application a company dispatch office located within the geographical boundaries of the city from which business will be conducted. The indicated company location must meet all applicable city zoning and ordinance requirements. The dispatch location must be staffed by company agents or employees, have a published telephone number, and have sufficient parking for accommodating its vehicles for hire when not in use as well as sufficient parking for employees' vehicles. (5)  File applications for the initial permitting of vehicles along with a list of all drivers who will be scheduled for driver permitting and indicate whether drivers are company employees or contract drivers. A copy of each contract driver's insurance coverage must be included in the application. (6)  Provide a copy of the rate schedule and the daily hours of operation. (7)  Provide the name, address, and telephone number of a responsible individual residing in the county who will be the registered agent for the purpose of serving of process. (d)  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to defray investigative and administrative costs. 
Sec. 14-242. - Same—Insurance required. (a)  An applicant for a company permit required by the provisions of this division shall provide with the application proof of motor vehicle insurance covering public liability and property damage issued by an insurer approved by the state. Such insurance shall insure passengers and third persons against personal injury and property damage in amounts specified by this section. (b)  Any applicant for a permit to operate a taxicab service in the city shall maintain minimum insurance coverage in the following amounts: (1)  Fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) bodily injury per person. (2)  Thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) bodily injury per occurrence. (3)  Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) property damage. (4)  Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) personal injury protection. (c)  Any applicant for a permit to operate all other vehicles for hire services shall maintain minimum insurance coverage as required by the state public service commission. A copy of the certificate and a copy of the registration permit issued by the public service commission shall be attached to the application for a permit. (d)  Before the policy is canceled for nonpayment of premium or other cause, notice thereof shall be given in writing to the city clerk at least thirty (30) days before the policy lapses. 
Sec. 14-243. - Driver's permit. (a)  No person shall drive a vehicle for hire without a driver's permit. No business permitted for operating vehicles for hire shall employ any driver who has not first met the requirements of this article and been issued a driver's permit. (b)  A driver's permit shall not be issued to any driver not employed by or representing a permitted company. (c)  A driver's permit must be posted on the dash or sun visor of the vehicle being driven so that it is visible from the passenger area. Company permittees under this article are responsible for checking to ensure that each driver has a current driver's permit in the driver's possession and that it is posted on the dash or sun visor of the vehicle being operated. (d)  No request for a driver's permit will be processed unless the permit applicant presents a letter on company stationery to the city clerk from a permitted company requesting issuance of a driver's permit to the named individual. The driver's permit applicant will further furnish information on a form provided by the city clerk and submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation or fingerprinting. Driver permit applicants must meet the following requirements: (1)  Be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. (2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. (3)  Possess a current valid state driver's license. Such license must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-58 and 40-5-64. (4)  Exhibit a proficiency with the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers, and obey lawful orders of police and others in lawful authority. (5)  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five (5) years previous to the date of application, or for the violation of any of the following offenses of the state, of any other state, or of the United States: homicide; rape; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; child molestation; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempts to commit any of these listed offenses; any felony where a motor vehicle was used; any crime of violence or theft; any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs; moral turpitude. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. (e)  Drivers are responsible for reporting any change in qualifications or other permitting information previously supplied to the city clerk within ten (10) days of the change. (f)  Each application for a driver's permit must be accompanied by a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). Fees required by this article are nonrefundable and are not prorated. (g)  Upon approval of the application and payment of the required fee, the applicant shall receive a copy of his permit approval. He shall then carry this card of approval to the license/permits unit of the county department of public safety (or to other governmental unit and location as the applicant is directed by the city clerk). Upon payment by the applicant of an additional fee of five dollars ($5.00), the applicant shall be photographed and provided with a permit which shall bear the applicant's photograph, name, and organization and which shall identify the applicant as a driver of a vehicle for hire. 
Sec. 14-244. - Transfer and term.     All company permits and driver's permits required by this article are nontransferable and shall expire on December 31 of each year. Permittees should contact the city clerk no later than December 1 of each year for renewal information. 
Sec. 14-245. - Suspension or revocation.     Company permits and driver permits issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the city clerk for the following reasons: (1)  Where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for a permit; (2)  Failure to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article and this chapter; (3)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a company or driver permit; (4)  Violation of any part of this article; (5)  Charging a fare in excess of those fares on file with the city clerk; (6)  Having four (4) or more moving traffic violations in any twelve-month period; (7)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse. 
Secs. 14-246—14-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 14-261. - Purpose of article.     The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests, reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-90), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-262. - Penalty for violation of article.     Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for suspension or revocation by the city manager of the license issued under this article. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-113), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-263. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five (5) percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas.     Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters.     Good moral character means a person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five (5) years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime.     Minor means, for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years.     Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: (1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.     Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: (1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; (2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; (3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; (4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; (5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; (6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or (7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal, or anal irrigation. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-92), 8-30-93) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-264. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-96), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-265. - Certain activities prohibited.     No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-94), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-266. - Minors. (a)  Admission. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. (b)  Sales to. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device, or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor, or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-97), (13-98), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-267. - Location restrictions. (a)  No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: (1)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes. (2)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located. (3)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. (4)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. (5)  On less than three (3) acres of land containing at least one hundred (100) feet of road frontage. (b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-99), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-268. - Change of location or name. (a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the governing body, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city manager. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the city Code have been met. (b)  No licensee and/or permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license and/or permit. (c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-109), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-269. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. (a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. (b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the city clerk showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. (c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. (d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of eighteen (18) years or a person not permitted pursuant to this article. (e)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. (f)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and the two (2) hours immediately following such time, i.e., until 1:55 a.m. on the subsequent day. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on Christmas Day. (g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. (h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. (i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least eighteen (18) inches from the level of the floor. (j)  No dancing shall occur closer than four (4) feet to any patron. (k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. (l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. (m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. (n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths (3.5) footcandles per square foot. (o)  If any portion or subsection of this section or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-93), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-270. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. (a)  Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. (b)  Sworn officers of the city police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city official to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of city Code. (c)  The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. (d)  Violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation by the city manager of a license granted hereunder. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-114), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-271. - Employees. (a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. (b)  List of employees. It shall be the duty of all licensed adult establishments to file with the chief of police the name of the establishment, the license number, and a list of all employees with their home addresses and home telephone numbers annually before December 1. (c)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-100(a), (f), (i)), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-272. - Sanitation. (a)  Cleaning. Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment, and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. (b)  Self-inspection. The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city clerk. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. (c)  Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the city manager on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city manager shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within twenty-four (24) hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city manager may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed or ordered removed by the city manager. The city manager shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. (d)  Abatement as sanitary nuisance. A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-115)—(13-118), 8-30-93) 
Secs. 14-273—14-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE AND PERMIT 
Sec. 14-291. - Authority for privilege license. (a)  Adult entertainment establishments may be operated in the city under a license granted under the authority of the board of mayor and commissioners upon the terms and conditions provided in this article. (b)  All licenses shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city Code and state law. (c)  All licenses under this division shall have printed on the front the following words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked or annulled and is subject to any future ordinances which may be enacted." (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-91), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-292. - Required.     It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a permit so to do. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the activity is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-95), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-293. - Employee permits. (a)  Approval for employment; fees. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the chief of police of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall receive approval of such employment from the chief of police. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the chief of police requires, including a set of fingerprints on city, county, or United States Department of Justice forms. A nonrefundable investigation fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall accompany the notice of intended employment. Upon approval and payment of a permit fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00), the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If it is found that the person is not eligible for employment, the chief of police shall notify in writing the prospective employee and the prospective employer that this person is not eligible for employment. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the prospective employee of the right to appeal. The prospective employee may, within ten (10) days of the denial, apply in writing to the city clerk for a hearing before the governing body which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. (b)  Expiration. All permits shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the calendar year for which they are issued. (c)  Issued in error; termination. All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the chief of police. (d)  Permits on file at premises. No licensee shall allow any employee to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each employee. All permits issued under this section remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the police department. (e)  Transferability. Valid permits may be transferred to another licensed establishment within the city. (f)  Suspension, revocation of permit. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of permit. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-100(b)—(e), (g), (h)), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-294. - Application—Generally. (a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk. Each application for a license under this division shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee plus a separate check or cash in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or the applicant withdraws his application prior to a license being issued, the license fee shall be refunded but the two hundred dollars ($200.00) paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. (b)  The application for license shall not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of, or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-101), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-295. - Same—Contents.     Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: (1)  The full, true name and any other names used by the applicant. (2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. (3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. (4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. (5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth. (6)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches taken within the last six (6) months. (7)  Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five (5) percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. (8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, county, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. (9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. (10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address, and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one (1) of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one (1) application fee shall be charged. (11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. (12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. (13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five (5) percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. (14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five (5) years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. (15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant. (16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. (17)  At least three (3) character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five (5) years. The city clerk shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. (18)  Address of the premises to be licensed. (19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right. (20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business thereunder regulated. (21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; b.  If a partnership, by the manager or general partner; c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; or d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-102), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-296. - Same—Applicant to personally appear.     The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the City of Avondale Estates and shall present the application containing the information described in section 14-295. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-103), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-297. - Same—Investigation.     The city shall have thirty (30) days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city manager may grant the license if he finds: (1)  The required fees have been paid. (2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. (3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. (4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of this application. (5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one (1) or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude. (6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by the city or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. (7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. (8)  The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. (9)  That the applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five (5) years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur. (10)  That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. (11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder. (12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state, or the United States. (13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-104), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-298. - Persons prohibited as licensees/permittees. (a)  No license or permit provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: (1)  Any applicant who has not paid all taxes, required fees, and property taxes for a business at that location; (2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; (3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five (5) percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; (4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five (5) percent interest therein are not of good moral character; (5)  Any person employing, assisted by, or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; (6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state, or the city. (b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. (427 U.S. 50, 81). (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-105), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-299. - Renewal. (a)  Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the licensees/permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. Fees for adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be established by resolution of the governing body. (b)  All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. A licensee who desires to renew his license shall file application, with the requisite annual fee, with the city clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed by November 30 of each year; otherwise, investigative and administrative costs and penalties will be assessed. No renewal license shall be granted after January. Such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. (c)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. License fees shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. License fees are not refundable. (d)  Any licensee renewing a license issued under this division who shall pay the required fees, or any portion thereof, after the date set for such payment shall, in addition to the annual fee, pay a late payment penalty of ten (10) percent plus five (5) percent for each additional month, or fraction thereof, during which failure continues. Such penalty shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-107), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-300. - Nontransferable.     No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer to assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one (1) or more of the partners should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-108), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-301. - Refusal; appeal.     If the city manager, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, the city manager shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten (10) days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a license may appeal such denial to the governing body of the city. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-106), 8-30-93) 
Sec. 14-302. - Appeal. (a)  Procedure. (1)  The applicant or licensee may, within ten (10) days after he has been notified of an adverse determination including suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment establishment license, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. (2)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the board of mayor and commissioners and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the governing body, and the name and address of the applicant. (3)  The city clerk shall schedule a hearing before the governing body not less than thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of appeal and shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in the city's legal organ at least two (2) weeks prior to the hearing. (b)  Hearing. (1)  Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the governing body at the time and date set therefor, the governing body shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the applicant, from interested parties, and from city staff. The governing body may sustain, overrule, or modify the action complained of. The findings of the governing body shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of the hearing by certiorari to the superior court of the county. (2)  The governing body may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath, and call witnesses as it may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. (3)  The governing body shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. (c)  Report. The governing body shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of such hearing, file a written report with the city clerk. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions, and its decision. All such reports shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the applicant/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city manager and the chief of police. (Ord. No. 854, § 1(13-110)—(13-112), 8-30-93) 
Secs. 14-303—14-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CABLE SERVICES FRANCHISING 
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 14-351. - Definitions.     For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number.     Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable.     Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act.     City means the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia.     Board of mayor and commissioners means the governing body of the city and its designee or any successor thereto.     Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide cable services through a cable system or open video system.     Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable services to inhabitants within the franchise area.     May is permissive.     Open video system means "open video system" as defined by section 76.1500(a) of Part 76 of the Code of Federal Regulations.     Ordinance means this ordinance and all modifications and amendments thereto.     Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city.     Shall is mandatory, not merely directive.     Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city.     Telecommunications services means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but does not include cable services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "telecommunications service" shall mean "telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. (Ord. No. 0005, § 1(1.1—1.1.13), 11-27-00) 
Secs. 14-352—14-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 
Sec. 14-361. - Granting authority. (a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any cable services or operate a cable system or open video system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. (b)  The board of mayor and commissioners may grant one (1) or more franchises in accordance with this ordinance, provided that the board of mayor and commissioners reserves the right to modify any provision of this ordinance by amendment hereof. (c)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the governing body and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. (d)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and/or itself engage in the provision of cable services. (e)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. (f)  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Cable Act, as amended, governing cable television system and open video system franchises and the renewals of cable television system franchises. (Ord. No. 0005, § 1(2.1—2.1.06), 11-27-00) 
Sec. 14-362. - Franchise applications. (a)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the governing body may determine, subject to applicable law. (b)  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the board of mayor and commissioners shall deem necessary or appropriate: (1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; (2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; b.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable systems and open video systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed cable system or open video system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable system or open video system in the city; e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; and f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable system(s) and open video system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof; (3)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: a.  A description of the cable services proposed to be provided; b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other service charges; d.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable services; and f.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; (4)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and (5)  Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the board, or by any other provision of law. (c)  Non-refundable application fees for new franchises. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. (1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. (2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this ordinance, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a non-refundable application fee in the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Avondale Estates. In the event that the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. (Ord. No. 0005, § 1(2.2—2.2.03), 11-27-00) 
Sec. 14-363. - Responsibilities of applicants.     It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 0005, § 1(2.3), 11-27-00) 
Sec. 14-364. - Public availability of applications.     To the extent determined by the board of mayor and commissioners, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at City Hall, 21 N. Avondale Plaza, Avondale Estates, during normal business hours. (Ord. No. 0005, § 1(2.4), 11-27-00) 
Sec. 14-365. - Evaluation criteria.     In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the board of mayor and commissioners may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: (1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and cable services offered by the applicant to the city; (2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; (3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; (4)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services to be provided, including the type of cable services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; (5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and (6)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. (Ord. No. 0005, § 1(2.5), 11-27-00) 
Sec. 14-366. - Investigation(s) and inquiries. (a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the board of mayor and commissioners deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the board of mayor and commissioners may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to the board of mayor and commissioners, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. (b)  If the board of mayor and commissioners, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider any application(s), the board of mayor and commissioners shall set one (1) or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the board of mayor and commissioners and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. (c)  The board of mayor and commissioners may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. (d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the board of mayor and commissioners, the board of mayor and commissioners may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. (Ord. No. 0005, § 1(2.6—2.6.04), 11-27-00) 
Sec. 14-367. - Terms and conditions of franchise. (a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: (1)  The term of the franchise; (2)  The franchise area and the cable services which are the subject of the franchise; (3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; (4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled; (5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise; (6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; (7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; (8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; (9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; (10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; (11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the grantee by the city; (12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; (13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; (14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; (15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; (16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and (17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. (Ord. No. 0005, § 1(2.7—2.7.1), 11-27-00) 
Sec. 14-368. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise.     The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five (5) percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. (Ord. No. 0801, § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 14-369. - Authorized designee.     The city manager is authorized, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five (5) percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. (Ord. No. 0801, § 2, 4-28-08) 
Secs. 14-370—14-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 14-376. - Severability.     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this ordinance is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. No. 0005, § 1(3.1), 11-27-00) 
Sec. 14-377. - Delegation.     Consistent with applicable law, the board of mayor and commissioners shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this ordinance to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this ordinance or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or grantee. The board of mayor and commissioners may also establish and appoint one (1) or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the board of mayor and commissioners shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this ordinance. (Ord. No. 0005, § 1(3.2), 11-27-00) 
Sec. 14-378. - Retroactivity.     This ordinance shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for cable services existing on the effective date of this ordinance, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. (Ord. No. 0005, § 1(3.3), 11-27-00) 
Secs. 14-379—14-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FRANCHISES AND LICENSES[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 0110, § 1, adopted Dec. 10, 2001, amended §§ 14-401, 14-421—14-429, 14-451—14-455 in their entirety. Formerly said sections pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 14-401. - Definitions.     For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning be intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural.     Affiliated person means each person who falls into one (1) or more of the following categories: (1)  Each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; (2)  Each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (3)  Each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant; (4)  Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the applicant; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant.     Board means the Board of Mayor and Commissioners or governing body of the City of Avondale Estates and its designee or any successor thereto.     Cable Services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable.     Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act.     City means the City of Avondale Estates.     Control or controlling interest means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of a person, including, but not limited to, a person's compliance with a franchise or revocable license, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by contract, or otherwise, and the beneficial ownership of shares representing ten (10) percent or more of the votes entitled to be cast by a corporation's voting shares shall create a rebuttable presumption of control.     Facility services means the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of conduit or related facilities in the streets by a person for sale or lease to third parties, other than affiliated persons, that use such conduit or related facilities for the transmission of telecommunication services, but such person does not itself provide telecommunications service or cable service to such third parties or any locations or other persons in the license area.     Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets by a telecommunications system to provide telecommunications services.     Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to provide facility services along licensed routes pursuant to a license, or to construct, install, operate and maintain a telecommunications system as necessary to: (1)  Furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; (2)  Provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; or (3)  Transport telecommunications services across the city along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications services at or from any person or location in the city.     May is permissive.     Ordinance means this ordinance and all modifications and amendments thereto.     Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city.     Private telecommunications services means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services.     Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in subsection 14-421(b) of this ordinance.     Shall is mandatory, not merely directive.     Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public right-of-way within or belonging to the city.     Telecommunications means "telecommunications" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include Cable Services.     Telecommunications service means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "telecommunications service" shall mean "telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the communications act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable.     Telecommunications system means the system, plant, equipment or property within the streets in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Secs. 14-402—14-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 
Sec. 14-421. - Granting authority. (a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to construct, operate or maintain a telecommunication system over which telecommunications services or private telecommunications services are provided, or use or occupy the streets to provide facility services, without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. The city intends to exercise its authority to franchise or license persons pursuant to this ordinance to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, including the 1996 Act. (b)  A person shall not use or occupy the streets to operate a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services or private telecommunications services are provided without a franchise, except that such a person may use or occupy specific streets without a franchise if the person obtains a revocable license in accordance with the terms of this ordinance. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets and: (1)  May be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is for the sole purpose of providing private telecommunications services or facility services; or (2)  Shall be granted to provide telecommunications service only if the use or occupation of such streets, together with the use or occupation of any streets pursuant to revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed five hundred (500) linear feet; or (3)  Shall be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is by a telecommunications system that is not used by the grantee or any other person to sell, resell or otherwise provide telecommunications services to any person in the city.     In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a person to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in this paragraph; such person must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. (c)  The board of mayor and commissioners may grant one (1) or more franchises or revocable licenses in accordance with this ordinance, provided that the board reserves the right to modify any provision of this ordinance by amendment hereof. (d)  The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the board and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the grantee. (e)  Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or revocable licenses as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services, private telecommunications services or facility services. (f)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license may only be granted for use of specifically identified streets. (g)  The grant of franchise and revocable licenses by the city to persons constructing, operating, or maintaining a telecommunications system shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the 1996 Act, as amended, governing telecommunications franchises and renewals thereof. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 14-422. - Franchise applications. (a)  Applications for franchise and revocable licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the board of mayor and commissioners may determine, subject to applicable law. (b)  Any application for a franchise or revocable license shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license: (1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; (2)  For the purpose of determining who controls the applicant, a detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including the following: a.  The names and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant. b.  The names and business addresses of all persons having control over the applicant. c.  Financial information sufficient to demonstrate that the applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system, or to provide facility services, in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules, and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law; and d.  For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate and repair the telecommunications system, or provide facility services, in compliance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations, with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety and welfare with respect to the applicant's use of the streets, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant and the areas served by such systems. (3)  In order to permit the city to manage its streets, a description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the telecommunications system or facility services to be constructed in the streets, which shall include the following: a.  A map indicating the location of the system of facility services in the streets, and an estimated construction schedule, if known, and; b.  A statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant; (4)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references reasonably pertinent to the city's management of the streets or the compensation to be paid to the city, which shall be required or requested by the board or by any other provision of law. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 14-423. - Non-refundable application fees for new franchises and revocable license.     No application for a new franchise or revocable license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of the application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise or revocable license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If the application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded except where required by law. (a)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. (b)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this section, each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Avondale Estates. Each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Avondale Estates. In the event the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. In the event that the city's reasonable costs are less then the application amount, the city shall reimburse to the applicant the amount in excess of the city's actual cost if required by applicable law. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 0403, § 1, 6-28-04) 
Sec. 14-424. - Responsibilities of applicants.     It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 14-425. - Public availability of applications.     To the extent determined by the board of mayor and commissioners, applications for franchise or revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designed city office during normal business hours. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 14-426. - Evaluation criteria.     An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to construct, operate and maintain a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services are provided, provided the board reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors: (1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city; (2)  Demonstration of adequate financial and technical ability to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, which such demonstration may be made by an adequate bond, security fund, and/or such demonstration that is reasonably acceptable to the city, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the state or Federal Communications Commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the city; (3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; (4)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction requirements and to abide by all conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise (including any terms or conditions imposed pursuant to section 14-428 of this ordinance) any public, health, safety and welfare requirements reasonably related to the applicant's use of the street's and the city's management of the streets; and (5)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations reasonably deemed pertinent by the city for managing the streets and safeguarding the interests of the city and the public in the streets, and for ensuring the city receives fair and reasonable compensation for use of the streets.     In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services and in accordance with applicable law, other than Section 253 of the Communications Act which is not applicable to persons providing only private telecommunications services or facility services, the board may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the foregoing factors to the extent applicable. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 14-427. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. (a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the board deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchise and revocable licenses. In considering applications, the board may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the board, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. (b)  After considering such information provided pursuant to this ordinance as it determines to be appropriate, the board shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain at which such application(s) shall be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing in accordance with applicable law. (c)  The board of mayor and commissioners may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. (d)  The board shall consider the application for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with this ordinance and applicable law, including 47 U.S.C. § 253, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth in section 14-426 of the ordinance. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements in order to grant a franchise or revocable license to an applicant when it determines that the best interest of the city may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. (e)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the board, the governing body may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services, and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interest of the city may be served thereby. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 14-428. - Terms and conditions of franchise and revocable license. (a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise and revocable license granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or revocable license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: (1)  The terms of the franchise or revocable license, provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five (5) years and shall not be renewed for terms exceeding five (5) years; (2)  The franchise area authorized by the franchise, or the streets that may be used pursuant to the revocable license; (3)  The compensation to be paid to the city; (4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or cancelled; (5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license. (6)  For the limited purpose of ensuring the grantee is complying with the terms of the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, the city reserves the right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; (7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; (8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records with respect to its obligations under the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; (9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods in the streets and rights-of-way of the city; (10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules, and policies; (11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight by the city of the grantee's use of streets and compliance with the franchise or revocable license; (12)  Provisions relating to an assignment or other transfer of franchise or revocable license or the telecommunications system that results in a change of control; (13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license; (14)  Provisions that ensure that the grantee will obtain all licenses and permits necessary to provide telecommunications services by use of the city's streets from any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; (15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of city operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements of the telecommunications system, or from the provision of facility services; (16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the telecommunications system, or the provision of facility services; and (17)  Such other provisions as the city reasonably determines are necessary or appropriate to permit the city to manage its streets or ensure compliance with the franchise or revocable license, to the extent not prohibited by law. (b)  The city manager shall make available to any applicant a model franchise or revocable license, as applicable, containing the terms and conditions the city seeks to impose pursuant to this article. The city manager shall have the right to modify from time to time such model franchise or revocable license, so long as such modifications are consistent with this ordinance and applicable law. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 14-429. - Revocation of revocable license.     The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause, or if the revocable license is for the provision of private telecommunications services or facility services, for the city's convenience. The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than five hundred (500) linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services by the grantee, any affiliated persons or any other persons to or from any person or location in the city, or unless the use or occupation of the street is for the provision of facility services. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Secs. 14-430—14-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 14-451. - Severability.     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this ordinance is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 14-452. - Delegation.     Consistent with applicable law, the board of mayor and commissioners shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this ordinance to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this ordinance or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or revocable license or grantee. The board may also establish and appoint one (1) or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the board shall determine, to advise it on such matters which are the subject of this ordinance. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 14-453. - Application to existing telecommunications systems and providers of telecommunications services and private telecommunications services.     This ordinance shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for the operation of telecommunications systems used to provide telecommunications services existing on the effective date of the ordinance, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 14-454. - Applicability of other ordinances.     All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 14-455. - Effective date.     This ordinance shall become effective 10 December 2001 immediately upon approval by the Board of Mayor and Commissioners of the City of Avondale Estates. (Ord. No. 0110, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Chapter 15 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
Sec. 15-1. - Lake Avondale—Use restricted. (a)  All dogs present at Lake Avondale must display a current license and be restrained on a leash held by a person competent to maintain control. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or dog to swim in Lake Avondale. (c)  No watercraft shall be allowed in Lake Avondale without the express permission of the city manager. (Ord. No. 16-08, § 1, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 15-2. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-01, § adopted April 24, 2017, repealed § 15-2, which pertained to Lake Avondale permit required; regulations and derived from Code 1973, §§ 2-759, 2-760; and Ord. No. 759, § 1, adopted October 28, 1974. 
Sec. 15-3. - Willis park and playground. (a)  Park hours are from 7:00 a.m. until sundown. It shall be unlawful to be present in Willis park outside of such hours. (b)  All dogs in Willis park must display a current license and be restrained on a leash held by a person competent to maintain control. (Ord. No. 16-08, § 2, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 15-4. - Alcoholic beverages.     No person shall serve, consume, or transport in open containers any alcoholic beverage within a city park or recreation facility, except during city-sponsored concerts and dances held in a city park or recreation facility. 
Sec. 15-5. - Motor vehicles in parks.     No person shall operate a motorized vehicle of any kind or nature in or on any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreation purposes; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to vehicles used for maintenance purposes by the city. 
Sec. 15-6. - Gazebo at Lake Avondale; pavilion at Dartmouth Avenue Park; reservations; fees. (a)  The city may reserve for a reasonable period of time the gazebo located at Lake Avondale and the picnic pavilion at the park and playground located on Dartmouth Avenue for purposes of group activities of city residents, their children, and guests upon submittal of an application and approval by the city manager or his designee. Use of these areas shall be free to residents and members of their immediate families; nonresidents may only rent the gazebo or pavilion as guests of a resident who shall sign the application as the sponsor. A deposit, in addition to any fee, shall be required for residents and sponsored nonresident guests. Following the group activity, the city manager or his designee shall inspect the location and, provided there is no damage and clean-up of the facilities is satisfactory, the deposit shall be returned. If damage exceeds the deposit, the resident signing the application shall pay for any excess damages upon notice from the city. In the event of a cancellation, refunds for the rental fee, less a processing fee, shall be issued after written notification of the cancellation is received by the city. (b)  The rental fee for sponsored nonresident guests, amount of deposit for residents and sponsored nonresident guests, and the cancellation processing fee shall be as specified on the application form. (c)  Rules and regulations pertaining to the use of the gazebo and the pavilion shall be specified on the application form. 
Chapter 16 - PERSONNEL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Police department, § 2-60 et seq. 
Sec. 16-1. - Personnel management system.     The city personnel management system document is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 16-2. - Retirement plan. (a)  The document entitled "A Retirement Plan for the Employees of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia," and any amendments thereto attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived as exhibit A and comprising 62 pages, is hereby adopted as the retirement plan of the city. (b)  The document attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived as Appendix A to the retirement plan of the city and consisting of pages A-1 through A-16, is hereby adopted as the joint trust agreement for the administration of such plan by the city and the state municipal employees' benefit system. (c)  The documents referred to in subsections (a) and (b) are hereby made public records and shall be maintained by the city clerk as such and be accessible to the members of the general public at city hall during all normal business hours. (d)  The effective date of this section was fifteen (15) days after final passage in accordance with section 1-401 of the city Charter, or not earlier than January 1, 1989, whichever was later, and the effective dates of the attachments hereto shall so correspond. (Ord. No. 817, §§ 1—4, 12-15-88; Ord. No. 833, § 1, 5-29-90; Ord. No. 838, § 1, 8-26-91; Ord. No. 845, § 1, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 0305, § 1, 8-25-03) Cross reference— Social security, § 2-9 et seq. 
Sec. 16-3. - Personnel board established; term; procedures; duties. (a)  There is hereby established the personnel board of the city to consist of five (5) residents who hold no other office with and shall remain residents of the city during the term for which appointed to the personnel board. (b)  Members of the personnel board shall be appointed by resolution, with terms to be four (4) years except for the first personnel board appointed, two (2) members of which shall be appointed for one-year terms, one (1) member for a two-year term, one (1) member for a three-year term and one (1) member for a four-year term. Thereafter, all terms shall be four (4) years. (c)  The operating procedures of the personnel board shall be those set out in the personnel management system manual as the same now exists or is hereinafter amended, it being the intent hereof that the personnel board shall perform all functions previously assigned to the board of mayor and commissioners in the said personnel management system manual. (Ord. No. 9903, §§ 1—3, 5-24-99) 
Chapter 17 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Authority, § 1-102(15), (16). Cross reference— Littering public places, § 11-22 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 17-1. - Reference point elevations.     The base or datum plane to which all levels taken by the city shall be referred shall be that plane at or near sea level from which the following local bench marks have elevations as follows: Elevation 1,074.95 feet at east end of car stop at starting point of Clarendon Avenue rail driven between car tracks. Elevation 1,088.33 feet nail in oak tree 50 feet east of Dudley Street (now Windsor Terrace) south corner of Covington Road. Elevation 1,011.00 feet pine tree south side of bathing pool. Elevation 1,099.49 feet first floor level of Avondale Grammar School. Elevation 1,002.95 feet nail in pine tree southeast of dam. (Code 1973, § 2-7144) Editor's note— This section is included because of its historic interest. 
Sec. 17-2. - Street grades.     The word "grade" as applied to any street shall mean the elevation above sea level, as indicated, above the sidewalk, at the building line or curb line as indicated, and grades shall be fixed by resolution of the governing body on presentation of a profile which shall be known as the official profile. Official profiles shall bear endorsements of the mayor and city clerk showing the facts and dates of their approval by the governing body. No grade once established shall be changed except upon resolution by the governing body. (Code 1973, § 2-7145) 
Sec. 17-3. - Curb grades.     On streets or along hillsides where it is necessary for drainage economy to have the curb grades higher or lower than the center line of the street, the same shall be shown on the profile and the curb grade as well as the street grade shall be established. (Code 1973, § 2-7146) 
Sec. 17-4. - Street numbers.     No person shall apply a street number to or maintain on such premises without ascertaining the correct number from the city clerk and using the number so designated. (Code 1973, § 2-7199) 
Sec. 17-5. - Construction and repair of sidewalks, curbs, gutters and streets—Sidewalk construction on petition of property owner. (a)  All applications for sidewalks shall be made by petition to the governing body, signed by the property owners abutting, and the contractor shall agree therein to lay such sidewalks in accordance with the specifications prescribed by the governing body. (b)  On the granting of the petition, or on the passage of any resolution for the construction of any sidewalk, curb or gutter, the city clerk shall notify the city manager in writing, and the city manager shall have the necessary grading done as soon as possible thereafter, provided there is available cash on hand in the street fund to pay for the same. When the cash is not on hand, the governing body may require the property owners to pay for the cost of grading of such sidewalks. (c)  A permit shall then be issued in writing by the city manager, on a form provided therefor, and on which shall be printed the specifications prescribed by the governing body. No permits shall be issued to any contractor who has not previously given bond to the city in the amount required by the governing body, conditioned to indemnify the city against loss or damage, for injury to person or damage to property due to the execution of the work, and to bind said contractor to comply with the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the right of the city to require property owners to put down sidewalks, where in the opinion of the governing body, the public welfare requires it, but in all such cases the contractor shall be required to obtain a permit from the city manager before beginning work. (Code 1973, § 2-7153) 
Sec. 17-6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 17-7. - Construction and repair of sidewalks, curbs, gutters and streets—Apportionment of costs.     The governing body may require that the entire cost of the construction of sidewalks and curbs and three-fourths of the entire cost of gutters, when the construction of gutters is ordered by the governing body, be borne by the abutting property owners, except the alley crossings and quadrants at intersections. (Code 1973, § 2-7154) 
Sec. 17-8. - Same—Recovery of costs.     If any of the owners of the lots or properties shall refuse to build or repair such sidewalks within the time required by the notice, and agreeable thereto, the governing body, through the city manager, may contract for the construction or repair of same, and shall pay the cost thereof out of the general fund, and amounts so paid shall be a lien upon such lots or property and may be enforced by attachments at law or in equity or in the manner provided in the Charter; or the amount may be recovered against the owners by suit before any court of competent jurisdiction; and the city attorney is authorized to proceed to enforce the lien declared and fixed by the Charter and this section. (Code 1973, §§ 2-7150, 2-7155) 
Sec. 17-9. - Same—On initiative of governing body. (a)  For the purpose of securing good and substantial sidewalks in the city and securing uniformity in the construction thereof, the governing body, wherever it is deemed necessary by it for the public welfare, may require the owner of any lot or part of a lot in the city fronting upon any public street to construct and keep in repair a good and substantial sidewalk of foot pavement along the whole street frontage of such person's lots or property, and of width and material prescribed by resolution of the governing body. (b)  When so instructed by resolution by the governing body, the city clerk shall give the owners of lots written notice stating the action of the governing body, and specifically setting forth work to be done and the length of time within which the same must be done, provided that the time fixed shall not be less than twenty (20) days. (Code 1973, §§ 2-7148—2-7150, 2-7155) 
Sec. 17-10. - Paving on railroad right-of-way.     When any street occupied by the track of a railroad is about to be paved or otherwise improved, it shall be the duty of the railroad company to pave at its own expense that portion of such street lying within its right-of-way, using such materials and construction methods as shall be approved by the city manager. (Code 1973, § 2-790) 
Sec. 17-11. - Excavations; obstructions—Permit; restoration of surface. (a)  No person, except in or as incident to the exercise of rights given by franchise, shall break or dig up the grounds in any public street, way or public place or lands of the city, or erect or place thereon any staging, or place or deposit thereon any brick, stone, timber or other building material without first having obtained a permit from the city manager in writing. In all cases in which a permit may be given for excavating in or obstructing any street, the city manager shall impose such restrictions and limitations as the city manager shall see fit to make the street safe and convenient for public travel by the erection of barriers, the maintaining of lights, the removal of rubbish or otherwise. It shall also be a condition of the permit that the person so excavating any street shall cause same to be refilled and tamped, and put in as good condition as it was before being opened. In case of a permit applicable to a paved street, the earth so excavated shall be hauled away and the excavation refilled with slag or sand well tamped on which the paving shall be laid as it was before, all done to the satisfaction of the city manager. (b)  Any person making an excavation shall meet the requirements as set forth in the federal occupational safety and health regulations for construction, as adopted April 17, 1971, and each amendment thereafter, with the following exceptions: (1)  Excavations involved in the construction of a basement or foundation for a single-family residential structure are exempt from all of these requirements, with the exception that any excavation or foundation grading on which construction does not proceed within thirty (30) days shall be fenced, so as to prevent general public entrance to the building site, or filled in. However, an extension may be allowed if justified and if approved by application to the city manager. (2)  Table P-2, the line reading "ten (10) to fifteen (15) feet, likely to crack" and the column "Maximum Spacing, Vertical Feet," shall contain the number "4." (Code 1973, § 2-7142) Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 18. 
Sec. 17-12. - Same—Bond; cash deposit.     No person shall be given a permit to excavate a street without first having executed a good and sufficient bond to the city in such amount as required by the governing body, conditioned to save the city harmless on account of any loss or damages resulting from excavations, and without having first deposited a sufficient amount of cash with the city treasurer as will, in the opinion of the city manager, cover the cost of restoring the street or way to its condition prior to the excavating. (Code 1973, § 2-7143) 
Sec. 17-13. - Same—Repairs.     If any street in the portion which has been so opened or dug up shall require repairing or resurfacing within a period of six (6) months after it has been so disturbed, the city manager shall give notice in writing to the person who had or was given the right to make the excavation to make such repairs therein as are necessary. If such repairs are not made within seven (7) days from the day of notification, the city manager shall proceed at once to have such repairs made and the expense of the same shall be paid by the party making the excavations. (Code 1973, § 2-7143) 
Sec. 17-14. - Reserved. 
Sec. 17-15. - Dangerous areas adjacent to streets.     All dangerous places upon private lots which are below the grade of the adjoining street shall be properly enclosed with fences or walls, and should the owner fail to so fence or wall upon being notified by the city manager, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1973, § 2-7186) 
Sec. 17-16. - Cutting curbs and gutters; driveway construction; crossing gutter, etc.; permit to cut. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cut a curb or gutter or to damage any sidewalk, in constructing a sidewalk or for any other purpose, without making petition to and obtaining from the city manager a permit to do so. If a permit is granted therefor, the party securing such permit shall perform such work at such person's own expense and as specified by the city manager. (b)  No person shall be allowed to place a bridge, or other obstruction in or over any paved gutter; provided, however, that the city manager may grant a permit to any person to put in a temporary crossing over a sidewalk for the purpose of excavating on or filling in private premises or hauling in building materials upon such conditions as may be necessary to protect such sidewalk from damage while such work is going on, to be constructed and maintained at the expense of the person to whom such permit is granted. (Code 1973, § 2-7182) 
Sec. 17-17. - Roof gutters.     All structures that are built so as to project over the sidewalk shall be so provided with gutters that there shall be no drip upon the sidewalk. (Code 1973, § 2-7183) 
Sec. 17-18. - Drainage—Discharge of water.     No water shall be discharged from the roof of any building so as to flow across any sidewalk upon any street in which curbs or gutters or a public drain have been laid; and the conductor for such water shall be made by the owner of such building to connect with such drain, under the direction of the city manager. (Code 1973, § 2-7176) 
Sec. 17-19. - Same—Obstruction of flow of water.     No person occupying the streets or alleys of the city with such person's work or any appurtenances shall obstruct or impede the flow of water in any street, gutter, alley or drain; and when sand, mortar or other like building material shall be deposited on the streets to be used for building purposes, the contractor or builder shall provide suitable boxes or other receptacles for the same, or otherwise keep the gutter open. (Code 1973, § 2-7181) Cross reference— Buildings; construction, maintenance, and related activities, ch. 5. 
Sec. 17-20. - New streets—Privately installed.     If any person shall lay out a new addition to the city or a new street, the same shall be surveyed and opened in such manner as to conform to the streets of the city already opened and accepted, and no new streets surveyed and opened by a private person shall be considered as streets of the city, or be taken charge of by the governing body unless a plat of same with all dimensions clearly marked thereon in figures is adopted by governing body, upon the recommendation of the city manager and filed with the city manager. (Code 1973, § 2-7156) Cross reference— Subdivisions, app. B. 
Sec. 17-21. - Same—Opening by city; altering streets. (a)  Whenever the governing body shall by resolution determine that the public interest demands that any new street shall be opened within the corporate limits, or any old street should be extended, widened or straightened, and the owners of the land through which same shall pass require damages, the governing body shall, by resolution, proceed to condemn land for the same and provide damages therefor in the manner set forth in the charter and in O.C.G.A. § 22-1-6 et seq. The notices required by law shall be served by any police officer of the city, and such publications and other notices shall be made by the city clerk. The names of any number of nonresident owners may be inserted in one advertisement. (b)  Whenever the funds to settle the damages assessed as provided by law shall be in the hands of the treasurer for the benefit of the owner of the land, the governing body may condemn the land, by ordinance, and after allowing the property owners five (5) days' time in which to open such street, may order such street to be opened, and the same shall be and become a public thoroughfare. Any person failing or refusing to open such street shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8 for each such day of such failure or refusal. (Code 1973, §§ 2-7157, 2-7158) 
Sec. 17-22. - Utility apparatus—Permit to install. (a)  No person opening a public utility or furnishing public service shall locate any pole, wire, conduit, pipe or other apparatus without first having obtained a permit from the city manager in writing; one (1) copy shall be filed with the city clerk. The permit and installation shall be subject to the publication "Utility Accommodation and Standards," 1988, and each amendment thereafter, on file in the city clerk's office. (b)  Any permit granted hereunder shall be subject to the right of the city, free of charge, to place its fire alarm, telegraph or other electric lines upon the poles or through the conduits so permitted to be maintained; and to the right of the city to license the location of wires or lines by any other person upon such poles or through such conduits upon the payment or tender to the owner thereof a reasonable compensation to be determined by the parties. (c)  The city manager shall not grant permits for more than one (1) line of poles on any street, unless it is impossible to use two (2) or more lines of wires on the same pole, and shall use every endeavor to locate poles where they will be least objectionable. (d)  The number of poles permitted in each block shall be determined by the city manager. (e)  All utility wiring involving new construction shall be located underground. (Code 1973, §§ 2-7151, 2-7159, 2-7161) 
Sec. 17-23. - Same—Removal.     Any such person, at such person's own expense, shall remove such person's poles or conduits to other suitable locations whenever ordered to do so by the governing body. (Code 1973, § 2-7160) 
Sec. 17-24. - Placement of sharp objects.     No person shall throw, scatter, drop or place or cause or procure to be thrown, scattered, dropped or placed within the city any glass, tacks, nails, pieces of metal or any other substance likely to damage tires on any vehicle. (Code 1973, § 2-7175) Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 18; vehicles damaging streets, § 18-8. 
Sec. 17-25. - Removal of city property.     No person shall remove or carry away any city property in any of the public streets or other public places of the city except as authorized by the city. (Code 1973, § 2-7170) 
Sec. 17-26. - Fires in streets.     No person shall make any fire in any street for any purpose. (Code 1973, § 2-7166) 
Sec. 17-27. - Apertures in streets or sidewalks—Permit to make.     No person shall make or cause to be made any aperture in or under any street or sidewalk for any purpose without first having obtained a permit from the city manager; and no person shall leave any aperture opened or unfastened except while actually in use with workers present. (Code 1973, § 2-7178) 
Sec. 17-28. - Same—Cellar doors.     Every cellar door opening upon the pavement shall be of iron grating, and so constructed that when shut it shall be on a level with the pavement and have its gratings running at right angles to the line of the street. No cellar door shall be permitted to extend more than five (5) feet from the wall, nor be so constructed as to open downward. (Code 1973, § 2-7179) 
Sec. 17-29. - Same—Security and repair.     Whenever the owner or occupant of any premises upon which there is a cellar, hole, area, or vault opening on the street is notified by the city that the covering of the same is insecure and dangerous, it shall be such person's duty to repair the same at once. If such person fails to do so after five (5) days' notice, it shall be the duty of the city manager to have the same repaired or placed in safe condition and collect the cost thereof from the owner or occupant. No cellarway or other hole of like nature opening in or upon the public streets or sidewalks shall be allowed to be open when not in use. All such means of access to buildings shall be provided with a substantial lock. (Code 1973, § 2-7185) 
Sec. 17-30. - Projections upon sidewalk—Bay windows; steps.     No person shall build or erect any bay window or steps to project upon any sidewalk from the first story of any building. (Code 1973, § 2-7189) 
Sec. 17-31. - Same—Awnings.     No awning frames shall have supports placed on sidewalks or in parkways, but swinging awnings may be constructed and securely attached to the buildings extending not beyond the curbline, the rods of which shall be at least seven and one-half (7½) feet above the sidewalk, and the flaps and aprons of such awnings shall clear the sidewalk at least seven (7) feet. (Code 1973, § 2-7188) 
Sec. 17-32. - Mailboxes.     It shall be unlawful for any person to move a mailbox currently attached to any building to any street. (Code 1973, § 2-7196) 
Sec. 17-33. - Protection of sidewalk, curb and gutter.     No substance of a greater weight than four hundred (400) pounds shall be handled upon the sidewalk, curbing or guttering of the city, unless such sidewalk, curbing or guttering be sufficiently covered with wood so as to protect it from damage. (Code 1973, § 2-7192) Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 18. 
Sec. 17-34. - Use of the public right-of-way.     It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain a dumpster, pod-type storage container, construction materials and equipment, landscape materials and equipment, or portable toilet on the public streets, sidewalks or other public right-of-way within the city limits, unless the city manager or his designee makes a finding that the placement of any of the items set forth in this section on private property would be impractical due to the topography or other physical condition of the land and to set conditions as to the use and placement of such items on public streets, sidewalks or other rights-of-way, in which case any such item may be located on the public street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way with the city limits, as designated in such finding; provided, however, in the event of such finding by the city manager of his designee, no such item set forth in this section, with the exception of portable toilets, shall remain on the public street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way for more than three (3) days in any continuous thirty (30) day period. (Ord. No. 0505, § 1, 7-25-05) 
Sec. 17-35. - Maintenance of refuse receptacles, pod type storage containers and portable toilets.     Any person using or in possession of a refuse receptacle (garbage can or dumpster), pod-type storage container or portable toilet shall maintain such refuse receptacle, pod-type storage container or portable toilet free of graffiti. (Ord. No. 0505, § 1, 7-25-05) 
Sec. 17-36. - Requirement to have portable toilets. (a)  Any person issued a building permit* in the city limits of Avondale Estates for construction or renovation of property, where said construction or renovation is valued at a cost estimate exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), is required to have a portable toilet to serve their property from the date the construction or renovation begins until the work being performed receives final approval by the issuing authority, unless such person shall sign a statement that all persons performing work pursuant to said permit shall be allowed to use a toilet located on the property. (b)  Portable toilets must have a working key or combination locking mechanism and shall be locked when not in use. (Ord. No. 0505, § 1, 7-25-05) *Note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 0505 states that this ordinance shall apply to all permits issued after July 25, 2005. For permits issued prior to July 25, 2005, the effective date shall be Oct. 1, 2005. 
Secs. 17-37—17-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREE BOARD; TREES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-05, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 27, 2009, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 17-40—17-51, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 798, 11-26-84; Ord. No. 857, 9-27-93. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 17-40. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park.     Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on both sides of all streets and other public ways within the city. (Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-27-08) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 17-41. - Tree board—Created and established; membership. (a)  Created and established. There is hereby created and established a city tree board. (b)  Appointment of members. The members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor. (c)  Term of office. The terms of the members of the city tree board shall be two (2) years. (d)  Compensation. Members of the city tree board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 17-42. - Same—Duties and responsibilities.     It shall be the responsibility of the city tree board to study, investigate, counsel and advise the city manager who will administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the governing body and upon its acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan. The city tree board, when requested by the governing body shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. (Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 17-43. - Same—Organization.     The city tree board shall choose its own officers and make its own rules and regulations. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 17-44. - Review of city manager's acts.     The governing body shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the city manager relative to his/her actions that relate to this article. (Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 17-45. - City manager—Interference therewith.     It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent or interfere with the city manager or his designee(s), while engaging in the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street tree, park tree, or tree on private grounds, as authorized in this article. Any person(s) found to be in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 17-46. - Official tree species list.     No tree may be planted on city property without prior written permission from the city manager. The following list constitutes the official list of tree species that may be planted in city rights-of-way and city parks/greenspaces, respectively. Botanical name Common name Street Trees Large street trees Acer barbatum Southern Sugar Maple Acer saccharum Sugar Maple Carya aquatica Water Hickory Carya cordiformis Bitternut Hickory Fagus grandifolia American Beech Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo Lagerstroemia fauriel Japanese Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia x (Indian Hybrids) Hybrid Crape Myrtle Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum Quercus alba White Oak Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak Quercus hemisphaerica Darlington Oak Quercus lyrata Overcup Oak Quercus michauxil Swamp Chestnut Oak Quercus nuttallil Nuttall Oak Quercus pagoda Cherrybark Oak Quercus phellos Willow Oak Quercus prinus Chestnut Oak Quercus rubra Northern Red Oak Quercus shumardii Shumard Oak Quercus x comptonia Compton Oak Tilia heterophylla Southern American Linden Ulmus americana American Elm Ulmus alata Winged Elm Medium—Small street trees under power lines (or where root zones are small) Acer buergeranum Trident Maple Acer leucoderme Chalkbark Maple Acer truncatum Shantung Maple Amelanchier x grandiflora Serviceberry Amelanchier laevis Allegheny Serviceberry Carpinus caroliniana Ironwood Cercis canadensis Redbud Chionanthus retusus Chinese Fringetree Cornus florida Flowering Dogwood Cotinus obovatus American Smoketree Halsia diptera Two Wing Silverbell Lagerstroemia x (Indian Hybrids) Hybrid Crape Myrtle Magnolia x loebneri Merrill Magnolia Magnolia x soulangiana Saucer Magnolia Magnolia x (Little Girl Series) Little Girl Magnolia Parrotia persica Persian Parrotia Pistacia chinensis Chinese Pistache Quercus geogiana Georgia Oak Park and Greenspace Trees Large deciduous shade trees Acer barbatum Southern Sugar Maple Acer rubrum Red Maple Acer saccharum Sugar Maple Aesculus flava Yellow Buckeye Betula nigra River Birch Carya aquatica Water Hickory Carya cordiformis Bitternut Hickory Carya glabra Pignut Hickory Carya ovata Shagbark Hickory Carya tomentosa Mockemut Hickory Fagus grandifolia American Beech Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip Poplar Magnolia acuminata Metasequoia glyptostroboides Dawn Redwood Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum Quercus alba White Oak Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak Quercus hemisphaerica Darlington Oak Quercus lyrata Overcup Oak Quercus michauxii Swamp Chestnut Oak Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin Oak Quercus nuttallii Nuttall Oak Quercus pagoda Cherrybark Oak Quercus phellos Willow Oak Quercus prinus Chestnut Oak Quercus rubra Northern Red Oak Quercus shumardii Shumard Oak Taxodlum ascendens Pond Cypress Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress Tilia heterophylla Southen American Linden Ulmus americana American Elm Ulmus alata Winged Elm Small—Medium deciduous character trees Acer buergeranum Trident Maple Acer leucoderme Chalkbark Maple Acer palmatum Japanese Maple Asimina triloba Pawpaw Betula nigra River Birch Carpinus caroliniana Ironwood Cotinus obovatus American Smoketree Cotinus x 'Grace' Grace Smoketree Gymnocladus dioicus Kentucky Coffeetree Magnolia virginiana Sweetbay Magnolia Magnolia macrophylla Bigleaf Magnolia Magnolia tripetala Umbrella Magnolia Parrotia persica Persian Parrotia Pistacia chinensis Chinese Pistache Flowering trees Aesculus pavia Red Buckeye Amelanchier x grandiflora Serviceberry Amelanchier laevls Allegheny Serviceberry Cercis canadensis Redbud Chionanthus retusus Chinese Fringetree Chionanthus virginicus American Fringetree Cladrastis kentukea Yellowwood Cornus angustata Evergreen Dogwood Cornus florida Flowering Dogwood Cornus kousa Kousa Dogwood Crataegus spathulata Littlehip Hawthorn Crataegus viridis Green Hawthorn Halesia diptera Two-wing Silverbell Halesia tetraptera Carolina Silverbell Lagerstroemia fauriei Japanese Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia x (Indian Hybrids) Hybrid Crape Myrtle Magnolia x loebneri Merrill Magnolia Magnolia macrophylla Bigleaf Magnolia Magnolia x soulangiana Saucer Magnolia Magnolia x (Little Girl Series) Little Girl Magnolia Magnolia stellata Star Magnolia Magnolia tripetala Umbrella Magnolia Magnolia x (acuminata hybrids) Yellow Magnolia Prunus serrulata Asian Cherry Prunus subhirtella Higan Cherry Prunus x (hybrid) Hybrid Asian Cherry Prunus x yedoensis Yoshino Cherry Styrax americanus American Snowbell Styrax obassia Fragrant Snowbell Large—Medium evergreen trees Cedrus deodara Deodar Cedar Cryptomeria japonica Japanese Cryptomeria Cupressus arizonica Arizona Cypress Ilex opaca American Holly Ilex latifolia Lusterleaf Holly Ilex x attenuata American Hybrid Holly Ilex x wandoensis Aspire Holly Ilex x (latifolia hybrids) Lusterleaf Hybrid Holly Ilex aquifolium x comuta hybrid Nellie R. Stevens Holly Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar Magnolia grandiflora Southern Magnolia Magnolia virginiana Sweetbay Magnolia Pinus echinata Shortleaf Pine Pinus glabra Spruce Pine Pinus palustris Longleaf Pine Pinus taeda Loblolly Pine Pinus thunbergiana Japanese Black Pine Quercus hemisphaerica Darlington Oak Quercus myrsinifolia Chinese Evergreen Oak Thuja x 'Green Giant' Green Giant Arborvitae Small evergreen trees Cornus angustata Evergreen Chinese Dogwood Ilex x attenuata American Hybrid Holly Ilex x (Red Holly Hybrids) Red Holly Ilex cornuta Chinese Holly Ilex vomitoria Yaupon Holly Juniperus chinensis Chinese Juniper Magnolia virginiana Sweetbay Magnolia Osmanthus x fortunei Fortunes' Osmanthus Osmanthus fragrans Fragrant Tea Olive Thuja occidentalis American Arborvitae  (Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-27-08; Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 8-24-2015) 
Sec. 17-47. - Planting, maintaining, removing trees, plants.     The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city tree board may recommend the removal of any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. (Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 17-48. - Tree topping.     It shall be unlawful for any person or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property except as expressly permitted by this section. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstruction, where other pruning practices are impractical, may be excepted from this section at the determination of the city manager. Any person(s) found to be in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 17-49. - Pruning and removal of vegetation. (a)  Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or interfere with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, or obstruct the view of any street intersection. (b)  There shall be a clear space of eight (8) feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. (c)  Such owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a hazard to the safety of the public or harbor insects or diseases which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. (Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 17-50. - Removal on private property. (a)  The city shall have the right to cause the removal or pruning of trees, limbs or shrubs as necessary as indicated is section 17-49. (b)  The city manager or his designee shall notify, in writing, the owners of such trees. (c)  Removal shall be done by such owners at their own expense within ten (10) days of written notification. (d)  In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove or prune such trees and shrubs and add the cost of removal to the property tax of the owner. (Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 17-51. - Removal of stumps.     All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. (Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 10-27-08) 
Secs. 17-52—17-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LAKE AVONDALE ADVISORY BOARD 
Sec. 17-60. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.     Lake area shall mean all public land lying between the easterly curb line of Berkeley Road, the northerly curb line of Wiltshire Drive, the westerly curb line of Lakeshore Drive and the southerly curb line of Lakeview Place, plus the area commonly known as the "bird sanctuary" south of Wiltshire Drive as it parallels the dam of Lake Avondale.     Trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation within the lake area. (Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 17-61. - Lake Avondale Advisory Board—Created and established; membership. (a)  Created and established. There is hereby created and established a Lake Avondale Advisory Board. (b)  Appointment of members. The five (5) members of the board shall be appointed by the board of mayor and commissioners. All members shall be citizens of the City of Avondale Estates. (c)  Qualification of members. At least two of the members of Lake Avondale Advisory Board shall have either education and/or experience in watershed/lake management, natural resource management, environmental management, environmental engineering or a related field as determined by the governing body. (d)  Restricted members. No more than two (2) of the members of Lake Avondale Advisory Board may reside within view of Lake Avondale. (e)  Term of office. The terms of the members of Lake Avondale Advisory Board shall be two (2) years and shall be appointed in staggered terms so that not more than two (2) members of Lake Avondale Advisory Board shall have their initial terms expire simultaneously. (f)  Compensation. Members of the Lake Avondale Advisory Board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 17-62. - Same—Duties and responsibilities.     It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Lake Avondale Advisory Board to: (a)  Study, investigate, counsel and advise the city manager in writing on any matter which affects the aesthetics, visibility or user friendliness of the lake area, it being understood Lake Avondale is a primary recreational resource of the city. (b)  Exercise the sole authority to recommend preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees in the lake area, including memorial plantings. (c)  In conformity with section 17-49, ensure an eight (8) feet clear space be maintained between the ground and any tree limb in the lake area, where practicable, and eliminate any tree which unduly restricts fishing access or visibility so that the full vista of Lake Avondale may be enjoyed by residents. (d)  Investigate, make findings, report and recommend regarding any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work when requested by the governing body. (e)  Advise the city manager regarding any matter which either affects water quality or the fish or waterfowl populations of Lake Avondale. (Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 17-63. - Duty of city manager to comply; exceptions.     The city manager shall comply with any written recommendation of the Lake Avondale Advisory Board within the scope of its work unless within ten (10) days of its receipt the city manager notifies the Lake Avondale Advisory Board in writing giving reasons why its recommendation cannot be implemented. Should lack of funding be a reason for any such denial, the city manager shall either request a supplemental budget appropriation or include a sufficient funding request in the next annual budget submitted to the board of mayor and commissioners to cover such recommendations. Absent written notification as set out above, the city manager shall comply with all written recommendations of the Lake Avondale Advisory Board in accordance with their terms within sixty (60) days where practicable. (Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 17-64. - Organization.     The Lake Avondale Advisory Board shall choose its own officers and make its own rules and regulations. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 17-65. - Planting in lake area prohibited without written permission.     No tree, including memorial plantings, shall be planted in the lake area without the written permission of the Lake Avondale Advisory Board. (Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Chapter 18 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Scattering of articles on streets from vehicles, § 11-30; barricades, § 17-11; placement of sharp objects on streets, § 17-24; placing heavy objects on sidewalks, § 17-33. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 18-1. - Uniform Rules of the Road and definitions; adopted by reference, penalty for violation. (a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, all provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.), known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. (b)  Any future amendments or repeal of a provision of the chapter of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated containing the Uniform Rules of the Road or the definitions referenced in this chapter shall so amend or repeal the pertinent provisions of this chapter without any action by the governing body of the city being required. (c)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. (Ord. No. 758, § 2, 10-28-74) State Law reference— Adoption of rules of the road by reference, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372 et seq. 
Sec. 18-2. - Chapter does not affect property rights.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of real property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of the owner, and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use, or from requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified herein, or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such owner. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-8. 
Sec. 18-3. - Applicability to public officers and employees.     The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets and highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, any state or any county, city, town, district, or any other political subdivision of the state, except as otherwise provided. 
Sec. 18-4. - Owners or persons directing drivers of vehicles not to permit violation.     It is unlawful for the owner or any other person employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle to require or knowingly permit the operation of that vehicle upon a street or highway in any manner contrary to this chapter. 
Sec. 18-5. - Use of vehicle without consent of the owner.     It shall be unlawful for any person to take, use, or operate any motor vehicle or motorcycle upon the public streets and highways of the city without the permission of the owner thereof. 
Sec. 18-6. - Obstructions to right-of-way. (a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the right-of-way of any public road, street, or other easement in the city by placing or maintaining thereon any obstruction, whether it is in the nature of shrubbery, signs, fences or whatever, which interferes with the clear view of motorists or the free passage of pedestrians thereon. (b)  Notice to remove. Wherever any obstruction prohibited by subsection (a) of this section has been placed and is being maintained, the city manager or his designee shall notify in writing the owner of the obstruction and the owner of the land abutting the right-of-way where the obstruction is found and also the person in possession of the property. Such notice shall state the nature of the obstruction and the fact that the obstruction is an interference with the clear view of motorists or the free passage of pedestrians and that it shall be removed with ten (10) days from the date of the notice. (c)  Issuance of summons upon failure to remove. Whenever the person so notified as provided by subsection (b) of this section fails or refuses to remove the obstruction within the time allowed in the written notice, the city manager or his designee shall issue a citation to this person to appear in municipal court on a day certain to stand trial for the violation. (d)  Continued violations; issuance of summons without notice. If upon conviction for the first offense, the person continues to refuse to remove the obstruction, each day that it remains intact shall constitute a new violation of subsection (a) of this section for which the city manager or his designee shall issue a citation without the necessity of issuing additional written notice. 
Sec. 18-7. - Abatement of unsafe vehicles as nuisances.     The use of any vehicle on the streets is a nuisance where by reason of a defect in such vehicle the driving thereof on the streets constitutes a menace or a hazard to the life, safety or property of others. The members of the police department are charged with the duty of enforcing this section. Where it is shown that any vehicle on the street is dangerous or likely to cause injury to person or damage to property, the police shall have authority to order the driver or owner thereof to immediately remove such vehicle from the streets or, if the vehicle can be made safe by repair, to repair it. Failure to remove the vehicle from the streets immediately, or to continue to drive the vehicle on the streets shall be an offense. If on the hearing of such failure to remove the vehicle from the streets as ordered by the police or to continue to drive such vehicle on the streets, the municipal judge sees from the evidence that such vehicle is a nuisance, within the meaning of this section, such judge shall enter an order so declaring and stating the terms of the abatement and the conditions under which such vehicle may be driven on the streets. (Code 1973, App. II, § 2) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-7; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 18-8. - Vehicle damaging streets.     No vehicle shall be operated on the streets with cleated wheels, or so constructed in other ways as to damage the street. (Code 1973, App. II, § 3) Cross reference— Placing sharp objects on street, § 17-24. 
Sec. 18-9. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. (a)  No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of this city. (b)  It shall be unlawful for persons so skating or riding to gather in crowds, or to create noise or be guilty of any disorderly conduct, or to take hold of or hang on to any automobile or other vehicle, or in any way to interfere with the natural progress of vehicles along and in the streets of the city, or for two (2) or more persons to join hands while skating on the sidewalks. Any persons so skating or riding shall give right-of-way to, and in no way interfere with, persons walking on the sidewalks. (c)  Any persons violating any provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8; provided, however, that any such offender under the age of seventeen (17) years shall be dealt with as provided by the law creating juvenile courts. The parent of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. (Code 1973, App. II, § 5) 
Sec. 18-10. - Unlawful riding.     No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (Code 1973, App. II, § 8) State Law reference— Obstructing driver's view, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-242. 
Sec. 18-11. - Persons entering or leaving moving vehicle.     No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (Code 1973, App. II, § 11) 
Sec. 18-12. - Parades and marches. (a)  Definition. The word "parade" or "march" means an assemblage of persons, groups of persons, vehicles, bands, floats, or devices gathered together in public with some circumstance of show. It shall not include a funeral procession or an assemblage of public officials gathered for any purpose in the public interest. (b)  Prohibited without permit. It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to hold or participate in a parade in the city without first securing a parade permit from the city. (c)  Application for permit. To obtain a parade permit, the person or group of persons desiring to hold a parade shall file an application with the city manager at least five (5) days before the date of the scheduled parade. The application shall contain the following information: (1)  The name, address, and telephone number, both business and residential, of the applicant. (2)  The date and hours when the parade is to be held. (3)  The location and time of the point of assembly. (4)  The parade route. (5)  The anticipated number of marching persons. (6)  The anticipated number and types of motorized and other vehicles and devices. (7)  The number of bands and floats in the parade. (8)  A statement by the applicant agreeing to assume all responsibility for the mechanical condition of each vehicle in the parade and all damages caused by mechanical failure of any vehicle, float, or other device in the parade. (d)  Issuance of permit; conditions. The issuance of the permit by the city manager shall give full consideration to the condition and width of the streets or sidewalks along the proposed route; the nature of traffic conditions as related to the number of participants and the number and type of vehicles to participate in the parade or march as shown on the application for such permit; the number of police personnel available to direct traffic, properly manage such parade or march, and provide police protection to participants and the general public; and whether the city, county, state, or a public utility company has scheduled improvements along the parade route during the time of the parade which cannot be interrupted. The city manager may require the applicant for a parade permit to furnish to the city a bond in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) secured by a surety company licensed to do business in the state, payable to the city or to any person in the city who may suffer any injury or damage from any vehicle, float, device or person participating in the parade or march. (e)  Police vehicle to precede parades and marches. All parades and marches through the streets of the city shall be preceded by a police vehicle and conducted in such manner as to impede and interfere with the flow of traffic to the least possible extent. (f)  Hours restricted. No parade permit shall be issued for any parade to be held between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. (g)  Appeals from denial of parade permit. An applicant who has been denied a parade permit by the city manager has the right to file an appeal to the governing body with the city clerk within five (5) days from the date the application is denied. The governing body shall hear the appeal at any regular or special meeting of the board to be held at any time not less than fifteen (15) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the appeal is received by the city clerk. (Code 1973, § 2-801(52), App. II, § 12) Cross reference— Miscellaneous provisions and offenses, ch. 12. State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a); operation of motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7. 
Sec. 18-13. - Funeral processions. (a)  Vehicles of a funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles, provided each shall identify itself by burning regular headlights, shall keep in close formation, and shall display a device with the word "funeral," in such size and form as to identify the procession as a funeral. (b)  Each driver in a funeral procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the street or roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. (c)  When the lead vehicle in a funeral procession has entered an intersection on a green light, all other cars in the procession may proceed through the intersection even though such signal may change to red. (d)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when these vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this section. (Code 1973, App. II, § 36) State Law reference— Authority to regulate processions on highways, § 40-6-371(a)(3). 
Sec. 18-14. - Sanitation vehicles.     All employees and vehicles of the city when engaged or used in performance of collection of solid waste or recovered materials shall have the right-of-way in the use of the streets within the city and may stop or stand on the road, street, or highway for the sole purpose of collecting such waste or materials; provided, however, that such vehicle shall maintain flashing hazard lights at all times that it is engaged in stopping or standing for the purpose of waste or materials collection. State Law reference— Special privileges of municipal solid waste or recovered materials vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-203. 
Sec. 18-15. - Open alcohol container in motor vehicles prohibited. (a)  As used in this Code section "open container" means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from or which the seal has been broken. (b)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while operating a motor vehicle or while a passenger in a motor vehicle in operation within the city. For purposes of this code section, an open container shall be considered in the possession of the operator of the motor vehicle if the container is not in possession of a passenger, and is not located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk, or other locked non-passenger area of the motor vehicle. (c)  Any person who violates this Code section is subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. No. 9908, § 1, 11-22-99) 
Secs. 18-16—18-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT 
Sec. 18-20. - Authority to install traffic-control devices.     The city manager shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic-control signs and devices when and as required under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of this chapter and such ordinances. The city manager may cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic-control devices as deemed necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. (Code 1973, App. II, § 56) 
Sec. 18-21. - Duty and authority of police officers. (a)  It shall be the duty of officers of the police department to enforce this chapter and all other traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. (b)  Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformity with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. (c)  County fire officers when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (Code 1973, App. II, § 18) State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(2). 
Sec. 18-22. - Delegation of powers and duties.     The city manager may delegate to any officer in the police department the duties and responsibilities conveyed to him by this chapter. (Code 1973, App. II, § 19) 
Sec. 18-23. - Traffic violations bureau—Created; administration; accepting fines. (a)  A traffic violations office to assist the court with the clerical work of traffic cases shall be established. The office shall be in charge of such persons and shall be open at such hours as the governing body may designate. (b)  The municipal judge who hears traffic cases shall designate the specified offense under this chapter or other traffic ordinances of this city and applicable state traffic laws in respect to which payment of fines may be accepted by the traffic violations office in satisfaction thereof, and shall specify by suitable schedules the amount of such fines, provided such fines are within the limits declared by law or ordinance, and shall further specify what offenses shall require appearance before the municipal judge. (Code 1973, App. II, § 114) State Law reference— Traffic violations bureau, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-50 et seq. 
Sec. 18-24. - Same—When person charged may elect to appear thereat. (a)  Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a fine may be made to the traffic violations office shall have the option of paying such fine within the time specified in the notice of arrest at the traffic violations office upon entering a plea of guilty and upon waiving appearance in court; or may have the option of depositing required lawful bail and upon a plea of not guilty shall be entitled to a trial as authorized by law. (b)  The payment of a fine to the office shall be deemed an acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged offense, and the office upon accepting the prescribed fine shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging the payment thereof. (Code 1973, App. II, § 115) 
Sec. 18-25. - Same—Duties.     The following duties are hereby imposed upon the traffic violations office in reference to traffic offenses: (1)  Accept designated fines and issue receipts to such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty and waive court appearance. (2)  Receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons who must or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of their appearance on the court docket, and notify the arresting officer and witnesses, if any, to be present. (3)  Keep an easily accessible record of all violations of which each person has been guilty during the preceding five (5) years, whether such guilt was established in court or in the traffic violations office. (Code 1973, App. II, § 116) 
Sec. 18-26. - Same—Following procedure.     The traffic violations office shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by this chapter or other traffic ordinances of this city or as may be required by any laws of this state. (Code 1973, App. II, § 117) 
Sec. 18-27. - Records of traffic violations.     The traffic violations office shall keep a record of all violations of this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city or the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, in the municipal court, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Such record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. Such matters shall be filed alphabetically under the names of the persons so arrested or convicted.     All such records shall be public records. (Code 1973, App. II, §§ 14, 17) State Law reference— Records to be kept, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-27. 
Sec. 18-28. - Licenses and reports of conviction to state department of public safety. (a)  Whenever any person is convicted of any offense for which state law mandates the suspension of the license of such person by the state department of public safety, the municipal court shall require the surrender to it of any driver's license then held by the person so convicted and the license and citation shall be forwarded to the state department of public safety within the time frame prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 40-5-53(a). (b)  Citations for other convictions of offenses pertaining to the operation of motor vehicles shall be forwarded to the state department of public safety in the manner and within the time frame prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 40-5-53(b). (c)  Any payments to the municipal court or municipal court clerk from the state department of public safety for the submission of uniform citations shall be paid into the city treasury. 
Sec. 18-29. - Accidents—Immediate notice.     The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of that amount prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-273 or more shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the police department if such accident occurs within this city. (Code 1973, App. II, § 24) 
Sec. 18-30. - Same—Police department to investigate; etc.     It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. (Code 1973, App. II, § 15) 
Sec. 18-31. - Same—Reports by police. (a)  It shall be the duty of every member of the police department investigating a traffic accident to make a written report of such officer's findings as soon as practicable after completing the investigation. (b)  The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports required by this section. (c)  A copy of all accident reports shall be submitted to the department of public safety in the manner and within the time frame as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 40-9-31. (Code 1973, App. II, § 16) 
Sec. 18-32. - Vehicle inspection.     It shall be an offense against the city for any person to drive or operate on any of the streets of the city any motor vehicle required to be inspected by state law which has not been so inspected. (Code 1973, App. II, § 130) State Law reference— Inspection authorized, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-200; display of valid emission inspection sticker, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-55. 
Sec. 18-33. - Driver's license. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon the streets of the city without having a valid driver's license in such person's immediate possession at the time. (b)  Refusal to display a valid driver's license upon the demand of a law enforcement officer shall constitute a violation of this section. (c)  A person convicted of a violation of subsection (b) of this section shall be fined in an amount not to exceed that amount prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 40-5-29(c). (Code 1973, App. II, § 131) State Law reference— Driver's license, O.C.G.A. § 40-5-29. 
Sec. 18-34. - Procedure upon arrest.     Except when authorized or directed under state law immediately to take a person arrested for a violation of any of the traffic laws before the municipal judge, any police officer, upon making an arrest for violation of this chapter or other traffic ordinance of the city or laws of the state, shall take the name, address, and operator's license number of the alleged violator and the license tag number of the motor vehicle involved and shall issue to such person on a form provided, a notice to answer to the charge against such person at a place and time to be specified in the notice. (Code 1973, App. II, § 119) State Law reference— Form of citation, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1. 
Sec. 18-35. - When summons for arrest to be issued.     In the event any person fails to comply with a notice given to such person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons directing an appearance in the traffic violations office, or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted by ordinance, the traffic violations office may forthwith secure and issue a summons for such person's arrest. (Code 1973, App. II, § 124) 
Sec. 18-36. - Penalty for failure to appear when served with copy of charges.     Any person who has been lawfully served with a copy of charges to appear in the municipal court and shall fail to appear at the time and place indicated in such copy of charges shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction in the municipal court shall be punished as provided in this Code. (Code 1973, App. II, § 125) 
Sec. 18-37. - Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures.     All fines and forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail for any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other ordinance of the city shall be paid into the city treasury. (Code 1973, App. II, § 126) 
Secs. 18-38—18-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATIONS OF VEHICLES GENERALLY 
Sec. 18-50. - Speed limits—Generally.     Unless otherwise specifically provided by ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour on any street with the exception of those streets listed in section 18-51. (Code 1973, App. II, § 47A; Ord. No. 775, § 1, 4-28-80) Cross reference— Speed of bicycles, § 18-153. State Law reference— Authority to decrease speed limit, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 18-51. - Same—On streets where speed detection devices employed. (a)  On-system streets. For on-system streets see the latest speed zone order for the county as effected and issued by the state department of transportation and the state department of public safety. The state speed zone order is hereby adopted by reference thereto for those sections of state routes within the city. Signs are to be erected by the state department of transportation. _____(b)  Off-system street. The following are off-system streets, signs for which are to be erected by the city: Street     From     To Length (miles) Speed Limit (m.p.h.) Berkeley Road South Avondale Plaza Lakeview Place .40 25 Berkeley Road Lakeview Place Wiltshire Drive .30 25 Clarendon Ave. North Avondale Road Columbia Drive 1.50 30 Kensington Road Covington Highway South Avondale Plaza .80 30 North Clarendon Ave. Old Rockbridge Road North Avondale Road .30 30 South Avondale Road Fairfield Drive Clarendon Avenue .30 30  (Ord. No. 848, §§ 1, 2, 2-24-92; Ord. No. 0301, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 0308, § 1, 12-15-03; Ord. No. 0413, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 18-52. - Same—Slowly moving vehicles generally.     Slowly moving or heavily laden vehicles shall not be driven upon the streets abreast, but one must follow behind the other and keep as near the right-hand curb as possible. (Code 1973, App. II, § 50) 
Sec. 18-53. - Limitations on backing.     The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made in safety. Such backing shall be done at a speed not to exceed five (5) miles per hour, nor for a greater distance than sixty (60) feet, and never into an intersection. (Code 1973, App. II, § 43) 
Sec. 18-54. - Towing.     No vehicle shall tow more than one (1) other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed sixteen (16) feet in length. (Code 1973, App. II, § 46) 
Sec. 18-55. - Pass-through traffic prohibited at certain times. (a)  Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., it shall be unlawful for pass-through traffic to enter the city at the following locations: (1)  South Avondale Road or Clarendon Avenue at either's intersection with East College Avenue/North Avondale Road and to exit at Kensington Road at its intersection with Stratford Road or at its intersection with Wynn Drive or at its intersection with Covington Highway; or (2)  Kensington Road at its intersection with Covington Highway or at its intersection with Wynn Drive or at its intersection with Stratford Road and to exit at South Avondale Plaza or to exit at Clarendon Avenue or to exit at South Avondale Road/North Avondale Road/East College Avenue. (b)  An operator of a motor vehicle shall be deemed to engage in pass-through traffic when such driver enters and exits streets in the city as above-stated without making a bona fide stop at the elementary school on Lakeshore Drive at Covington Road or within the residential district of the city, except as directed by traffic control devices. 
Sec. 18-56. - Pass through truck traffic prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for trucks to use the residential streets of the city except to make a bona fide delivery on a residential street within the city. Any person driving or in charge or control of a truck shall be prepared to present for inspection by a police officer a log book, weight slip, delivery slip or other written evidence of such person's destination in the residential district of the city and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on the residential street. 
Sec. 18-57. - Securing loads.     No person shall operate any vehicle with a load on the public streets and roads of the city unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping, or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
Sec. 18-58. - Play streets. (a)  Authority to establish; signing. The city may declare any street or part thereof a play street and place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect it. (b)  Driving on; speed limit. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then the driver shall exercise the highest degree of care in driving upon such street or portion thereof, and at no time shall the driver's speed exceed ten (10) miles per hour. 
Sec. 18-59. - One-way streets and rotary traffic islands. (a)  Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley, signs shall be placed giving notice thereof, and no regulation shall be effective unless these signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. The following are one-way streets in the direction indicated: (1)  Lakeshore Drive, northbound, from Kensington Road to Covington Road. (2)  Dartmouth Avenue, northbound, from Clarendon Place to Kingstone Road/Fairfield Plaza, from Memorial Day through Labor Day. (b)  A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(4); one-way streets generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-47. 
Sec. 18-60. - All-way stop signs.     Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of the city designates all-way stops at intersecting streets, signs shall be placed giving notice thereof, and no regulation shall be effective unless these signs are in place. The following are designated as intersections at which traffic shall be required to stop in all directions: (1)  Berkeley Road and Kingstone Road; (2)  Dartmouth Avenue and Clarendon Place; (3)  Dartmouth Avenue and Kingstone Road and Fairfield Plaza; (4)  Exeter Road and Fairfield Plaza and Fairfield Drive; (5)  Hess Drive and Lakeshore Drive; (6)  Kensington Road and Berkeley Road and South Avondale Plaza; (7)  Kensington Road and Lakeshore Drive; (8)  Kensington Road and Stratford Road; (9)  Kensington Road and Wynn Drive; (10)  Majestic Circle and Wynn Drive; (11)  Nottingham Drive and Majestic Circle; (12)  Nottingham Drive and Wynn Drive; (13)  Nottingham Drive and Wiltshire Drive; (14)  Wiltshire Drive and Hess Drive; (15)  Wiltshire Drive and Majestic Circle; (16)  Wiltshire Drive and Stratford Road; (17)  Wiltshire Drive and Lakeshore Drive and Lakeshore Plaza; (18)  Wiltshire Drive and Berkeley Road; (19)  Windsor Terrace and Melford Place. 
Secs. 18-61—18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 18-81. - Parking for certain purposes.     No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for: (1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. (2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by sudden emergency; in such emergency, such vehicle shall be moved or towed away with all due haste. (3)  For displaying advertising. (Code 1973, App. II, § 68) 
Sec. 18-82. - Illegal parking—Presumption.     In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. (Code 1973, App. II, § 120) 
Sec. 18-83. - Same—Owner liable; vehicle subject to impoundment.     It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in such person's name to stand or park in any street in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city regulating the parking of vehicles. Such person shall be equally liable with the operator for such violation and, in addition thereto, the vehicle may be removed and conveyed by the police department. (Code 1973, App. II, § 127) 
Sec. 18-84. - Manner of parking. (a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within six (6) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this article. (b)  Vehicles may be parked at an angle at such places as may be provided by property owners adjacent to the street where the indentations provided by such property owners extend a sufficient distance from the original curbline to allow vehicles parked at an angle in such places to project into such street beyond such curbline a distance no greater than the width of such vehicles, the amount of space occupied in such street thereby being no greater than in cases of parallel parking, or at such places where the roadway is of sufficient width as determined by the city manager and chief of police to allow for such angle parking. (c)  No person shall park at an angle any vehicle twenty-four (24) feet or more in length on any street or roadway in the city. 
Sec. 18-85. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.     Whenever a space is marked off on any highway or street for the parking of a vehicle, the vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
Sec. 18-86. - Emergency parking restrictions.     When not inconsistent with this chapter or any other ordinance, the city manager and chief of police have authority in an emergency to prohibit the parking or stopping of vehicles on any street or portion of a street or to close a street to traffic. All these orders shall be temporary only. 
Sec. 18-87. - Authority to prohibit parking in certain streets.     When not inconsistent with this chapter or any other ordinance, the city manager and chief of police may prohibit parking or stopping of vehicles on any street or portion of a street when traffic and engineering surveys indicate that stopping or parking may impede the free flow of traffic on the street. 
Sec. 18-88. - Parking prohibited in specified places. (a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the direction of a police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places: (1)  Between the front building restriction line and the front street line except on a bona fide paved driveway leading to a garage, carport, or other paved parking place; (2)  On a sidewalk or on the verge between the sidewalk and roadway; (3)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a curb of a street; (4)  Within an intersection; (5)  On a crosswalk; (6)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings; (7)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; (8)  On any railroad tracks; (9)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway; (10)  At any curb marked in yellow by direction of the city manager and chief of police; or (11)  At any place prohibited by the city manager and chief of police or by ordinance and indicated by official signs or markings. (b)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger in any of the following places: (1)  In front of or within three (3) feet of a public or private driveway or in such a manner as to block ingress or egress thereof; (2)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant; (3)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; (4)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway; (5)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance when so marked; or (6)  Within any area marked as a bus stop. (c)  No person shall park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. (d)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under such person's control either into any prohibited area or move and leave such vehicle away from a curb such distance as is prohibited by this chapter or other ordinance. 
Sec. 18-89. - Parking not to obstruct traffic.     No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
Sec. 18-90. - Parking adjacent to schools. (a)  The police department may have signs erected indicating no parking upon any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. (b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in such designated place. 
Sec. 18-91. - Parking on narrow streets. (a)  The city manager and chief of police are authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. (b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
Sec. 18-92. - Restrictions on the parking of certain vehicles, trailers, boats, etc.     The parking, storing, or use of any boat, boat trailer, bus, house trailer, mobile home, motor home, motorized home, pole trailer, semi-trailer, trailer, travel trailer, camper trailer, truck camper, pick-up coach or utility trailer on any street, alley, highway, or other public place, or on any tract of land within the city shall be unlawful except as provided in the city's zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 18-93. - Use of parking facilities at city hall.     Parking facilities at city hall shall be reserved for the parking of vehicles owned or operated by elected city officials, city employees, city boards, authorities, and committee members, and persons visiting or transacting business at city hall. These parking facilities may also be used for customers of businesses in the central business district zone. The parking of vehicles by any other persons shall be unlawful. 
Sec. 18-94. - Fire zones.     It shall be unlawful to stand or park in an area on public property or private property used for public purposes which has been designated as a fire zone. The city may enforce this section by the issuance of a citation and the immediate removal of the vehicle to an impound lot. 
Sec. 18-95. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. (a)  The city manager and chief of police are authorized to erect signs upon either side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles and when such signs are in place no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such street in violation of any such signs. (b)  Unless prohibitive signs are erected on one-way streets, vehicles may also park on the left-hand side headed in the direction of traffic with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within six (6) inches of the curb or the edge of the roadway. 
Sec. 18-96. - Hazardous or congested places. (a)  The city manager may determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. (b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in such designated place. 
Secs. 18-97—18-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDING[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-60-4, 40-6-206; abandoned vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 18-121. - When vehicles may be impounded.     Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any place within the city where parking is not permitted at that time, or whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the terms of this chapter or any ordinance relating to traffic, such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by any member of the police department by means of towing the same, or otherwise, to a vehicle pound. (Code 1973, App. II, § 70) 
Sec. 18-122. - Record of impounding to be made.     It shall be the duty of the officer so impounding a vehicle immediately to report the fact of such impounding together with any other information which will definitely identify the vehicle, to the police department, which shall cause a permanent record to be made thereof. The record shall contain the name and address of the owner of the vehicle, the state where licensed and the tag number and the nature and circumstances of the violation(s) as well as the disposition of each case once made. (Code 1973, App. II, § 71) 
Sec. 18-123. - Release of impounded vehicle.     Any person claiming a vehicle impounded under this chapter shall produce evidence of such person's identity and ownership or right of possession to the police department which shall issue an order to the person in charge of the pound to release the vehicle and deliver the same to such person upon payment of the fees for removal and storage. Thereupon, the impounded vehicle shall be surrendered by the person in charge thereof, who shall issue a receipt for such impounded vehicle and for payment of the fees for removal and storage. (Code 1973, App. II, § 73) 
Sec. 18-124. - Protest and bond permissible.     In case protest is made against the payment of any impounding or storage fee, the chief of police may authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to discharge the same upon the following terms and conditions: Such person shall be charged with violation of this chapter or other traffic ordinance and required to make bond for such person's appearance and trial before the municipal judge. Thereupon, the chief of police shall authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to deliver it to such person. If such person is convicted of violating this chapter or other traffic ordinance by the municipal judge, in addition to other costs the municipal judge shall assess as cost the fees for removal and storage which have accumulated in connection with the impounding of such vehicle. (Code 1973, App. II, § 74) 
Sec. 18-125. - Impounding does not preclude other prosecution.     The impounding of a vehicle shall not prevent or preclude prosecution for violations of the penal provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic. (Code 1973, App. II, § 77) 
Secs. 18-126—18-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Bicycle regulations, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq. 
Sec. 18-151. - Compliance with chapter; responsibility of parents; scope of regulations. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article. (b)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. (c)  These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. (Code 1973, App. A, § 84) 
Sec. 18-152. - Obedience to traffic-control devices. (a)  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. (b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or "U" turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn; in which event, such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (Code 1973, App. II, § 86) 
Sec. 18-153. - Speed.     No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than the maximum speed provided in this chapter for vehicles at the particular location. Cross reference— Operation of vehicles generally, § 18-50 et seq. 
Sec. 18-154. - Parking.     No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at a curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (Code 1973, App. II, § 93) 
Sec. 18-155. - Riding on sidewalks.     Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (Code 1973, App. II, § 94) 
Sec. 18-156. - Acrobatic or fancy riding on streets.     No rider of any bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars, or feet from the pedals, or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on any street; nor shall any person operating a bicycle upon a street participate in any race of speed or endurance in a contest with any other bicycle or vehicle, unless the street has been temporarily set aside for such purposes. (Code 1973, App. II, § 96) 
Sec. 18-157. - Operation on roadways and paths. (a)  The operator of a bicycle, upon entering a bicycle lane or path, shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles approaching upon the lane or path and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and bicycles in the roadway. (b)  Any bicycle being operated on a public roadway shall yield to the right following an audible signal when overtaken by another vehicle. The driver of a vehicle overtaking a bicycle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken bicycle. (c)  No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon a roadway adjacent to which or upon which bicycle lanes have been designated except within this bicycle lane or except as otherwise permitted by the provisions of this chapter. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon a roadway adjacent to which there is a bicycle path which is less than seventy-five (75) feet from the roadway and which is in a safe condition for bicycle riding. (d)  When a roadway is determined to be unsafe for bicycling by the city, bicycle users may be restricted from the roadway by the erection of a sign prohibiting bicycle use and directing bicycle users to a suitable alternative route similar in directness and surface quality to the roadway. 
Sec. 18-158. - Turning movements. (a)  When completing a left turn on two-way roadways, bicyclists shall merge to the portion of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and shall negotiate the left turn so as to enter the intersecting roadway near the right side of the centerline, giving right-of-way to all vehicles proceeding through the intersection in the opposite direction. (b)  When completing a right turn, motor vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to bicycles crossing the intersecting roadway or completing a right turn. (c)  All vehicles or bicycles making turns at intersections shall not proceed into the intersection nor make this turn without first yielding the right-of-way to all bicycles or other vehicles within or approaching the intersection and shall proceed only when it is safe to do so. (d)  A bicyclist may also negotiate a left turn by dismounting the bicycle and crossing as a pedestrian, leading the bicycle to the other side of the intersecting roadway and, hence, to the other side of the traffic roadway. When the person dismounts from a bicycle, such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (e)  When a bicycle "ride" control signal is shown, the bicyclist may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and while so proceeding across the roadway has the right-of-way over other vehicles. When a bicycle "wait" control signal is shown: (1)  The bicyclist facing the signal shall not commence to cross the roadway until the bicycle "ride" control signal is shown. (2)  When a "wait" signal is shown after a bicyclist has entered the roadway, the bicyclist shall quickly proceed across the roadway and has the right-of-way for that purpose over other vehicles. 
Secs. 18-159—18-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Off-road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq. 
Sec. 18-171. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Off-road vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain and not intended for use predominantly on public roads. It includes, but is not limited to, four-wheel drive or low-pressure tire vehicles, two-wheel vehicles, amphibious machines, ground effect or air cushion vehicles, and any other means of transportation deriving power from any source other than muscle or wind, except that such term shall exclude any motorboat; any military, fire, or law enforcement vehicle; any vehicles used exclusively in airports; all farm machinery, farm tractors, and other self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, for clearing land for planting, for utility services and maintenance, for earth moving, construction, or mining; and self-propelled lawnmowers, snowblowers, garden or lawn tractors, or golf carts, while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes.     Operate means to ride in or on and control the operation of an off-road vehicle, whether in motion or at rest.     Operator means any person who operates or is in actual physical control of an off-road vehicle.     Ride means to ride in or on as a passenger but not control the operation of an off-road vehicle. Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-172. - Enforcement and penalties. (a)  Any law enforcement officer whose duty it is to enforce the provisions of this article may stop and examine any off-road vehicle for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is being operated in compliance with this article and with O.C.G.A. tit. 40, ch. 7 (O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq.). (b)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed that amount prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 40-7-6. 
Sec. 18-173. - Operation.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an off-road vehicle off the roadway or on the property of another under the following circumstances: (1)  Without operative brakes, or without mufflers or other silencing equipment; (2)  On the private property of another without first obtaining permission from the landowner, lessee or other person in control of the property; permission shall not be required where notice is conspicuously posted on the property declaring it open to off-road vehicles; (3)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residence, place of worship, business or public meeting place between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except where the off-road vehicle operator is the owner, lessee or invited guest of the owner or lessee of the residence, place of worship, business or public meeting place. 
Secs. 18-174—18-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MOTORIZED CARTS, PERSONAL TRANSPORTATION, LOW SPEED AND OTHER VEHICLES 
Sec. 18-181. - Findings and intent.     This article is adopted to address the interest of public safety. Motorized carts, personal transportation, low speed and other similar vehicles are not designed or manufactured to be used on public highways, streets and roads, (hereafter "public roads") and the City of Avondale Estates in no way advocates their operation on the public roads within its jurisdiction. Adoption of this article is not to be relied upon as a determination by the city that operation of motorized carts, personal transportation, low-speed and other similar vehicles on public roads is safe or advisable if done in accordance with this article. By regulating such operation the city is merely addressing safety issues. All persons who operate or ride in motorized carts, personal transportation, low speed and other similar vehicles on public roads do so with their own judgment and at their own risk, and must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the city has no liability in negligence, nuisance or under any other cause of action for losses resulting from the use of motorized carts, personal transportation, low speed and similar vehicles on roads, sidewalks, rights-of-way or other public property under this article. Any person who operates motorized carts, personal transportation, low speed and other similar vehicles is responsible for procuring appropriate insurance as may be required by any State of Georgia law or this chapter as a condition of operating motorized carts, personal transportation, low-speed and other similar vehicles on the roads of the city. (Ord. No. 12-10, 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 18-182. - Definitions.     The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the definitions respectively ascribed to them in this article.     All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three (3) or more low pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars for steering control. All-terrain vehicles are prohibited by section 18-173.     Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having only two (2) wheels which are in tandem and either of which is more than thirteen (13) inches in diameter.     Dealer means a person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or exchanging vehicles who has an established place of business in this state.     Electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD) means a self-balancing, two (2) nontandem wheeled device designed to transport only one (1) person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of seven hundred fifty (750) watts (one (1) horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than twenty (20) miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such propulsion system.     Gross weight means the unladen weight of the vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon.     Low-speed vehicle (LSV) means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one (1) mile is greater than twenty (20) miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571.500 and in effect on January 1, 2001.     Moped means a motor driven cycle equipped with two (2) or three (3) wheels, with or without foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion, and an independent power source providing a maximum of two (2) brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum piston or rotor displacement shall be three point five (3.05) cubic inches (fifty (50) cubic centimeters) regardless of the number of chambers in such power source. The power source shall be capable of propelling the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed thirty (30) miles per hour (forty-eight point twenty-eight (48.28) kilometers per hour) on level road surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged.     Motorized cart (MC) means every motor vehicle having no less than three (3) wheels and an unladen weight of one thousand three hundred (1,300) pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than twenty (20) miles per hour. All-terrain vehicles are prohibited by section 18-173.     Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled other than an electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD).     Pedestrian means any person afoot.     Personal transportation vehicle (PTV) means any motor vehicle with a minimum of four (4) wheels, capable of a maximum level ground speed of less than twenty (20) miles per hour with a maximum gross vehicle unladen or empty weight of one thousand three hundred seventy-five (1,375) pounds and capable of transporting not more than eight persons. The term does not include mobility aids, including power wheelchairs and scooters, which can be used indoors and outdoors for the express purpose of enabling mobility for a person with a disability. The term also does not include any all-terrain vehicle.     Public road means the entire width between the boundary lines of every right-of-way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel within the boundaries of the City of Avondale Estates, including streets and alleys.     Sidewalk means that portion of public property of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a railway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use only by pedestrians.     Unladen weight means the weight of a vehicle without load as per the manufacturer's specifications for such vehicle.     Valid motor vehicle driver's license means any current and valid certificate issued by the state, other state of the United States of America, or international agency which permits persons to operate motor vehicles on the public roads of the state.     Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. No. 12-10, 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 18-183. - Nomenclature.     Any personal transportation vehicle, as defined by this chapter, which also qualifies as a motorized cart, as defined by this chapter, shall only be considered a motorized cart under this chapter and be subject only to the requirements, including registration, equipment, and inspections for motorized carts under this chapter. (Ord. No. 12-10, 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 18-184. - Motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle registration. (a)  A one-time fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to register each and every motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle for use on public roads will be charged by the city to cover the costs of implementing and maintaining this article. It shall be the duty of every owner of a motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle that is operated on public roads in the jurisdiction of the city to register the motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle with the city within ten (10) business days of the date of purchase. The registration form shall be supplied by the city. (b)  Registration with the city shall include a record of the model, make, any vehicle identification number or serial number on each motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle, the name and address of the owner, a contact phone number, and any other such information as the city shall require, all of which shall be maintained by the city clerk. (c)  Upon registration with the city, a license decal from the city shall be issued signifying such registration. The decals must be affixed to the rear of each motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle in such a manner as to be visible at all times and shall remain permanently with such motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle unless it is sold or the license is destroyed. (d)  The failure to have a current registration license decal affixed to a motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle for use on a public road in the city shall be a violation of this article and subject the owner of such motorized cart to the penalties set forth in section 1-8. (e)  If the motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle for use on public roads is not registered with the city within ten (10) business days of purchase it shall be considered unregistered and subject the owner to penalties set forth in section 1-8. Furthermore, each motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle for use on public roads not registered within ten (10) business days of purchase shall be assessed a late registration fee of five dollars ($5.00). (f)  The decal issued by the city shall be nontransferrable from the motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle for which is it was obtained. (g)  Only those persons eighteen (18) years of age and older with a valid vehicle driver's license may register a motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle. Registration may be in one (1) person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person. (h)  Any owner or operator registering a motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle with the city agrees to abide by all of the requirements of state law and this Code. By registering a motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle with the city, the owner or operator verifies that the vehicle qualifies to be classified as such under state law and this Code. (i)  The city manager may, at his/her discretion waive registration requirements for special events of a limited duration to which out-of-city residents may bring motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles as participants, Such special events shall last no longer than seven (7) calendar days. (Ord. No. 12-10, 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 18-185. - Motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle equipment and inspections. (a)  All motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles shall have a braking system sufficient for the weight and passenger capacity of the vehicle including a parking brake, a reverse warning device functional at all times when the directional control is in the reverse position, a main power switch which shall render the power circuit inoperative when the switch is in the off position or the key or other activating device is removed, such key or other activating device only being removable in the off position, head lamps, reflex reflectors, tail lamps, a horn, a rearview mirror, safety warning labels, and hip restraints and hand holds. Head lights and tail lamps must be on at all times. (b)  Any low-speed vehicle being operated on the highways of the state, including public city roads, shall display an amber strobe light which shall be visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet from the front and rear of such vehicle. (c)  All personal transportation and low speed vehicles which do not also qualify as motorized carts shall comply with all applicable provisions of Article 1, Chapter 8, Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. (Ord. No. 12-10, 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 18-186. - Gasoline-powered motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles. (a)  All gasoline-powered motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: (1)  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer. (2)  The exhaust system in its own shall be securely fastened, including the consideration of missing or broken brackets or hangers. (3)  The engine and power mechanism of every gasoline-powered motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle shall be so equipped, adjusted, and tuned, as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. (b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any gasoline-powered motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle to operate or permit the operation of such gasoline-powered motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric conditions, which is placed on the gasoline-powered motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle by the manufacturer, to render the device unserviceable by removal, alteration, or other interference with its operation. (c)  All gasoline-powered motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles shall be maintained in working order and kept in good condition and shall be subject to inspection by city officials at reasonable times and intervals. (d)  All gasoline-powered motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles shall be maintained in such condition so that they are incapable of "backfiring", or otherwise operating so as to make loud noises; or create noise as a result of an operator equipping the gasoline-powered motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle with a certain device. (Ord. No. 12-10, 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 18-187. - Personal transportation and low speed vehicle registration. (a)  Any personal transportation vehicle which does not also qualify as a motorized cart, low speed vehicle, or other motor vehicle required to be registered by Georgia law shall register such motor vehicle with the State of Georgia, as required by law, before being allowed to operate within the boundaries of the city. (b)  Only registered personal transportation and low speed vehicles may be operated on public roads within the boundaries of the city, subject to limitations provided in this article. (Ord. No. 12-10, 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 18-188. - Motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle operation regulations. (a)  Motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles may only be driven on designated public roads, in the city. (1)  The designated public roads shall include all public roads within the jurisdiction of the city, excluding U.S. 278. (b)  Motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles shall not be operated on sidewalks, in parks" playgrounds, greenspace, city right-of-way (aside from public streets), or front yards. (c)  Motorized carts, personal transportation or low speed vehicles may not cross U.S. 278 or any other street, road or highway which is part of the state highway system. (d)  Motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles may cross streets and roads which are part of the city street system and used by other types of vehicles. (e)  Motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle owners shall maintain their motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles in a manner which ensures that an unobstructed view from the driver's seat to the rear is maintained at all times the motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle is in operation on public roads. (f)  The maximum occupancy of motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles traveling on public roads, shall be one (1) person per designated seat. (g)  All operators of motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the designated public roads. (h)  Any low-speed vehicle being operated on the highways of the state, including public city roads, shall display an amber strobe light which shall be visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the front and rear of such vehicle. (i)  No all-terrain vehicle shall be permitted to operate on any public roads, sidewalks, rights-of-way or other public property of the city. Violations will be prosecuted under the Code of Georgia, Title 40, Chapter 7, pertaining to "off-road vehicles." (Ord. No. 12-10, 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 18-189. - Motorized cart, personal transportation and low speed vehicle operator licensing regulations.     Those persons possessing a valid motor vehicle driver's license issued by the state, other state of the United States of America, or international agency which permits such person to operate a motor vehicle on the highways of the state may operate and drive motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles on designated public roads. (Ord. No. 12-10, 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 18-190. - Insurance. (a)  The owner or operator of a motorized cart is liable for his or her own actions. Any person who operates or owns a motorized cart is responsible for procuring liability insurance and verifying coverage in terms enough to cover risk involved in using such motorized cart on designated public roads. (b)  The owner or operator of a personal transportation vehicle which does not also qualify as a motorized cart shall keep proof or evidence of required minimum insurance coverage in the personal transportation vehicle at all times during the operation of the motor vehicle as required by state law. (c)  The owner or operator of a low speed vehicle shall keep proof or evidence of required minimum insurance coverage in the low speed vehicle at all times during the operation of the motor vehicle as required by state law. (Ord. No. 12-10, 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 18-191. - Hazardous activities and special rules. (a)  Blocking of public access to any public roads, sidewalks, rights-of-way or other public property of the city shall be prohibited, except for permitted events. (b)  All operators and passengers of motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles, and other motor vehicles shall remain seated at all times during the operation of motor vehicle. (c)  Racing in any form shall be prohibited, except for special events approved by the city. (d)  Reckless or aggressive driving, or loitering shall be prohibited. (e)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws which apply to traffic on the streets in the city, shall also apply to drivers and occupants of motorized carts, personal transportation vehicles and low speed vehicles. (f)  The number of occupants in a motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle shall be limited to the number of persons for whom the factory seating is installed and provided. (g)  All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during the movement and/or operation of motorized carts, personal transportation and low speed vehicles. No parts of the bodies of any operator or passenger shall extend outside the perimeter of the vehicle while it is being operated. (h)  No driver shall operate a motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines of rows of vehicles. (i)  No motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle shall be parked on sidewalks, in parks, in playgrounds, on greenspace, on city right-of-way (except public roads), in front yards or as determined by the city manager at any time. (Ord. No. 12-10, 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 18-192. - Penalties. (a)  Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court or other court of appropriate jurisdiction and, upon conviction, punished as provided in the Code of Ordinance, City of Avondale Estates, Georgia. (b)  Whenever a vehicle is involved in a third violation of this article within any ten (10) year period, the motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle city registration shall be revoked. The registered owner cannot thereafter register any motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle for use in the city for a period of two (2) years following the third conviction. Additionally, such person shall be prohibited from operating a motorized cart, personal transportation or low speed vehicle on the public roads for a period of two (2) years. (c)  Any violation by an operator of a low speed vehicle shall be charged against the operator according to the provisions of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia and this Code. (d)  Any violation by an operator of a personal transportation vehicle or other motor vehicle may be charged against the operator according to this Code or according to the provisions of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia. (Ord. No. 12-10, 12-17-2012) 
Chapter 19 - WRECKERS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Removal of improperly parked cars, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
Sec. 19-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Disabled, as used in this chapter, means a motor vehicle disabled on a public way or other public place in such a manner as to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian travel or access to public or private property.     Operator includes all persons owning or operating wreckers for, on behalf of, or within a wrecker service in the city and all officers, agents and employees of such persons who are engaged in the business of the wrecker service.     Wrecker means an automotive vehicle equipped and used for the purpose of towing or hauling wrecked or disabled automobiles or other vehicles.     Wrecker or towing service means any person regularly engaged in the business of towing or hauling wrecked or disabled motor vehicles for hire within the city, whether or not such wrecker service maintains an office within the corporate limits of the city. Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-2. - Compliance with chapter.     It shall be unlawful for any wrecker service or operator to tow or haul any motor vehicle which has been wrecked, abandoned or disabled on a public way or other public place within the jurisdiction of the city from the scene of the wreck, abandonment or disablement except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 19-3. - Administration and enforcement of chapter.     It shall be the duty of the city manager to administer and carry out the provisions of this chapter. All police officers of the city shall have authority to issue citations and prosecute violations of this chapter. 
Sec. 19-4. - Application to operate wrecker services in city; license required. (a)  A wrecker service maintaining an office, garage, or storage area within the corporate limits of the city shall not operate until that wrecker service has an approved application on file and a license has been issued by the office of the city clerk. In addition, when necessary for the police department to remove any motor vehicle for any cause from any place within the jurisdiction of the city, no wrecker shall be used to tow or haul such vehicles unless the wrecker service has an approved application on file and a license has been issued by the office of the city clerk. The application shall contain the following information: (1)  Name of the wrecker service and all persons having a financial interest therein. (2)  Home and business addresses and telephone numbers of the principal operator of the wrecker service. (3)  Description of each wrecker, including the make, model, color, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, title number, and tag number. (4)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of each wrecker if different from the operator. (5)  Date each vehicle was first placed in service as a wrecker. (6)  Location and telephone number of the office or garage to and from which the wrecker service is operated. (7)  Persons, including all agents and employees, authorized to operate the wrecker and class of driver's license held by each operator. (b)  The applicant shall file with the application either a certified copy of title showing ownership or other written instrument authorizing possession of each wrecker along with a copy of insurance certificate evidencing that the wrecker service is properly insured in accordance with the insurance laws of the state and with section 19-7 and a copy of the wrecker service's registration permit issued by the state public service commission. (c)  Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a certified check in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to defray investigative and administrative costs. 
Sec. 19-5. - Approval of application; issuance of license; nontransferable; expiration. (a)  The city manager shall inspect each wrecker before approving the application to determine whether the vehicle is serviceable, properly equipped, and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with other applicable laws. Thereafter, the city manager shall inspect each wrecker annually. (b)  Upon approval of the application by the city manager, the city clerk shall issue a license to the wrecker service which shall authorize the wrecker service to operate in the city. The license shall not be transferable. (c)  If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to issuance of the license, the application fee shall be retained. (d)  All licenses granted pursuant to this chapter expire on December 31 of each year. A licensee who desires to renew his license shall file application, with the application fee, by November 30 of each year. 
Sec. 19-6. - Revocation of license; appeal thereof. (a)  The city manager shall direct the city clerk to revoke the license of any wrecker owner or operator when such person has been found in violation of any terms of this chapter or upon any of the following grounds: (1)  The license granted hereunder was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a material fact as to ownership, use, possession, or operation; (2)  The owner or licensee is found at the scene of an accident in violation of the provisions of this chapter; or (3)  The licensee pays, in the form of a gratuity, any person not involved in an accident for information as to the location of the accident. (b)  Any wrecker service whose license is revoked shall be notified in writing by the city manager of the revocation to take effect fifteen (15) days after mailing of the notice, the reasons therefor, the witnesses relied upon by the city manager, and that the wrecker service shall be granted a hearing before the governing body upon written request. If a hearing is desired, the request for the hearing shall be filed with the city clerk within five (5) days of the notice from the city manager. Prior to the effective date of the revocation, the governing body shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of determining whether the license shall be revoked and, upon hearing the facts, may affirm, reverse, vacate or modify the city manager's order of revocation. (c)  Any wrecker service whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to again apply for a license with the city for a period of one (1) year from the date of revocation. 
Sec. 19-7. - Insurance.     In addition to the motor vehicle liability insurance required by state law, each wrecker service shall maintain general comprehensive liability and garage and extended operation insurance on business operations providing a minimum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) single-limit coverage per occurrence. Copies of insurance certificates showing the name and address of the insurance company, policy number, amount of coverage and expiration of the policies shall be attached to the application required by this chapter. 
Sec. 19-8. - Information printed on side of wrecker.     It shall be unlawful for a wrecker service to operate within the city any wrecker unless such vehicle has lettered in permanent paint on each side in plain view the name, address, and telephone number of the wrecker service. This lettering shall be in a contrasting color to the color of the wrecker and shall be at least two and one-half (2½) inches in height. Temporary or removable magnetic signs shall not be permitted. 
Sec. 19-9. - Required equipment.     Each wrecker vehicle shall have a minimum rating of not less than ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight and shall be minimally equipped with the following additional equipment: one (1) broom, one (1) shovel, one (1) ABC-type fire extinguisher, and a revolving amber emergency light mounted on the top of the cab or boom of the vehicle. 
Sec. 19-10. - Response to accident scene upon proper requests only.     It shall be unlawful for a wrecker service to go to any place where an accident has occurred unless called by the driver or the owner of the disabled vehicle, or by the vehicle owner's authorized representative, or by a police dispatcher. Upon being so called, a wrecker operator shall not block traffic and shall maintain his vehicle in such position as not to impede emergency vehicles and/or normal vehicular traffic. 
Sec. 19-11. - Solicitation for business. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any wrecker operator or wrecker service to solicit business at the scene of a motor vehicle accident or other vehicular disablement, whether such solicitation be conducted from a wrecker vehicle, private automobile, other motor vehicle, or on foot. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any city employee to solicit business for any wrecker service or operator. 
Sec. 19-12. - Responsibility for cleaning accident debris from street and right-of-way.     A wrecker operator, after having been called to the scene of an accident for the purpose of removing a damaged vehicle, shall clean all the debris caused by the accident from the street and right-of-way before he leaves. If two (2) or more wreckers are called to the same accident scene, they shall be equally responsible for cleaning. 
Sec. 19-13. - Display of emergency light.     A wrecker operator shall not display the vehicle's amber emergency light except upon arrival at the scene where a call originated and when leaving the scene with the vehicle in tow. Each wrecker operator shall abide by all applicable traffic regulations and shall be responsible for any violations incurred in the process of responding to a call. 
Sec. 19-14. - Release by investigating officer prior to towing.     No vehicle shall be removed from the scene of a wreck, abandonment or disablement until it is released by the investigating officer. The police officer may, in his discretion, require inside secured storage of the vehicle until any investigation and processing are completed. 
Sec. 19-15. - Vehicle inventory; procedure. (a)  Whenever any vehicle is removed by a wrecker service without the owner or operator of the vehicle present, the police officer shall make a thorough inventory of all equipment, accessories, personal articles or other items either attached to or located within the vehicle. The inventory shall be indicated on the inventory/impound form and signed by the police officer. Upon acceptance of the vehicle, and prior to its removal, the agent or employee of the wrecker service performing the removal shall sign the inventory/impound form. The officer shall retain the original, and the wrecker service shall retain a copy. A copy of the inventory/impound form shall be provided to the owner of the vehicle when the vehicle is released. (b)  Whenever any vehicle is removed at the request of the vehicle owner and without participation by a police officer, the wrecker service performing the removal shall complete and sign an inventory form. The vehicle owner shall be given a reasonable opportunity to verify and sign the inventory form. The owner or lawful custodian of the vehicle shall keep the original of the inventory form and the wrecker service shall retain a copy. 
Sec. 19-16. - Vehicle storage area.     Each wrecker service shall maintain an area for storage of towed vehicles sufficient to provide storage in a manner not inconsistent with applicable zoning ordinances and other laws. The storage area shall be enclosed or the entire perimeter fenced. Towed or hauled vehicles shall not be parked or left standing on any city, county, or state right-of-way at any time or under any circumstances. All stored vehicles shall be subject to reclamation twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
Sec. 19-17. - Release of impounded vehicle.     Any person claiming a vehicle impounded under this chapter shall produce evidence of such person's identity and ownership or right of possession to the police department which shall issue an order to the wrecker service to release the vehicle and deliver the vehicle to the person upon payment of the fees for removal and storage. Thereupon, the impounded vehicle shall be surrendered by the person in charge thereof, who shall issue a receipt for such impounded vehicle and for payment of the fees for removal and storage. Cross reference— Impounding vehicles, § 18-121 et seq. 
Sec. 19-18. - Notification to county public safety department; required reports. (a)  The operator of any wrecker removing a private motor vehicle in the city from another person then having possession of such motor vehicle at the request of any person other than a police officer or dispatcher shall report this action to the county public safety department in the same manner and timeframe as required by the county for the unincorporated area of the county. (b)  The owner or operator of any business providing wrecker service or storage facilities within the city shall furnish reports to the county public safety department in the same manner and timeframe as required by the county for the unincorporated area of the county. 
Sec. 19-19. - Maximum fees and charges.     The maximum reasonable costs of removal, relocation, and storage pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be established annually by the governing body, a copy of which shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Chapter 20 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CODE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 0415, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 2004, amended ch. 20 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said chapter pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. Cross reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 5-201 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CODE OF AVONDALE ESTATES, GEORGIA 
DIVISION 1. - STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
Sec. 20-1. - Short title.     This chapter shall be known as the Stormwater Management Code of Avondale Estates, Georgia. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-2. - Findings. (a)  Uncontrolled stormwater discharges may have a significant, adverse impact on the health, safety, and general welfare of the city and on the quality of life of its citizens. More specifically, surface water runoff can carry pollutants and nutrients into receiving waters. (b)  Adverse stormwater discharge quality and quantity consequences as described above could result in substantial economic losses. Potential losses include, but are not limited to, increased water treatment costs, as well as state and federal fines associated with water quality violations. (c)  Many future problems can be avoided through proper stormwater quality management. (d)  Every parcel of real property, both public and private, either impacts or derives benefits from the operation and maintenance of the City of Avondale Estates Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. (e)  Current and anticipated growth will contribute to and increase the need for improvement and maintenance of the City of Avondale Estates Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. (f)  Management, monitoring and enforcement of the city stormwater management program will be beneficial for the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city and will facilitate compliance with the provisions of the city national pollutant discharge elimination system permit (hereinafter "permit"). (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-3. - Objectives.     The objectives of this chapter include the following: (1)  Protect, maintain, and enhance the short-term and long-term public health, safety, and general welfare. This objective will be achieved by providing for regulation and management of the city municipal separate storm sewer system, including public and private stormwater conveyances in the city's service area. (2)  Comply with the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources (Georgia EPD) and federal environmental protection agency (EPA) stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act and the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. These requirements include: a.  Control of the contribution of pollutants to the city municipal separate storm sewer system by stormwater discharges associated with commercial and industrial activity and the quality of stormwater discharged from sites of commercial and industrial activity; b.  Prohibition of illicit connections to the city municipal separate storm sewer system; c.  Control of discharges to the city municipal separate storm sewer system of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater; and d.  Control, through intergovernmental agreements, of the contribution of pollutants from one municipal or county system to another. (3)  Provide for intergovernmental cooperation in management, monitoring and enforcement of the city stormwater management program between the city and DeKalb County. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-4. - Definitions. (a)  For the purposes of this chapter, unless specifically defined below, words or phrases shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most effective application. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words used in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. (b)  Unless otherwise specified, or it is apparent from the context, definitions herein will be the same as those in other chapters of the Avondale Estates City Code. (c)  For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases and words, and their derivatives, shall have the meanings given herein:     Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the city municipal separate storm sewer system which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence.     Authorized representative means: (1)  If the discharger is a business, an owner, partner, corporate officer or highest ranking employee of the business employed at the facility from which the discharge or connection was made; (2)  If the discharger is a federal, state or local government facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or that person's designee.     Best management practices (BMPs) means a wide range of stormwater management regulations, procedures, engineering designs, activities, prohibitions or practices which control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater.     City commission means the Board of Mayor and Commissioners of Avondale Estates, Georgia.     City manager means the city manager of the city or any of that person's authorized representatives, or, when a department other than the engineering department is designated to enforce provisions of this article or any portion thereof, the director of such department or any of that person's authorized representatives.     City of Avondale Estates Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System means a stormwater conveyance or system of stormwater conveyances which is: (1)  Owned or maintained by the city; (2)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; (3)  Not a combined sewer; (4)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW); and (5)  Not located outside the boundaries of the city or owned, operated or maintained by any other private or governmental body.     City stormwater management program means that program of activities and procedures for stormwater quality management as set forth in the application for the permit, as approved by the Georgia EPD, and any amendment or modification thereto.     Cooling water means water used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance, device or apparatus.     Department, unless otherwise specified, means the engineering department and its divisions which are responsible for stormwater management activities and implementation of the provisions of this article or such other department as may hereafter be designated to enforce this article or any portion thereof, or any authorized representative of such department.     Discharge means the spill, draining, dumping, deposit, seeping, disposal, placement, release or loss of any material or substance to the city municipal separate storm sewer system.     Discharger means any person who discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system, either directly or indirectly, including, without limitation, the owner and occupant of the property where the discharge occurs and the person responsible for or performing the discharge. For purposes of notice, "discharger" shall include the authorized representative of such discharger.     Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.     Federal Clean Water Act or Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, presently codified at 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto.     Federal EPA or EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.     Georgia EPD or EPD means the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources.     Georgia Water Quality Control Act or Water Quality Control Act means the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, as amended, presently codified at O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto.     Governing body means the board of mayor and commissioners.     Ground water means the water beneath the earth's surface between saturated soil and rock.     Illicit discharge/connection means a discharge or connection to the city municipal separate storm sewer system that contains pollution or that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except such discharges which are pursuant to, and are in compliance with, a national pollution discharge elimination system permit (other than the permit for discharges from the city municipal separate storm sewer system).     Maintenance means any action necessary to preserve stormwater conveyances in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this article or to prevent structural failure of such conveyances.     Permit means a national pollution discharge elimination system permit for discharges from the city municipal separate storm sewer system issued by the Georgia EPD, or such subsequent authorization for discharges from the city municipal separate storm sewer system to waters of the state.     Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, and includes any individual, firm, corporation, government agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity.     Pollution or polluted means the contamination or other alteration of any of water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including, but not limited to, change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters; or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into the city municipal separate storm sewer system as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render any waters contained therein or discharged into waters of the state harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or general welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.     Private means property or stormwater conveyances owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by city, county, state or federal governments.     Procedure means a procedure adopted by the engineering department to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this chapter, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this article or other chapters of the City Code, or other ordinances or resolutions of the city or other agencies.     Regulation means any regulation, rule, development standard, or other requirement adopted or approved by the governing body pursuant to the requirements of this article.     Sanitary sewer system means the complete sanitary sewer system of DeKalb County which discharges sanitary sewerage directly or indirectly into the sewage treatment plant, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes and flushing inlets and appurtenances to the foregoing, but shall exclude any portion or facilities of the sewage treatment plant.     Site means any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land.     Stormwater means any type of stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, surface or subsurface runoff or drainage.     Stormwater conveyance means natural or constructed stormwater conduits, features, facilities or best management practices designed or used for the collection, conveyance or treatment of stormwater through open or closed drainage systems, including, but not limited to, pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, roads with drainage systems, highways, rights-of-way, county streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, storm drains, detention ponds, retention ponds, infiltration devices, oil/water separators, sediment basins, modular pavement or other such devices.     Stormwater discharge association with industrial activity means the discharge from any stormwater conveyance which is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial facility. The term includes, but is not limited to, stormwater discharges from industrial facility yards; immediate access roads and rail lines used or traveled by carriers of raw materials, manufactured products, waste materials or by-products used or created by the facility; material handling sites; refuse sites; sites used for the storage and maintenance of material handling equipments; sites used for application or disposal of process wastewaters; sites used for residual treatment, storage, or disposal; shipping and receiving areas; manufacturing buildings; storage areas (including tank farms for raw materials, and intermediate and finished products); and areas where industrial activity has taken place in the past and significant materials remain and are exposed to stormwater.     Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater in a manner to meet the objectives of this article and which shall include a system of vegetative or structural measures, or both, that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater and water quality impacts caused by man-made changes to the land.     Stormwater runoff means the direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff or drainage or other concentrated flow that enters a stormwater conveyance during and following precipitation.     Unpolluted means the absence of pollution.     Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water.     Water quantity means those characteristics of stormwater that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater, both surface and subsurface. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-5. - Scope of regulation. (a)  The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the city. (b)  The city manager shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this article. (c)  The city manager shall be responsible for the conservation, management, maintenance (where applicable), extension and improvement of the city municipal separate storm sewer system, including activities necessary to control stormwater discharges, and activities necessary to carry out stormwater management programs included in the permit. (d)  The provisions of this article shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers or authority granted by federal, state or local law or ordinance. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-6. - Authority of city manager. (a)  The city manager, or his authorized representative, shall have the power to administer and enforce all regulations and procedures adopted to implement this article, including the right to maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article, or to seek recovery of damages, fees or costs. (b)  Subject to approval by the city commission, the city manager can: (1)  Administer, coordinate and oversee conservation, acquisition, extension, improvement, design, construction, management, operation and maintenance of the city municipal separate storm sewer system; (2)  Establish or oversee establishment of regulations for control, management, and enhancement of the quality or quantity of stormwater, and establish procedures and guidelines to implement such regulations; (3)  Determine the manner in which stormwater conveyances should be operated; (4)  Inspect and enforce private stormwater conveyances which discharge to the city municipal separate storm sewer system; (5)  Advise the city commission and other city departments on issues related to stormwater; (6)  Protect the city municipal separate storm sewer system and stormwater conveyances and properties owned or maintained by the city and prescribe how they are used by others; (7)  Require new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater discharges to the city municipal separate storm sewer system to comply with the terms of this article, including regulations and procedures adopted pursuant thereto, with respect to the installation of stormwater conveyances or best management practices; (8)  Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the city municipal separate storm sewer system; (9)  Develop, adopt and implement the city stormwater management program; and (10)  Comply with federal and state regulations and permits concerning the city municipal separate storm sewer system. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-7. - Discharges to be permitted.     It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any component of the city municipal separate storm sewer system except in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-8. - Regulation of quantity of stormwater discharges.     Regulation of the quantity of stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system is required as set forth in this article and other applicable ordinances and Code provisions. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-9. - Prohibited and illicit discharges.     It is unlawful for any person to discharge to any component of the city municipal separate storm sewer system or to cause, permit or suffer to be discharged into such system any matter of any nature that is not composed entirely of stormwater, or such unpolluted water as exempted in accordance with the provisions of section 20-12 and such discharge shall be deemed an illicit discharge and constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-10. - Prohibited and illicit connections. (a)  It is unlawful for any person to connect any stormwater conveyance of any type that discharges any matter of any nature that is not composed entirely of stormwater or such unpolluted water as exempted in accordance with the provisions of section 20-12 to the city municipal separate storm sewer system, and such connection shall be deemed an illicit connection and constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. (b)  Illicit connections must be disconnected and redirected, as necessary and appropriate, to the sanitary sewer system. Any such redirection to the sanitary sewer system must be in compliance with all city and county ordinances and state and federal laws and regulations applicable to such discharge and connection. The requirement of disconnection of an illicit connection and redirection to the sanitary sewer system shall be supplemental to any other violation, penalty, remedy or other action taken with respect to the illicit connection. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-11. - Stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity. (a)  Discharges of stormwater associated with industrial activities, as identified in applicable federal regulations, must comply with the permit requirements of the federal national pollution discharge elimination systems program for stormwater discharges. Those specific dischargers of stormwater associated with industrial activity are responsible for submitting a permit application to the Georgia EPD. (b)  A copy of the permit application shall also be submitted to the city manager for the required record keeping purposes. (c)  Discharges of stormwater associated with industrial activity must comply with all provisions of this article for any discharges which are made to the municipal separate storm sewer system. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-12. - Exemptions from prohibition on illicit discharges and illicit connections. (a)  The following categories of discharges and connections are exempt from the prohibitions set forth in sections 20-8 and 20-9, unless the city manager determines such a discharge or connection to be a significant source of pollution. (1)  Water line flushing performed or approved by the engineering department or the county water and sewer department and other unpolluted discharges from potable water sources; (2)  Unpolluted landscape irrigation and lawn watering; (3)  Unpolluted irrigation water; (4)  Unpolluted diverted stream flows; (5)  Unpolluted rising or pumped ground water; (6)  Unpolluted infiltration to the city municipal separate storm sewer system; (7)  Unpolluted water from foundation and footing drains, crawl space pumps, and air conditioning condensation; (8)  Unpolluted springs; (9)  Individual residential car washing where biodegradable soap is used; (10)  Unpolluted flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; (11)  Unpolluted dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; (12)  Flows from firefighting; or (13)  Other unpolluted water. (b)  In the event that the city manager determines a discharge or connection to constitute a significant source of pollution, then the city manager shall notify the discharger of such determination, that such discharge or connection is now prohibited by the terms of this article, and that the discharger shall be required to immediately cease the illicit discharge or illicit connection and to comply with the provisions of this article. (c)  The discharger, after notice, shall be required to immediately cease the illicit discharge or illicit connection and to bring any discharge or connection to the city municipal separate storm sewer system into compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-13. - Appeal of denial of exemption. (a)  Any person aggrieved by the determination of the city manager that a discharge or connection otherwise exempted under the provisions of section 20-12 is a significant source of pollution may file a notice of appeal of such determination to the city manager. The notice of appeal must be in writing and received within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice of the determination of the city manager that such discharge or connection constitutes a significant source of pollution and is prohibited under the terms of this article. The notice of appeal must set forth the reasons that the person believes that the determination of the city manager should be rescinded. (b)  The city manager shall schedule an appeal review meeting within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice of appeal. The purpose of the appeal review meeting is to permit the appellant to present to the city manager the reasons that the person believes that the determination of the city manager should be rescinded. (c)  The fact that a person has appealed the determination of the city manager shall not delay or otherwise hinder any notice of violation, citation or other enforcement action or proceeding brought by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this article after notice of the determination. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-14. - Reporting, remediation and corrective action requirements. (a)  In the event of an illicit discharge or illicit connection to the city municipal separate storm sewer system, the discharger shall immediately inform the city manager of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge or connection. The initial report shall be followed up by a written report to the city manager, describing the exact location, nature and events of the illicit discharge or illicit connection, as well as describing details on corrective procedures which have been taken or scheduled to prevent recurrence of the illicit discharge or illicit connection. This written report shall be submitted within fifteen (15) days from the initial report. The failure to report an illicit discharge or illicit connection as required by this Code section shall constitute a separate violation of this article. (b)  The discharger shall take immediate action to remediate, correct, contain, treat, and minimize the effects of the illicit discharge or illicit connection on the city municipal separate storm sewer system and receiving streams and to ensure no recurrence of the illicit discharge or illicit connection, including corrective and preventive procedures, and implementation of best management practices, where necessary to prevent recurrence. The failure to remediate the effects of an illicit discharge or illicit connection as required by this Code section shall constitute a separate violation of this article. (c)  The requirement to report and remediate with respect to an illicit discharge or illicit connection shall be supplemental to any other violation, penalty, remedy or other action taken with respect to the illicit discharge or illicit connection. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-15. - Maintenance. (a)  All stormwater conveyances shall be privately owned and maintained, unless accepted for public ownership and maintenance by the city. (b)  The city may require dedication of privately owned stormwater conveyances which discharge to the city municipal separate storm sewer system. (c)  Owners of stormwater conveyances that discharge to the city municipal separate storm sewer system shall maintain a perpetual nonexclusive easement that allows for monitoring, inspection and emergency maintenance by the city. (d)  Where stormwater conveyances are accepted by the city for maintenance, public access easements shall be provided. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-16. - Investigation.     The city manager shall have authority to investigate any apparent violation of any provision of this chapter and to take any action authorized by this article which he/she deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-17. - Inspection and right of entry. (a)  The city manager may inspect any stormwater conveyance within or outside of an existing drainage easement. (b)  The city manager, bearing proper credentials and identification, and in accordance with state and federal law, shall be permitted to enter private or public property at all reasonable times to inspect or investigate conditions relating to the enforcement of this article, the investigation of any apparent violation of any provision of this article, compliance with the terms of the permit, observation, measurement, sampling or testing with respect to the city stormwater management program or compliance with the permit, and periodic investigations in accordance with provisions of this article. The city manager shall notify the owner of such property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. (c)  The city manager, bearing proper credentials and identification, and in accordance with state and federal law, shall be permitted to enter private or public property at all reasonable times for repairs, maintenance and other similar purposes related to any portion of the city municipal separate storm sewer system. The city manager shall notify the owner of such property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. (d)  The city manager, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant for the purpose of inspection or investigation of conditions relating to the enforcement of this article, compliance with the terms of the permit, or observation, measurement, sampling or testing with respect to the city stormwater management program or the permit, and periodic investigations in accordance with the provisions of this article. (1)  Inspection warrants may be issued by the municipal court when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the following conditions are met: a.  The city manager has established by oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection that includes the property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of the property. b.  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this section. (2)  An inspection warrant will be validly issued only if it meets all of the following requirements: a.  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. b.  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or occupant of the property or discharger can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. c.  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal. d.  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the Code provisions sought to be enforced. (e)  Measurements, samples, tests and analyses performed by the city or required of any discharger to the city municipal separate storm sewer system shall be in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, unless another method is approved by the city manager. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-18. - Emergency powers. (a)  If, after inspection, the condition of a stormwater conveyance presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, the city shall have the right to take action as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare and make the stormwater conveyance safe. (b)  The city manager may conduct emergency maintenance or remediation operations on private property and on private stormwater conveyances. Emergency maintenance or remediation operations shall constitute actions to remedy conditions that in the opinion of the city manager create a condition potentially injurious to life, property or the city municipal separate storm sewer system. (c)  Emergency maintenance conducted on any stormwater conveyance shall not be construed as constituting a continuing obligation on the part of the city. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-19. - Authority to require person to cooperate.     Whenever required to carry out the objectives of this article, including but not limited to obtaining information regarding permit compliance, implementing the city stormwater management program, or determining whether any person is in violation of any provision of this article, the city manager may in writing require a discharger to the city municipal separate storm sewer system to: (1)  Establish and maintain records; (2)  Make reports; (3)  Install, use and maintain monitoring equipment or methods, including where appropriate, biological monitoring methods; (4)  Sample such discharges, in accordance with such methods, at such locations, at such intervals, and in such manner as the city manager shall prescribe; and (5)  Provide such other information as he or she may reasonably require. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-20. - Notice of violation and citation. (a)  Whenever the city manager determines that a violation of this article or regulations and procedures adopted thereto has occurred, he or she shall serve upon the discharger a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, and state that, if the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time to be determined by the city manager, a citation shall be issued for the discharger to appear in the municipal court. The notice of violation shall set forth the potential penalty involved and the fact that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. (b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager may issue a citation to appear in the municipal court without first issuing a notice of violation if, in the judgment of the city manager, the illicit discharge or illicit connection was not an accidental discharge or if the violation constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, general welfare, or the city municipal separate storm sewer system. (c)  If the violation has not been remedied within the time specified in the notice of violation, the city manager shall issue a citation to the discharger to appear in the municipal court. (d)  Nothing in this Code chapter shall limit the authority of the city manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-21. - Response to notice of violation or summons and corrective plan.     Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice of violation, the discharger shall submit to the city manager a written explanation of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the illicit discharge or illicit connection resulting in the notice of violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation, including corrective and preventive procedures and implementation of best management practices, where necessary to prevent recurrence. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. The failure to submit this written explanation and plan as required by this Code section shall constitute a separate violation of this article. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-22. - Cease and desist order.     When the city manager finds that a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article or that the discharger's past violations are likely to recur, the city manager may issue an order to the discharger directing the discharger to cease and desist all such violations and to: (1)  Immediately comply with the provisions of this article; and (2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation and to prevent recurrence of the violation. (3)  Each day of violation of a cease and desist order, after notice thereof, shall constitute a separate violation of this article. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-23. - Penalties. (a)  Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment in accordance with section 1-8 of the City Code. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (b)  Nothing in this Code section shall prevent the city manager from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-24. - Injunctive proceedings. (a)  The city manager may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of or to correct violations of this article. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief which restrains the violation or compels compliance with the requirements imposed by this article on activities of the discharger. The city manager may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the discharger to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a discharger. (b)  The city manager may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, environmental impact assessments, geotechnical work, and the costs of any actual damages incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, costs of containment and cleanup. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-25. - Civil damages suits.     When the city manager finds that a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, the city manager may file a civil damage action against the discharger, through the city attorney, seeking such damages, fees and costs as are permitted by law. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-26. - Cooperation with other governments.     The city may enter into agreements with other local governments to carry out the purposes of this article, to comply with the provisions of the permit, and to implement the city stormwater management program. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, agreements regarding enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, cooperative stormwater management programs and cooperative monitoring, maintenance, enforcement and management of municipal separate storm sewer systems, or other actions as may be needed to control the contribution of pollutants from and between any municipal system and the city municipal separate storm sewer system. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Secs. 20-27—20-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STORMWATER UTILITY 
Sec. 20-31. - Establishment of a utility and an enterprise fund. (a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility which shall be responsible for stormwater management programs throughout the city, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. The stormwater utility management unit shall be composed of such personnel, employees and agents of the city as the board of mayor and commissioners may from time to time determine and their compensation shall be fixed and determined by the city manager as approved by the city commissioners. (b)  A stormwater enterprise fund shall be established in the city budget and accounting system for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the stormwater utility, including but not limited to rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses as may be established by the board of mayor and commissioners and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the stormwater utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater enterprise fund and all expenses of the utility shall be paid from the stormwater enterprise fund, except that other revenues receipts, and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management programs, facilities, operations and capital investments as deemed appropriate by the city commissioners, upon recommendation by the city manager. (c)  The board of mayor and commissioners hereby confers upon the stormwater utility operational control over the existing stormwater management programs, systems and facilities performed, provided or owned and heretofore operated by the city and other related assets, including but not limited to properties other than roadways upon which such systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-32. - Definitions.     Customers of the stormwater utility. Customers of the stormwater utility shall include all persons, properties and entities served by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, regulation and improvement of the stormwater management programs, systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities and activities related thereto, and persons, properties and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program.     Hydrologic response. The hydrologic response of a property is the manner whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including but not limited to the presence of impervious area, the size, shape, topographic, vegetative and geologic conditions of a property, antecedent moisture conditions and groundwater conditions on a property.     Impervious surfaces. Impervious surfaces are those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, paved areas and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development or other imposition of impervious surfaces.     Stormwater management systems and facilities. Stormwater management systems and facilities are those natural and man-made channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff.     Undeveloped land. Land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-33. - Scope of responsibility for the city stormwater system and facilities. (a)  The city owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvement of those stormwater systems and facilities which: (1)  Are located within public streets, rights-of-way and easements; (2)  Are subject to easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or (3)  Are located on public lands to which the city has adequate access for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of systems and facilities. (b)  Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater systems and facilities which are located on private property or public property not owned by the city and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of the systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as that responsibility may be otherwise affected by the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. (c)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of all properties and persons in general by regulation of the stormwater system and facilities, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. (d)  To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the city, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation, or rule of the city or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the city, its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-34. - Requirements for on-site stormwater systems: enforcement methods and inspections. (a)  All property owners and developers of real property to be developed within the city shall provide, manage, maintain and operate on-site stormwater systems and facilities sufficient to collect, convey, detain, control and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all city development regulations and the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by the city in the municipal court. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the city may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof charged to the owner in the same manner as a stormwater service charge. (b)  In the event that the city shall file an action pursuant to this article, from the date of filing such action the city shall have lien rights in relation to any service charge assessed against the property in the same manner as a tax levied against the property, which rights may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the Superior Court of DeKalb County, Georgia. In addition, the city shall have the right to pursue collection of the service charge through other legal action or judgment. (c)  The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private property and public property owned by other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance with any order or judgment entered pursuant to this section. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-35. - General funding policy. (a)  It shall be the policy of the city that funding for the stormwater utility program, systems and facilities shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater program, systems and facilities by individual properties or persons and/or the level of service rendered by or resulting from the provision of stormwater programs, systems and facilities. Stormwater service charge rates shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable, and the resultant service charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing services and facilities. Similarly situated properties shall be charged similar rentals, rates, charges, fees or licenses. Service charge rates shall be structured to be consistent and coordinated with the use of other funding methods employed for stormwater management within the city, including but not limited to general tax revenues allocated to stormwater management, plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in-lieu of regulatory requirements, impact fees, system development charges and special assessments. (b)  The cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities may include operating, capital investment and reserve expenses, and may consider stormwater quality as well as stormwater quantity management problems, needs and requirements. (c)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service charges and/or other methods of funding stormwater management shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater systems or facilities or to private stormwater facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater systems or facilities. (d)  Stormwater utility service charge rates, fees and other similar charges shall be established by the city commissioners. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Secs. 20-36—20-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER SERVICE FEE RATES 
Sec. 20-40. - Findings.     The board of mayor and commissioners makes the following findings of fact: (1)  The professional engineering and financial analyses conducted on behalf of and considered by the board of mayor and commissioners properly assess, define and project the cost of stormwater management systems and facilities of the city. (2)  Given the projected cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses submitted to the city, it is appropriate to adopt a stormwater service fee rate methodology and to charge service fees to properties and persons within the city in a manner that recovers the cost of programs, systems and facilities and other costs associated therewith, including but not limited to allocations of the cost of services provided to the stormwater management utility by other funds of the city and other government entities and agencies, interest on bonds, operational and emergency reserves, allowances for delinquencies and bad debt, and such other costs as may be deemed reasonable and appropriate by the board of mayor and commissioners to ensure the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater programs, systems and facilities in the city. (3)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the city and the stormwater service fee rate methodology and service fees should be applicable throughout the city to enable the city to successfully manage, operate and improve stormwater programs, systems and facilities at an advanced level. (4)  It is most equitable that a portion of the needed stormwater program, systems and facilities continue to be funded from the city's general tax revenues, and therefore that the board of mayor and commissioners may allocate general fund support to stormwater management in the future in the form of a combination of service fee payments for city-owned properties and a supplemental allocation of the general fund. (5)  The stormwater needs in the city include but are not limited to protecting the public health, safety and welfare. Funding of stormwater programs, systems and facilities is therefore incidental to the fundamental regulatory function of the city in protecting the public health, safety and welfare. (6)  Provision of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities renders and/or results in both services and benefits to individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city and to all properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city concurrently in a variety of ways as identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses, and the services and benefits differ among the individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents in relation to the demands they impose individually and collectively on the stormwater systems and facilities. (7)  The services and benefits rendered or resulting from the provision of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities may differ over time depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and facilities, and risk exposure. It is not practical to allocate the cost of the city's stormwater management programs, systems and facilities in direct relationship to the services or benefits rendered to or received by individual properties or persons over a brief span of time, but it is both practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among properties and persons in proportion to the long-term demands they impose on the city's stormwater programs, systems and facilities which render or result in services and benefits. (8)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed, installed and acquired through various mechanisms over many years. The future usefulness and value of the existing stormwater systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and of future additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use and enhance the stormwater systems and facilities in the city. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program operating and capital investment needs. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-41. - Definitions.     Credits: Credit shall mean a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service fee or other fees, rates, rentals, charges, fines and penalties to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility, or continuing provision of a service or activity that reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities.     Developed land : Developed land shall mean property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than two hundred (200) square feet of impervious surfaces as defined in this chapter.     Duplexes and triplexes : Duplexes and triplexes shall mean developed land containing two (2) (duplex) or three (3) (triplex) residential dwelling units located within the same building on one or more parcels of land.     Equivalent residential unit : For the purposes of this article, an equivalent residential unit shall mean two thousand nine hundred (2,900) square feet of impervious surfaces. The equivalent residential unit shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service fees to single-family dwelling unit properties or classes of single-family dwelling unit properties and to other developed lands.     Multiple -family dwelling unit residential properties: Multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties shall mean developed land whereon more than one residential dwelling unit is located, and shall include, but not be limited to apartment houses, structures containing multiple residential condominiums located on a single parcel of property, boarding houses, group homes, hotels and motels, personal care homes, homes for the elderly, retirement and nursing homes, and other structures in which more than one family group commonly and normally reside or could reside. In the application of stormwater service fees, multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties shall be treated as other developed lands as defined in this article.     Other developed lands: Other developed lands shall mean, but not be limited to, multiple-family dwelling unit residential unit properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial, retail and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, railroad stations and other transportation facilities covered by impervious surfaces, parking lots and decks, parks and other recreational properties, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, and water and wastewater treatment plants and all other types of developed land except single-family dwelling units.     Single-family dwelling unit: Single-family dwelling unit shall mean developed land upon which is located one principal structure that contains one dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one family, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities. Single-family dwelling units may include houses, duplexes, triplexes, manufactured homes, mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land, and fee-simple ownership or condominium townhomes and attached single-family residential structures located on individual lots or parcels of land and such single units located on more than one individual lot or parcel of land. For the purposes of this article, developed land may be classified as a single-family dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental and/or accessory structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports or small storage buildings, accessory dwellings or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional areas of impervious surfaces such as parking spaces, playgrounds or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship or similar nonresidential uses. Single-family dwelling units shall not include developed land containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple-family residential units that are individually owned but are located on a single parcel of developed land, such as condominiums and cooperatively-owned apartments.     Stormwater service fees : Stormwater service fees shall mean the periodic service fee imposed pursuant to this article by the city for the purpose of recovering and/or funding costs related to stormwater management systems and facilities. The use of the area of impervious surface on each property as a measure to determine the stormwater service fee rate shall not preclude the use of other measures, or of grouping of properties having similar characteristics into classes or categories, grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the city's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service fees may also include certain special charges to individual properties or persons for stormwater management systems and facilities or services related to stormwater management, including but not limited to charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced levels of stormwater service above and beyond the service levels normally provided by city. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-42. - Stormwater service fee rates. (a)  Stormwater service fee rates may be determined and modified from time to time by the board of mayor and commissioners so that the total revenue generated by said fees and any other sources of revenues or other resources allocated to stormwater management by the board of mayor and commissioners shall be sufficient to meet the cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities, including but not limited to the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, operating expense, capital outlays, non-operating expense, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the board of mayor and commissioners of the city. Stormwater service fee revenues in any given year may exceed or be less than the cost of service in that year, provided, however, that the stormwater service fee rate shall be based on meeting the long-term projected cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities. All unencumbered stormwater management funds derived from service fees and other sources of revenue not expended at the end of a fiscal year shall remain in the stormwater management utility enterprise fund account and balances shall be forwarded to the next fiscal year. (b)  The stormwater service charge shall be assessed annually as follows: (1)  Single-family dwelling units. Single-family dwelling units, as defined by this article, shall be billed for one (1) equivalent residential unit, as defined in this article. (2)  Other developed lands. All developed lands not classified as single-family dwelling units, as defined by this article, shall be billed for one (1) equivalent residential unit, as defined by this article, for each two thousand nine hundred (2,900) square feet of impervious surfaces or partial increment thereof located on the property. (c)  The stormwater service charge rate per equivalent residential unit, as defined in this article, shall be established by resolution of the board of mayor and commissioners. Once so established, such rate shall remain in effect until amended by subsequent resolution of the board of mayor and commissioners. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04; Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 5-17-17) 
Sec. 20-43. - Exemptions and credits applicable to stormwater service fees.     Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater utility service fees or receive a credit or offset against such service fees. No exemption, credit, offset or other reduction in stormwater service fees shall be granted based on the age, tax, or economic status, race or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities. A stormwater utility service fee credit technical manual shall be prepared by the city manager and approved by the board of mayor and commissioners specifying the design and performance standards of on-site stormwater systems, facilities and activities that qualify for application of a service fee credit, and how such credits shall be calculated. (1)  Properties not defined in this article as developed land shall be exempt from stormwater service fees. (2)  Railroad tracks shall be exempt from stormwater service fees. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service fees. (3)  Developed land than other single-family dwelling units, including but not limited to multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial, retail and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks and other recreational properties, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, and water and wastewater treatment plants and all other types of developed land except single-family dwelling units may receive a credit against the stormwater service fee applicable to the property. The stormwater utility service fee credit for on-site stormwater control systems or facilities that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces on the subject property shall be proportional to the extent that the on-site stormwater control systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner meets or exceeds the city's development and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit technical manual and other requirements and conditions. The amount of the stormwater utility service fee credit shall not be related to the cost incurred by the property owner for performing, constructing, providing and/or maintaining such programs, systems, facilities, services and activities. (4)  Groups of single-family dwelling units represented by an incorporated homeowner's association that owns, operates and maintains on-site stormwater control systems or facilities, or that provides services or activities that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces located on the subject properties may receive a credit against the stormwater service fee applicable to the properties represented by the homeowner's association. Such service fee credit shall be based on attaining and continuing compliance with the technical requirements and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit technical manual and other requirements and conditions. The stormwater utility service fee credit for on-site stormwater control systems or facilities, or for services or activities provided by groups of single-family dwelling units represented by an incorporated homeowner's association shall be proportional to the extent that the on-site stormwater control systems or facilities provided, operated and maintained by the homeowner's association meets or exceeds the city's development and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit technical manual and other requirements and conditions. Such credits shall be proportionately allocated among all properties represented by the incorporated homeowner's association. The stormwater utility service fee credit for services and activities that reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities shall not be related to the cost of such services and activities to the homeowner's association or any person or entity providing same. (5)  Individual single-family dwelling units required by the city to install on-site detention or that provide services or activities that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces located on the subject properties may receive a credit against the stormwater service fee applicable to the subject property. Such service fee credit shall be based on attaining and continuing compliance with the technical requirements and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit technical manual and other requirements and conditions. The stormwater utility service fee credit for on-site stormwater control systems or facilities, or for services or activities provided by individual single-family dwelling units shall be a fixed amount and shall be subject to the requirement that the on-site stormwater control systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner meet the city's development standards and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit technical manual and other requirements and conditions. The stormwater utility service fee credit for services, facilities and activities shall not be related to the cost of such services and activities to the homeowner or any person or entity providing same. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-44. - Stormwater service fee billing, delinquencies, and collections.     A stormwater service fee bill may be sent though the United States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. The stormwater service fee bill may be billed and collected along with other fees and charges, including but not limited other utility bills, assessments or property taxes, as deemed most effective and efficient by the city manager of the city. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for non-payment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fees and other charges and any associated fines or penalties, including but not limited to interest on delinquent service fees. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent for developed land, the city may backbill for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency during that backbilled period. A late charge of one percent of the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service fee bill shall be charged when a bill becomes delinquent. Thereafter, an additional charge of one percent based on the unpaid bill and any applicable delinquency charge shall be charged for each month the bill remains delinquent. (1)  Stormwater service fee bills for commercial or multiple residential condominium properties may be delivered to the individual condominium owners apportioning the stormwater service fee for the entire property equally among all properties. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 20-45. - Appeals.     Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner and sequence. (1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the city manager or her/his designated representative. In the case of stormwater service fee appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions that influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. (2)  Using information provided by the appellant, the city manager shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within sixty (60) days. In response to an appeal, the city manager may adjust the stormwater service fee applicable to any property in conformance with the general purposes and intent of this article. (3)  All decisions by the city manager shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant. All decisions of the city manager shall be final. (4)  Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting his/her administrative remedies, shall have a right to appeal de novo to the superior court of DeKalb County. (Ord. No. 0415, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Secs. 20-46—20-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POST DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 0510, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 2005, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been included as art. II at the discretion of the editor. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 20-61. - Purpose and intent.     The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: (1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; (2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; (3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; (4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; (5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; (6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and (7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
Sec. 20-62. - Applicability. (a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: (1)  New development that involves the creation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one (1) acre or more; (2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one (1) acre or more; (3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city manager to be a hotspot land use; or (4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items (1) and (2) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. (b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: (1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; (2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; (3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and (4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city manager. 
Sec. 20-63. - Designation of article administrator.     The city manager or his or her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 20-64. - Compatibility with other regulations.     This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
Sec. 20-65. - Severability.     If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
Sec. 20-66. - Stormwater design manual.     The City of Avondale Estates will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
Secs. 20-67—20-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 20-81. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     "Applicant" means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval.     "Channel" means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.     "Conservation easement" means an agreement between a land owner and the City of Avondale Estates or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership.     "Detention" means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge.     "Detention facility" means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.     "Developer" means a person who undertakes land development activities.     "Development" means a land development or land development project.     "Drainage easement" means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement.     "Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan" means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities.     "Extended detention" means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater.     "Extreme flood protection" means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of one hundred (100) years or more.     "Flooding" means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands.     "Greenspace" or "open space" means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state.     "Hotspot" means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.     "Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG)" means a Natural Resource Conservation Service Classification System in which soils are categorized into four (4) runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.     "Impervious cover" means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface.     "Industrial stormwater permit" means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.     "Infiltration" means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil.     "Jurisdictional wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.     "Land development" means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover.     "Land development activities" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development.     "Land development project" means a discrete land development undertaking.     "Inspection and maintenance agreement" means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project.     "New development" means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site.     "Nonpoint source pollution" means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.     "Nonstructural stormwater management practice" or "nonstructural practice" means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels.     "Off-site facility" means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site.     "On-site facility" means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site.     "Overbank flood protection" means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two (2) year through twenty-five (25) year frequency storm events.     "Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site.     "Permit" means the permit issued by the City of Avondale Estates to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity.     "Person" means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     "Post-development" refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require.     "Pre-development" refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions.     "Project" means a land development project.     "Redevelopment" means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution.     "Regional stormwater management facility" or "regional facility" means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced.     "Runoff" means stormwater runoff.     "Site" means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located.     "Stormwater better site design" means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management.     "Stormwater management" means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare.     "Stormwater management facility" means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff.     "Stormwater management measure" means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice.     "Stormwater management plan" means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article.     "Stormwater management system" means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site.     "Stormwater retrofit" means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site.     "Stormwater runoff" means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation.     "Structural stormwater control" means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff.     "Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Secs. 20-82—20-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 20-86. - Permit application requirements.     No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity.     Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the City of Avondale Estates a permit application on a form provided by the City of Avondale Estates for that purpose.     Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: (1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 20-87; (2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 20-88; (3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 20-89, if applicable; (4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 20-90, if applicable; and (5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 20-91. 
Sec. 20-87. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting.     Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer [shall] meet with the City of Avondale Estates for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced.     To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: (1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. (2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. (3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. Local watershed plans, the DeKalb County Greenspace Projection Plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
Sec. 20-88. - Stormwater management plan requirements.     The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section division 4.     This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual.     The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: (1)  [Legal description.] Common address and legal description of site; (2)  [Map.] Vicinity map; (3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. (4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 4; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than fifty (50) percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in division 4 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. (5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 4; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. (6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten (10) percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. (7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES Permit for Construction Activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. (8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. (9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. (10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. (11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Avondale Estates as provided in section 20-89, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section 20-89. (12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the City of Avondale Estates that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
Sec. 20-89. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements.     Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the City of Avondale Estates requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Avondale Estates, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site.     The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the City of Avondale Estates prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval.     The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance.     As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof.     In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Avondale Estates may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in division 6 of this article.     The City of Avondale Estates, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
Sec. 20-90. - Application procedure. (a)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the City of Avondale Estates. (b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 20-86 (two (2) copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). (c)  The City of Avondale Estates shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. (d)  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the City of Avondale Estates shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subparagraph (c) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such re-submittal. (e)  Upon a finding by the City of Avondale Estates that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this ordinance, the City of Avondale Estates may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. (f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: (1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; (2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; (3)  The City of Avondale Estates shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; (4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the City of Avondale Estates; and (5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 20-122. 
Sec. 20-91. - Application review fees.     The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the City of Avondale Estates and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
Sec. 20-92. - Modifications for off-site facilities.     The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility.     A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the City of Avondale Estates which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility.     To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City of Avondale Estates that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: (1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; (2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; (3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltration; (4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or (5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
Secs. 20-93—20-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
Sec. 20-101. - Water quality.     All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: (1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; (2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and (3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the City of Avondale Estates are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
Sec. 20-102. - Stream channel protection.     Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three (3) approaches: (1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; (2)  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; (3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
Sec. 20-103. - Overbank flooding protection.     Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under section 20-102 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
Sec. 20-104. - Extreme flooding protection.     Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
Sec. 20-105. - Structural stormwater controls.     All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from City of Avondale Estates before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City of Avondale Estates may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question.     Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
Sec. 20-106. - Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures.     The use of one (1) or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 20-101. The applicant may, if approved by the City of Avondale Estates, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Sec. 20-107. - Drainage system guidelines.     Stormwater conveyance facilities which may include, but are not limited to, culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one (1) parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: (1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; (2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and (3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
Sec. 20-108. - Dam design guidelines.     Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
Secs. 20-109—20-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
Sec. 20-121. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction.     Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City of Avondale Estates or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the City of Avondale Estates. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance.     All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: (1)  The date and location of the inspection; (2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; (3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and (4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
Sec. 20-122. - Final inspection and as built plans.     Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the City of Avondale Estates is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
Secs. 20-123—20-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND PRACTICES. 
Sec. 20-131. - Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices.     Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article.     A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City of Avondale Estates shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Avondale Estates, may correct the violation as provided in section 20-134 hereof.     Inspection programs by the City of Avondale Estates may be established on any reasonable basis including, but not limited to, routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
Sec. 20-132. - Right-of-entry for inspection.     The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City of Avondale Estates to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
Sec. 20-133. - Records of maintenance activities.     Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the City of Avondale Estates. 
Sec. 20-134. - Failure to maintain.     If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Avondale Estates, after thirty (30) days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City of Avondale Estates may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
Secs. 20-135—20-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
Sec. 20-141. - [Enforcement.]     Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
Sec. 20-142. - Notice of violation.     If the City of Avondale Estates determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site.     The notice of violation shall contain: (1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; (2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; (3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; (4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; (5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and (6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City of Avondale Estates by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours notice shall be sufficient). 
Sec. 20-143. - Penalties.     In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Avondale Estates shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Avondale Estates may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. (1)  Stop work order. The City of Avondale Estates may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. (2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City of Avondale Estates may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. (3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City of Avondale Estates may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated [upon such conditions as the City of Avondale Estates may deem necessary] to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. (4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the City of Avondale Estates shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be sufficient) after the City of Avondale Estates has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the City of Avondale Estates may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the violation remains after receipt of the notice of violation. (5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the City of Avondale Estates may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in City of Avondale Estates Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
Secs. 20-144—20-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION AND OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 0510, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 2005, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been included as art. III at the discretion of the editor. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Sec. 20-161. - Purposes. (a)  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. (b)  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. (c)  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. (d)  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. (e)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. (f)  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. (g)  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. (h)  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. (i)  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. (j)  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. (k)  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. (l)  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
Sec. 20-162. - General regulations. (a)  Applicability of regulations. This conservation subdivision option is available in the following [list of applicable zoning districts and conditions] as a use by right. Applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. (b)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. (c)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two (2) methods, at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: (1)  Calculation: The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: a.  Slopes over twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; b.  The 100-year floodplain; c.  Bodies of open water over five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. (2)  Yield plan: The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
Sec. 20-163. - Application requirements. (a)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, Applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall included the following features: (1)  Property boundaries; (2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; (3)  Topographic contours of no less than ten (10) foot intervals; (4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in division 4 of this article; (5)  General vegetation characteristics; (6)  General soil types; (7)  The planned location of protected open space; (8)  Existing roads and structures; and (9)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. (b)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in division 4, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. (c)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in division 4, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. (d)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and the [subdivision code]. 
Sec. 20-164. - Open space. (a)  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. (b)  Standards to determine open space. (1)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least forty (40) percent of the gross tract area. (2)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: a.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; b.  Buffer zones of at least seventy-five (75) feet width along all perennial and intermittent streams; c.  Slopes above twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. (3)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible. a.  Important historic sites; b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one (1) acre contiguous area; c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight (8) inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; d.  Other significant natural features and scenic view-sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five (5) acres contiguous area; and f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. (4)  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the forty (40) percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. (5)  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. (6)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. (c)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: (1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; (2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; (3)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; (4)  Passive recreation areas; (5)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten (10) percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; (6)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; (7)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; (8)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or (9)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. (d)  Prohibited uses of open space. (1)  Golf courses; (2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; (3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and (4)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. (e)  Ownership and management of open space. (1)  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. (2)  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the board of commissioners; and d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. (3)  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, [the jurisdiction] may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowner's association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowner's association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. (f)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. (1)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one (1) of the following: a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: (i)  a land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or (ii)  a governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this article. If the entity accepting the easement is not [the jurisdiction], then a third right of enforcement favoring [the jurisdiction] shall be included in the easement; b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by [the jurisdiction]. (3)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
Secs. 20-165—20-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 0510, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 2005, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been included as art. IV at the discretion of the editor. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Sec. 20-181. - Findings and purposes. (a)  Findings. Whereas, the City of Avondale Estates finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: (1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; (2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; (3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; (4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; (5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; (6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; (7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; (8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; (9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; (10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and (11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. (b)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltration and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: (1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the City of Avondale Estates for the protection of water resources; and (2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
Sec. 20-182. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     "Buffer" means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by subsection 20-184(a)(1)), lying adjacent to the stream.     "Impervious cover" means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt.     "Land development" means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover.     "Land development activity" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development.     "Land disturbance" means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover.     "Land disturbance activity" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance.     "Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one (1) percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood.     "Parcel" means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records.     "Permit" means the permit issued by the City of Avondale Estates required for undertaking any land development activity.     "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     "Protection area", or "stream protection area" means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream.     "Riparian" means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment.     "Setback" means, with respect to a stream, the area established by subsection 20-184(a)(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream.     "Stream" means any stream, beginning at: 1.  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow; or 2.  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of twenty-five (25) acres or more; or 3.  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than twenty-five (25) acres, the City of Avondale Estates may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Sec. 20-183. - Applicability.     This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 20-182 of this article. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. (1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. b.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two (2) years of the effective date of this article. (2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this ordinance. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. a.  Activities for the purpose of building one (1) of the following: • a stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; • public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; • intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; • public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; • unpaved foot trails and paths; • activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection 20-183(2)a. c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this ordinance takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the City of Avondale Estates on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten (10) days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the City of Avondale Estates to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three (3) years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. After the effective date of this article, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to subsection 20-184(b). 
Sec. 20-184. - Land development requirements. (a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: (1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for fifty (50) feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. (2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for twenty-five (25) feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. (3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. (b)  Variance procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: (1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this article, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the board of appeals finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the Board of Appeals of the City of Avondale Estates may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. (2)  Except as provided above, the Board of Appeals of the City of Avondale Estates shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the board of appeals. The City of Avondale Estates shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Avondale Estates. The City of Avondale Estates shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the article would create an extreme hardship. Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. (3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; e.  At least one (1) alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. (4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
Sec. 20-185. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements.     This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
Sec. 20-186. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties.     Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: (1)  A site plan showing: a.  The location of all streams on the property; b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five (5) foot contour intervals; d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; (2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and (3)  Any other documentation that the City of Avondale Estates may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
Sec. 20-187. - Responsibility.     Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the City of Avondale Estates, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
Sec. 20-188. - Inspection.     The City of Avondale Estates may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the City of Avondale Estates in making such inspections. The City of Avondale Estates shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area.     No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
Sec. 20-189. - Violations, enforcement and penalties.     Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. (1)  Notice of violation. If the City of Avondale Estates determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City of Avondale Estates by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be sufficient). (2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Avondale Estates shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Avondale Estates may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. a.  Stop work order. The City of Avondale Estates may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City of Avondale Estates may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City of Avondale Estates may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City of Avondale Estates may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days (or such greater period as the City of Avondale Estates shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be sufficient) after the City of Avondale Estates has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the City of Avondale Estates may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains after receipt of the notice of violation. e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, the City of Avondale Estates may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in City of Avondale Estates Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 20-190. - Judicial review.     Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of City of Avondale Estates, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. 
Secs. 20-191—20-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
Division 1. - Generally 
Sec. 20-201. - Purpose and intent.     The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: (1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; (2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities or erosion; (3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; (4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally diver floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; (5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and (6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-202. - Applicability.     This article shall be applicable to all areas within the City of Avondale Estates. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-203. - Designation of article administrator.     The city manager or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-204. - Basis for area of special flood hazard—Flood area maps and studies.     For the purpose of this article, the following are adopted by reference: (1)  The flood insurance study (FIS) for DeKalb County, dated May 7, 2001, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are adopted by reference. (2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the one hundred-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Avondale Estates; or b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the City of Avondale Estates. (3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Avondale Estates; or b.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the City of Avondale Estates. (4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at DeKalb County Watershed Management, 1580 Roadhaven Drive, Stone Mountain, Georgia 30083. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-205. - Compatibility with other regulations.     This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-206. - Severability.     If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-207. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.     The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Avondale Estates or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-208. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction.     Adjacent to the future-conditions floodplains means those areas located within the defined horizontal distance from the future-conditions floodplain boundary that are at or lower in elevation than either three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc. with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation).     Appeal means a request for a review of the article administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article.     Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.     Area of special flood hazard is the land subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1—30, A-99, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other flood-prone areas as referenced in section 20-204. All streams with a draining area of one hundred (100) acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated.     Base flood means the flooding having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the one hundred-year flood.     Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood.     Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.     Building see Structure.     Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.     Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.     Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before December 14, 2009.     Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of this article.     Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the contraction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.     FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.     Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or (2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.     Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A.     Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.     Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.     Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding.     Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.     Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot.     Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.     Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one (1) percent change of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the one hundred-year future-conditions flood.     Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood.     Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood.     Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation.     Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building.     Historic structure means any structure that is: (1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered history district; (3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.     Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article.     Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.     Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article the term is synonymous with the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988.     National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.     New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after the effective date of this article and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure.     New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of this article.     North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.     Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site.     Permit means the permit issued by the City of Avondale Estates to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity.     Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: (1)  Built on a single chassis; (2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and (4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.     Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located.     Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.     Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank.     Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway.     Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before damage occurred.     Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include this improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project.     Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.     Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article.     Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Secs. 20-209—20-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 20-221. - Permit application requirements.     No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where as area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity.     Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City of Avondale Estates a permit application on a form provided by the City of Avondale Estates for that purpose.     No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria for this article. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-222. - Floodplain management plan requirements.     An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: (1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; e.  Proposed grading plan; f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. (2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 20-242(2); d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in subsection 20-241(5); and e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). (3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; (4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre and post development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; (5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and (6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article.     The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-223. - Construction stage submittal requirements.     For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the article administrator a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final evaluation certificate shall be provided after completion made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.     Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The article administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-224. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.     Duties of the article administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: (1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; (2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; (3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the article administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of divisions 3 and 4; (4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; (5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; (6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the article administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; (7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); (8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the article administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and (9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city manager and shall be open for public inspection. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Secs. 20-225—20-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 
Sec. 20-231. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. (a)  Studied A zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. (b)  For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the City of Avondale Estates. If future-conditions evaluation data is not available from the City of Avondale Estates, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Avondale Estates. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-232. - Definition of floodway boundaries.     The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the City of Avondale Estates. If floodway data is not available from the City of Avondale Estates, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Avondale Estates. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-233. - General standards. (a)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: (1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; (2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; (3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or (4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. (b)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under (1) above shall also meet the following conditions: (1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations with the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; (2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two (2.0) percent; (3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; (4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 20-234; (5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and (6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City of Avondale Estates using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six (6) months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-234. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments.     An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 20-244 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the City of Avondale Estates prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: (1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; (2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the City of Avondale Estates. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; (3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one (1) every one hundred (100) feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; (4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-235. - Floodway encroachments.     Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwater, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: (1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below; (2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, (3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the City of Avondale Estates until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the City of Avondale Estates. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-236. - Maintenance requirements.     The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The City of Avondale Estates may direct the property owner (at no cost to the City of Avondale Estates) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the City of Avondale Estates. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Secs. 20-237—20-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 
Sec. 20-241. - General standards.     In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: (1)  New construction and substantial improvements of principal building (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 20-233, 20-234, and 20-235 have been met. (2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. (3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. (4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. (5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. (6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. (7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. (8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. (9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. (10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding. (11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. (12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-242. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain.     The following provisions, in addition to those in section 20-241, shall apply: (1)  Residential buildings. a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 20-233, 20-234 and 20-235 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 20-233, 20-234 and 20-235 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 20-241(5). b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvements of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 20-233, 20-234, and 20-235 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 20-233, 20-234, and 20-235 have been met, substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to evaluate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 20-241(5). (2)  Non-residential buildings. a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 20-233, 20-234 and 20-235 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 20-233, 20-234, and 20-235 must have the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to evaluate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 20-241(5). New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 20-233, 20-234 and 20-235 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the article administrator. b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvements of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 20-233, 20-234, and 20-235 have been met. Substantial improvements that have met all of the requirements of sections 20-233, 20-234, and 20-235 must have the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to evaluate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 20-241(5). Substantial improvements that have met all of the requirements of sections 20-233, 20-234, and 20-235 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the article administrator. (3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection 20-241(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. (4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (subsection 20-242(1)b.), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. (5)  Standards for manufactured homes. a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 20-233, 20-234 and 20-235 have been met. b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 20-241(7). (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-243. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. (a)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to evaluate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 20-241(5). (b)  Non-residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to evaluate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 20-241(5). (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-244. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones).     For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), the article administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other sources, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article.     If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: (1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. (2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with subsection 20-241(5). (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-245. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones).     Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: (1)  All substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the floor depth number In feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 20-241(5). (2)  Substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and (3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-246. - Standards for subdivisions. (a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; (b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; (c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 20-222; (d)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; (e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and (f)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City of Avondale Estates to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-247. - Variance procedures.     The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the City of Avondale Estates, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. (1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the city manager who shall forward the same to the board of appeals. All such requests shall be heard by the board of appeals and decided in accordance with procedures set forth in article 16 of the city's zoning ordinance. (2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the board of appeals shall have the right to appeal such decision in accordance with procedure set forth in Section 1611 of the city's zoning ordinance. (3)  The board of appeals shall apply the standards set forth in subsections (4) through (11) of this section when considering an application for variance pursuant to this section. (4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. (5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. (7)  In reviewing such requests, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. (8)  Conditions for variances: a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. b.  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. d.  The city manager shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. (9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the board of appeals or the city manager shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. (10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. (11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-248. - Violations, enforcement and penalties.     Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. (1)  Notice of violation. If the City of Avondale Estates determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the board of appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). (2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the article administrator shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the article administrator may take one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. a.  Stop work order. The article administrator may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The article administrator may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The article administrator may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City of Avondale Estates may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the article administrator shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the article administrator has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the article administrator may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the article administrator may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such persons shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 18-04, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Secs. 20-249—30-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-03, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 22, 2018, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 20-301—20-309, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to erosion, sedimentation and pollution control and derived from Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, adopted July 26, 2010. 
Sec. 20-301. - Title.     This article will be known as "City of Avondale Estates Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." (Ord. No. 18-03, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-302. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated:     Best management practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted.     Board means the board of natural resources.     Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.     Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.     Coastal Marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282.     Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC).     CPESC means Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc.     Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation.     Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR).     Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure.     Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative.     District means the DeKalb Soil and Water Conservation District.     Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources.     Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one (1) place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.     Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.     Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 20-304(c) of this article.     Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation.     Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction.     Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design.     Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.     Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.     Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 20-303(5).     Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot.     Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8.     Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins.     Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.     Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present.     NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit.     NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit.     Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions.     Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water.     Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article.     Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site.     Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.     Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal.     Roadway drainage structure mean a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled roadway consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.     Sediment means the solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.     Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity.     Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the DeKalb Soil and Water Conservation District.     Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.     State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f).     State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation.     Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.     Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs.     Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.     Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.     Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. (Ord. No. 18-03, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-303. - Exemptions.     This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: (1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". (2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; (3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; (4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; (5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; (6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 20-304(c), of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; (7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; (8)  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; (9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; (10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and (11)  Any public water system reservoir. (Ord. No. 18-03, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-304. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. (a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 20-304(b) and (c). of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES General Permit. (b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. (1)  Best management practices as set forth in section 20-304(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). (2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. (3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. (4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. (5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in section 20-304(c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(c). (c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: (1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; (2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; (3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; (4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; (5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; (6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; (7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; (8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; (9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq.; (10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; (11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; (12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; (13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; (14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 20-304(b)(2) of this article; (15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five (25) foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and (16)  There is established a fifty (50) foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five (25) foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and (17)  There is established a twenty-five (25) foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a twenty-five (25) foot buffer would consume at least eighteen (18) percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than five hundred (500) square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. (d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 20-304(b) and (c) of this article. (e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (Ord. No. 18-03, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-305. - Application/permit process. (a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. (b)  Application requirements. (1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Avondale Estates without first obtaining a permit from the City of Avondale Estates to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. (2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Avondale Estates and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 20-305(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 20-304(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by nine (9) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. (3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. (4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 20-304(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 20-305(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. (5)  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. (6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. (c)  Plan requirements. (1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 20-304(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. (2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. (d)  Permits. (1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. (2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 20-304(c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 20-305(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. (3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. (4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. (5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. (6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). (Ord. No. 18-03, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-306. - Inspection and enforcement. (a)  The City of Avondale Estates will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. (b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. (c)  The City of Avondale Estates shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. (d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. (e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. (f)  The Division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. (Ord. No. 18-03, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-307. - Penalties and incentives. (a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. (b)  Stop-work orders. (1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; (2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; (3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. (4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. (c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 20-305(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. D.  Monetary penalties. (1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. (Ord. No. 18-03, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-308. - Education and certification. (a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. (b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. (c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. (d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. (Ord. No. 18-03, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-309. - Administrative appeal judicial review. (a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the City of Avondale Estates Municipal Court within thirty (30) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. (b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. (Ord. No. 18-03, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Sec. 20-310. - Effectivity, validity and liability. (a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 22nd day of October, 2018. (b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. (c)  Liability. (1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. (2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. (Ord. No. 18-03, § 2(Att.), 10-22-18) 
Secs. 20-311—20-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FENCES AND WALLS 
Sec. 20-400. - Definitions.     [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:]     Drainage way means a conduit, ditch, or the like for draining water from an area.     Drainage swale means a natural recessed area in the earth's surface that provides storm water treatment by allowing portions of the runoff water to infiltrate into the ground versus completely running off to an outfall.     Drainage ditch means a long narrow excavation in the earth for carrying off excessive water.     Depression area means a recessed or lowered space that temporarily stores water runoff along impervious surfaces such as parking lots, streets, driveways, etc. (Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 20-401. - Fences and walls.     No fence or wall may be installed nor permitted to be installed in such a location as to obstruct or impede the flow of water in any drainage way, drainage swale, drainage ditch or depression area. (Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 8-20-2012) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— The zoning ordinance, as amended, is on file in the office of the city clerk. Cross reference— Historic districts, § 5-231 et seq.; signs and advertising, § 5-361 et seq. 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Printed herein is Ordinance No. 83, as adopted by the board of mayor and commissioners on December 4, 1989. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Cross reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations, § 5-201 et seq.; approved plat required for new streets, § 17-20. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 20-1. - Definitions.     For the purpose of this ordinance, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this section. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word "herein" means "in these regulations"; the word "regulations" means "these regulations"; and the masculine "he" or "his" also means "she" or "hers." A "person" includes a corporation, a partnership, or an unincorporated association of persons such as a club; "shall" is always mandatory; "may" is permissive; a "building" includes a "structure"; a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof; "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them by this section:     Alley or service drive. A minor but permanent public serviceway which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.     Applicant. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his legally appointed representative. Written consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises on all applications.     Building. Any roofed structure enclosed and isolated by exterior walls and constructed or used for residence, business, industry, or other public or private purposes; or accessory thereto whether stationary or movable.     Building official. The building official and codes enforcement officer of the city.     Building setback line. The minimum horizontal distances allowed between the future street right-of-way line (front lot line) and the principal building or structure on a lot or any projection thereof except the projections of unenclosed porches, steps, eaves, gutters, and similar fixtures as permitted in the zoning ordinance.     Building site. A parcel or lot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or structure.     Block. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, railway lines, or boundary lines of the city.     City. The City of Avondale Estates, Georgia.     City clerk. The city clerk of the City of Avondale Estates who also serves as secretary to the planning and zoning board and clerk to the board of mayor and commissioners.     City engineer. An individual who is a registered civil engineer, either appointed or under contract with the city.     County. DeKalb County, Georgia.     Crosswalk. A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, ten (10) feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor-propelled vehicles are excluded, and which is designed to improve or provide access to adjacent roads or lots; also referred to as a pedestrian walkway.     Cul-de-sac. A local street with only one (1) outlet and permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around.     Developer. The owner of the land proposed to be subdivided or his representative. Written consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises as a part of the application.     Dwelling unit. One (1) or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for use on a basis involving owner occupancy, rental, or lease on a monthly or longer basis with provisions for cooking, eating, and sleeping.     Easement. A grant by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property.     Final plat. A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal, engineering, and other information and certification necessary for recording.     Frontage. The distance for which the front boundary line of a lot and the street right-of-way line are coincident.     Governing body. The board of mayor and commissioners of the City of Avondale Estates.     Improvements. Sidewalks, street work, drainage structures, sewer and water systems, and other facilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed by the developer and to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways and easements, as are necessary.     Lot. A portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for a development or both. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a road, alley, or crosswalk may be included. All lots shall front on and have ingress and egress by means of a public right-of-way.     Lot, corner. A lot abutting on two (2) or more streets at their intersection.     Lot, depth. The distance between front and rear lot lines. If front and rear lines of said lot are not parallel, the least dimension shall be deemed to be the mean distance between them and shall be deemed the lot depth.     Lot, double frontage. A lot which has frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets.     Lot line, front. The line separating the lot from the street, easement, or principal access.     Lot line, rear. The boundary opposite and more or less parallel to the front lot line.     Lot line, side. Any lot boundary line which is not a front line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is an exterior side lot line. Any other side lot line is an interior side lot line.     Lot width. The distance between one (1) side lot line to the other side lot line measured at the minimum front yard setback line.     Master plan. A comprehensive plan, which may consist of several maps, data, and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto approved by the governing body, indicating the general location for major streets, parks or other public utilities, zoning districts, or other similar information.     Owner. Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, or trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these regulations.     Planning and zoning board. The appointed planning and zoning board of the City of Avondale Estates.     Plat. A map indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of land which is intended to be filed for record.     Preliminary plat. A drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate its suitability with the master plan or land use plan, if any, of the city. The preliminary plat provides for approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat.     Public improvement. Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvements, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established.     Public notice. The posting of a sign in a conspicuous place on the frontage of the property in question which contains information as to the purpose, date, time and place of the public hearing; letters of notification of the hearing to the abutting property owners; and publication of such notice in the city's legal organ as provided herein.     Right-of-way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, sidewalk, crosswalk, planting strip, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, landscape buffer, or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land-platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, landscape buffer, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established.     Screening. A buffer to provide acoustical and visual protection between incompatible land uses. It is a strip at least ten (10) feet wide, densely planted (or having equivalent natural growth) with shrubs or trees at least eight (8) feet high at the time of planting, of a type that forms a year-round dense screen at least eight (8) feet high, or an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six (6) feet high. The screening shall be maintained in good condition at all times and may have no signs affixed to or hung in relation to the outside thereof. The governing body reserves the right to approve the type of screening used.     Sidewalk. That part of the street which has been set apart for use by pedestrians, as distinguished from that portion set apart and used for vehicles.     Street. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way set aside for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated, which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. The following definitions are intended to distinguish between different categories of streets: (1)  Principal arterials. Those streets and highways which serve major activity centers and emphasize traffic service rather than abutting land access. Principal arterials include all limited access freeways, expressways, parkways, or roads and carry a high proportion of total area travel on a minimum of mileage. (2)  Minor arterials. Those streets which interconnect with the principal arterial system and provide service to trips of moderate length with emphasis on both traffic service and land access. Minor arterials provide intracommunity continuity but should not penetrate identifiable neighborhoods. (3)  Collector streets. Those streets which distribute trips from arterial streets to their ultimate origin or destination. Collector streets provide a greater level of land access than arterial streets, may enter or traverse identifiable neighborhoods, and rarely serve significant volumes of through traffic. (4)  Local streets. All streets not classified as arterial or collector. Local streets provide land access with service to through traffic being actively discouraged.     Street right-of-way line. The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a continuous street.     Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having permanent location on the ground including, but not limited to, tennis courts, fences, swimming pools, and buildings.     Subdivider. Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, or trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein.     Subdivision. The division, development, or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land, regardless of its prospective use, into two (2) or more lots either by plat or by metes and bounds description. Where appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" shall mean the aggregate of all parcels held by one (1) owner or combination of owners and designated to be developed or sold as parcels, related to each other or interdependent through the use of streets, easements or other right-of-way or public facility. For the purpose of these regulations, the following shall not be deemed subdivisions: (1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots, where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are in accord with the rules and regulations contained herein and with the zoning ordinance as amended and provided that the city manager and city clerk are notified of such combination. (2)  The separation of previously combined, platted lots provided that the lots created are not reduced below minimum sizes required by the zoning ordinance and provided that the city manager and city clerk are notified of such separation through a plat. (3)  Division of land into two (2) or fewer lots, provided: a.  Each lot abuts an existing public street; b.  No substantial alteration of existing utility installations is involved; c.  The lots created are not less than the minimum sizes required by the zoning ordinance; d.  The city manager and city clerk are notified of such division of land through a plat and execute a formal, written release of the property for recording purposes. (4)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining properties provided that additional lots are not thereby created and that any redrawn lots, as a result of such sale or exchange, are not reduced below minimum sizes required by the zoning ordinance. (5)  The division or sale of land by judicial decree.     Yard. A required space on the same lot with a principal building which is open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky, except where encroachments or accessory buildings and other structures are expressly permitted within any yard area and provided they do not create a traffic safety hazard.     Yard, front. A yard situated between the front foundation of the principal building and the front lot line extending the full width of the lot.     Yard, rear. A yard situated between the rear of the principal building and the rear lot line and extending the full width of the lot.     Yard, side. A yard extending the total depth of a lot between the front and rear yards and being that area between the side lot line and that line or lines established by the side wall or walls of the principal structure.     Zoning ordinance. An ordinance of the city regulating uses of property, buildings, and structures in various zoning districts and establishing standards for development of property, buildings, and structures in these districts for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, or general welfare of the city. Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-2. - Purpose.     The purpose of this ordinance is to encourage the development of an economically sound and stable community; to assure the provision of required streets, sidewalks, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments; to assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; to assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational and other public purposes; and, in general, to promote the safety, public health, convenience, and general welfare of the people of the city. 
Sec. 20-3. - Same—Compliance with zoning [ordinance].     The proposed land development shall comply with all requirements as stipulated in the zoning ordinance unless modifications are granted as provided for in section 20-4. 
Sec. 20-4. - Modifications—Large scale and/or planned unit developments. (a)  The requirements of these regulations may be modified in the case of a large scale or planned unit development which is not subdivided into customary lots, blocks, and streets, if the modifications are reviewed by the planning and zoning board, are approved by the governing body, and are in conformity with the purpose and intent of this ordinance. (b)  Modifications of the provisions of these regulations may be authorized by the governing body, when in its opinion and after review by the planning and zoning board, undue hardship may result from strict compliance and/or when modifications will not adversely affect the general public. (c)  Application for modifications shall be filed in writing with the building official and shall be indicated on the preliminary plat. 
Sec. 20-5. - Suitability of land for development.     The governing body shall not approve the subdivision or parts thereof if, from adequate investigation conducted by public entities concerned, it has been determined that, in the best interest of the public, the site is not suitable for development purposes of the kind proposed. 
Sec. 20-6. - Residential uses prohibited for certain land.     Land subject to flooding and land deemed topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life, or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. This land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions. 
Sec. 20-7. - Recording of plat. (a)  No plat of a subdivision may be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county except a final plat on which is inscribed the approval of the governing body. (b)  No lot shall be sold by reference to any subdivision plat, whether recorded or not, if the plat is made after the effective date of this ordinance, unless the plat shall have been finally approved by the governing body. 
Sec. 20-8. - Administration and enforcement.     It shall be the duty of the building official and he is hereby given the authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 20-9. - Conflict with other laws.     In the event the regulations of this ordinance conflict with any prior ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail. 
Sec. 20-10. - Conference prior to preparation of preliminary plat.     Prior to the preparation of the preliminary subdivision plat, the subdivider shall confer with the building official for information affecting development of the proposed subdivision. 
Secs. 20-11—20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC NOTIFICATION 
Sec. 20-21. - Notification—Legal organ.     The city clerk shall cause a legal notice to be published in the city's legal organ stating the date, time, place, and purpose of the required hearing. Said notice shall be published once a week, for two (2) consecutive weeks, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. 
Sec. 20-22. - Same—Abutting property owners.     The city clerk shall give notification of the application by regular mail to all abutting property owners within the city limits as shown by city tax records. Such notification shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the required public hearing and shall include a description of the application and the date, time, and place of the public hearing. 
Sec. 20-23. - Same—Posting of sign.     The building official shall post, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the required public hearing in a conspicuous location on the property for which an application has been submitted, a sign or signs containing information as to the purpose, date, time, and place of the public hearing; such sign shall contain the following information: Application for Subdivision and Development. Public Hearing to be held at _____ p.m. on ________, ________ at ___________. For information, call ___________. This is an Avondale Estates City Sign. Do Not Remove. 
Secs. 20-24—20-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 
Sec. 20-31. - Preliminary plat—Application.     The preliminary plat provides for approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. Whenever any subdivision of the land is proposed to be made, the subdivider shall first submit to the building official the following: (1)  A written letter of application; (2)  Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat; (3)  A preliminary plat fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) (payable to the City of Avondale Estates) to defray public notifications and hearing costs. 
Sec. 20-32. - Same—Preparation.     Preliminary plats for subdivisions shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer as follows: (1)  Ten (10) copies of black or blue line prints and ten (10) copies of all other documents required by this article for submission to the building official; (2)  Clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not less than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch; (3)  A maximum sheet size of twenty-four (24) inches in width and thirty-six (36) [inches] in length and a minimum sheet size of not less than twelve (12) inches in width and sixteen (16) inches in length; (4)  Sufficient blank space to accommodate required certifications. 
Sec. 20-33. - Same—Required information. (a)  The following existing conditions shall be shown on the preliminary plat: (1)  Boundary lines. Perimeter boundary of overall tract, bearings (if available), and distances, referred to a land lot corner or known street intersection. (2)  Easements. Location, width, and purpose of easements. (3)  Streets on, adjacent to tract. Name, right-of-way, and location of streets on and adjacent to the tract. (4)  Contour data. Significant contour data at a maximum of not more than five-foot elevation intervals to determine preliminary design of the proposed improvements and other dependent features; the source of this data shall be written on the plat. (5)  Other conditions on tract. Other conditions on the tract such as watercourses, existing structures, intermediate regional floodplain contour, and other significant features. (6)  Title and certificates. Title under which proposed subdivision is to be recorded, if known, with name of owner and name of designers. (7)  Geographical data. Numerical and graphic scales, north arrow, date of survey, date of plat, land lot and district numbers and lines, city and county names, and limit lines. (8)  Prior subdivisions. Name and reference of any former subdivision crossing any of the land shown on the plat. (b)  The following proposed conditions shall be shown on the preliminary plat: (1)  Street names; right-of-way widths including necessary right-of-way required for present or future widening of principal and minor arterials and collector, local, or other streets as shown on the county or city thoroughfare plan. (2)  Sidewalks, parking areas, street lights, and planting strips. (3)  Lot lines, lot numbers, block numbers, and proposed house or building numbers. (4)  Sites, if any, to be dedicated or reserved for parks, schools, playgrounds, or other public uses, together with the purpose and the conditions or limitations of this dedication, if any. (5)  Sites, if any, reserved for use other than single-family dwellings, including buffered areas and site location of water runoff retention or impoundment areas. (6)  Building setback lines, i.e., front, rear, and side yard setback lines. (7)  Percent of lot coverage by proposed principal building structure. (8)  Stages of development, if any. (c)  The stamp of the registered engineer shall be shown on the preliminary plat. (d)  Letters indicating availability of underground utility service to the proposed subdivision from public utility companies, i.e., electrical power, natural gas, telephone, and cable, shall be submitted with the preliminary plat application. 
Sec. 20-34. - Same—Review by building official. (a)  The building official shall review all applications for completeness and submit complete applications to the secretary of the planning and zoning board within fifteen (15) calendar days of submittal from the subdivider/developer. (b)  The building official shall review the application with the board in a work session to be called within fifteen (15) calendar days of submittal of the application to the building official. 
Sec. 20-35. - Same—Review by county departments. (a)  The building official shall forward three (3) copies each of the application and the preliminary plat to the county public works department—development for review of water/sewer availability, required road improvements, potential drainage problems, and necessary ties to adjoining properties. (b)  The building official shall forward one (1) copy each of the application and the preliminary plat to the county public safety department—fire services bureau for review. 
Sec. 20-36. - Same—Review by and public hearing before planning and zoning board. (a)  The board shall review the application for conformance to the regulations of this ordinance and the zoning ordinance, and shall submit its report to the governing body within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the application from the building official. (b)  The application shall be considered at a public hearing. (c)  Public notification of the hearing shall be given in accordance with article II of this ordinance. (d)  The secretary shall notify the applicant of the time and place of the meeting by mail at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing. (e)  At the public hearing, the board shall make a recommendation for approval, denial, deferral, or no recommendation. An action by the board to defer the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered; such statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application and no further notice, such as that indicated in article II of this ordinance, is required. (f)  Comments, recommendations and changes, if any, shall be marked on one (1) copy of the preliminary plat which shall be returned to the building official. 
Sec. 20-37. - Same—Review by and public hearing before governing body. (a)  The building official shall submit the application and preliminary plat with all comments, recommendations, and changes, if any, as a result of review by the planning and zoning board and the county public works department to the governing body. (b)  The application shall be considered at a public hearing. (c)  Public notification of the hearing shall be given in accordance with article II of this ordinance. (d)  The city clerk shall notify the applicant of the time and place of the meeting by mail at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing. (e)  At the public hearing, the governing body shall approve, deny, or defer the preliminary plat application. An action by the board to defer the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered; such statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application and no further notice, such as that indicated in article II of this ordinance, is required. 
Sec. 20-38. - Same—Denial by governing body.     If approval of the preliminary plat is denied by the governing body, copies of the preliminary plat shall be assembled by the building official with the action of the governing body and reasons for denial shown thereon. All copies shall be certified by the building official. The building official shall retain one (1) copy and return the remaining copies to the applicant. 
Sec. 20-39. - Same—Approval by governing body. (a)  If approved, all copies of the preliminary plat shall be assembled by the building official with all changes as recommended by the county public works department—development and the planning and zoning board and as approved by the governing body shown thereon or attached thereto. (b)  All copies with approval of the governing body indicated thereon shall be certified by the building official. (c)  Seven (7) copies shall be filed with the building official and three (3) copies shall be returned to the subdivider/developer. (d)  Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the engineering plans and final plat which will be submitted for approval of the governing body and recorded upon fulfillment of the requirements of this ordinance and the conditions of the approval of preliminary plat, if any. (e)  If the final plat is not submitted within eighteen (18) months of the preliminary approval, such approval shall expire. 
Sec. 20-40. - Design of water system. (a)  Upon receiving the approved preliminary plat from the building official, the subdivider/developer will furnish a sepia of the proposed subdivision plat to the county public works department. (b)  The county shall design on this plat the location and size of all pipes, valves, fire hydrants, fittings and stubs to lots. It will then furnish to the subdivider/developer copies of this plat with a list of materials which will include the total linear feet of main to be extended. 
Secs. 20-41—20-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENGINEERING PLANS 
Sec. 20-51. - Engineering plans—Layouts required. (a)  After approval by the governing body of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall have a registered civil engineer and land surveyor prepare complete engineering plans (except for the water system which shall be designed by the county public works department). These shall be provided to the building official for submission to the county public works department and the county soil and water conservation district for review and approval prior to submission to the governing body. (b)  Engineering plans for review and approval by the county public works department shall include: (1)  Subdivision sewer plan showing the proposed sewer in plan and profile; (2)  Subdivision street improvements plan including surface drainage plans. (c)  Engineering plans for review and approval by the county soil and water conservation district shall include the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for the subdivision. (d)  The water system shall be as designed by the county public works department. (e)  In addition to the above, existing and proposed covenants and restrictions shall be submitted by the subdivider/developer. 
Sec. 20-52. - Same—Sewer layout. (a)  The proposed subdivision sewer system shall be designed by a registered civil engineer and the design shall be in accordance with the standards as shown in article VII of this ordinance. (b)  Four (4) copies of the subdivision sewer plan showing the proposed sewer in plan and profile shall be prepared from an actual engineering survey, originating at the existing sewer, prepared on standard twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch plan and profile sheets, and shall include the following information and data: (1)  Station and deflection angle at each manhole; (2)  Invert elevation at each manhole; (3)  Grade of sewer between each manhole expressed in percent; (4)  Benchmark elevation and description at least each one thousand (1,000) linear feet along sewer line; whenever possible, United States Coastal and Geodetic Service data shall be used; (5)  Title of subdivision with section number of unit involved; (6)  Street names, lot numbers, block numbers, and house numbers; (7)  Property or lot lines and present owners if sewer is located on private property. 
Sec. 20-53. - Same—Streets and surface drainage layout. (a)  Four (4) copies of the complete plans and profiles for subdivision street improvements including surface drainage shall be submitted for approval by the county public works department. The plans shall be prepared from an actual engineering survey on standard twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch plan and profile sheets. (b)  The surface drainage layout shall include all measures to: (1)  Minimize off-site erosion during periods of peak flow; (2)  Control run-off. If retention ponds or similar structures are necessary, the methods and all calculations used to design the structure(s) should be clearly specified. (c)  The surface drainage plan shall show the size, length, and location of proposed surface drainage pipe or structures and shall be based on recognized hydrological formulas. 
Sec. 20-54. - Same—Water supply layout.     The engineering plans shall show the water system as designed by the county public works department and shall include, but not be limited to: (1)  Layout of existing and proposed water pipes, mains, and valves; (2)  Tie-in with existing system; (3)  Fire hydrant locations. 
Sec. 20-55. - Same—Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.     The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall conform to the provisions of the city's ordinance pertaining to same, a copy of which is on file with the city clerk. 
Sec. 20-56. - Same—Required certifications.     Once engineering plans have been approved, and prior to submission to the governing body, there shall be a certification placed upon the engineering plans from: (1)  The chief engineer of the county water system; (2)  The county soil and water conservation district; (3)  The county public works department as to sewer system requirements and plans; (4)  The county public works department as to street improvements, including surface drainage; (5)  Any other certificates of approval which may be required by city, county, state, or federal agencies; (6)  Engineering certification bearing the engineer's signature and state registration number and stating: "I hereby certify that these plans correctly represent data compiled or certified by me on ________, _____, of property shown and described hereon." 
Sec. 20-57. - Same—Submission to governing body for approval. (a)  Engineering plans with the required certifications shall be reviewed by the building official. (b)  The building official shall certify that the engineering plans are in compliance with all zoning, environmental, and subdivision requirements. (c)  The building official shall cause sufficient copies of the certified engineering plans to be made and shall forward these plans to the governing body for final approval and certification. (d)  The governing body shall review the engineering plans for aesthetic purposes and shall indicate thereon any necessary changes. (e)  Upon approval of the engineering plans by the governing body, the mayor shall execute thereon the following certification: All requirements of the Avondale Estates subdivision regulations relative to the preparation and submittal of a preliminary plat and engineering plans having been fulfilled, approval of these engineering plans is hereby granted, subject to further provisions of said regulations. This certificate shall expire ________, _____. This certificate is authorization to request a land-disturbing permit and an improvement permit for construction and installation of required improvements as indicated on engineering plans and as approved by the county and the city. This _____ day of ________, _____. _____Mayor, City of Avondale Estates, Georgia Attest: _____City Clerk, City of Avondale Estates, Georgia (c)  The building official shall cause sufficient copies of the certified engineering plans to be made for filing with the city clerk, the building official, and the county public works department. Three (3) copies shall be returned to the subdivider/developer. 
Secs. 20-58—20-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REQUIREMENTS PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS 
Sec. 20-61. - Summary of requirements.     No construction work on required improvements, as defined in article VI of this ordinance, shall be undertaken on a proposed land subdivision until: (1)  The county public works department-development has reviewed the preliminary plat for water/sewer availability, required road improvements, potential drainage problems, and necessary ties to adjoining properties. (2)  The planning and zoning board has held a public hearing for the review of the preliminary plat and made recommendation thereof. (3)  The governing body has held a public hearing and approved the preliminary plat. (4)  Engineering plans including, but not limited to, water, sewer, streets, and surface drainage, have been approved by the county public works department with final approval by the governing body. (5)  A land-disturbing permit has been obtained in accordance with the provisions of the city's soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. (6)  An improvement permit has been obtained in accordance with section 20-62 of this ordinance. (7)  The street giving access thereto has been accepted as a public street by the governing body in accordance with this ordinance, or such street had attained legal status of a public street prior to the proposed subdivision. 
Sec. 20-62. - Improvement permit. (a)  Upon acceptability and approval of the plans for required improvements as defined in article VI of this ordinance, the city shall issue an improvement permit. (b)  The developer shall pay a fee in the amount of six dollars ($6.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the cost for the required improvements to defray the cost of inspections. 
Secs. 20-63—20-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
Sec. 20-71. - Installation and maintenance. (a)  Every subdivider shall, at his own expense, be required to install, or have installed by the appropriate public entity, the improvements required by this article. (b)  The subdivider shall be responsible for maintenance as provided in this article. 
Sec. 20-72. - Street improvements and surface drainage. (a)  Street improvements shall be provided in each subdivision in accordance with specifications of the county and the state department of transportation in effect at the time the work is placed under contract. These specifications shall control the materials and equipment as well as the construction method. Standard plans and specifications may be obtained from the county public works department. The plans are cross-sections and construction drawings for a graded street, paved street, driveway section for curbed streets, brick catchbasin, and barricade for deadend streets. (b)  A storm/surface drainage system shall be installed in every new subdivision. This system shall be designed to serve the entire subdivision. (c)  The construction limits shall be cleared of those trees which cannot feasibly be preserved, stumps, brush, and rubbish before grading operations are begun. No trees, stumps, brush, or rubbish shall be placed in fill sections within the construction limits. Such debris shall be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the city. (d)  The size, length, and location of all surface drainage pipes or structures shall be shown on the engineering plans and final plat and shall be subject to the approval of the county public works department. Installation, backfilling, and compaction shall be in accordance with state transportation department specifications, sections 106 and 520. (e)  Curbing shall be required on all streets and shall be furnished and installed by the developer. All curbing shall be placed in firm, well-compacted subgrade, and curbing displaced prior to acceptance for maintenance by the city shall be reset or replaced. The minimum classes and types of curbing permitted are: (1)  Granite curbing, class D or better; (2)  Six-inch by twenty-four-inch combination class A concrete curb and gutter. Curbs and gutters shall be in accordance with county standards and specifications. These specifications may be obtained from the county public works department. (f)  If street improvements have been completed according to specifications and duly inspected by the county public works department and the city, a maintenance bond shall be required equal to ten (10) percent of the estimated construction cost. In lieu of a maintenance bond, funds may be placed in escrow with the city. (g)  The subdivider/developer shall be required to sign a maintenance agreement with the city, by which the developer shall agree to maintain the streets and rights-of-way for a period of twelve (12) months. During the developer-maintenance period, inspections shall be made and the developer shall be instructed by letter as to what corrections, if any, must be made. (h)  At the end of the twelve-month developer-maintenance period, a final inspection shall be made and the developer and bonding company, if applicable, shall be notified of any corrections to be made. If the work is acceptable at this time, the bond shall be canceled or the escrow funds released. (i)  If required corrections are not made within thirty (30) days of notice, the city shall have the authority to make these corrections, or cause to be made, at the expense of the bonding company. In cases where funds are being held in escrow by the city, the cost of making these corrections shall be deducted from these funds, and the developer shall be charged with any costs above the amount of escrow funds. (j)  In the discretion of the governing body, the maintenance period may be extended for a definite period of time sufficient to make the necessary corrections by a written agreement between the city, the developer, and the developer's surety, based upon any of the following: (1)  Weather conditions; (2)  The labor market; (3)  Material market; (4)  Circumstances beyond the control of the developer or the city unforeseen by either party. (k)  The developer shall be responsible for any damages done to work already completed by the developer to the time of the extension agreement, whether or not it had been accepted by the city. 
Sec. 20-73. - Sidewalks and planting strip. (a)  Sidewalks shall be installed by the subdivider/developer and shall provide for continuous public access on both sides of a street. (b)  A planting strip shall be provided between each street and sidewalk. Such planting strips shall be planted with appropriate hardwood trees as allowed in the city's tree ordinance. 
Sec. 20-74. - Street signs. [(a)  Reserved.] (b)  Street signs shall conform to standards as established by the city. (c)  The subdivider/developer shall pay to the city an amount to cover the cost of each street name sign. This will be paid prior to recording of the final plat. 
Sec. 20-75. - Street lights. (a)  Street lights shall be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions. (b)  The governing body shall approve the location and type of street lights in the subdivision. (c)  After acceptance of the street lights in the subdivision by the governing body, the city will assume responsibility for payment of the monthly usage fee. 
Sec. 20-76. - Monuments and iron pins.     Permanent monuments shall be accurately set where plat boundary lines intersect with lot lines and shall consist of a thirty-inch length of two-inch galvanized iron pipe filled with concrete and capped with a brass cap upon which the exact location of the corner shall be stamped. Iron pins shall be placed at all corners of each lot, and each such monument shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches long and one-half inch in diameter. 
Sec. 20-77. - Water system. (a)  All materials for water mains in subdivisions shall conform to specifications of the American Water Works Association and will be purchased from the county. (b)  After design of the water system by the county, the subdivider/developer shall take bids from contractors and when the contract is awarded, furnish the county with a copy of the contract. (c)  Fire hydrants shall be installed in subdivisions so that all residential property will meet the requirements of the fire prevention code of the city and county. (d)  Water valves shall be installed in subdivisions to effect a minimum cutoff of mains in case of shutdowns. (e)  Stub-out water services shall be installed in subdivisions in all cases where necessary to avoid cutting of pavement and shall be placed where specified by the county. (f)  Cuts in existing subdivision street pavement and driveways shall be patched by the contractor. The contractor shall maintain the cuts in good condition until a permanent patch is made. When necessary to abate dust, mud or potholing, the contractor shall furnish and install crushed rock or cold patch asphaltic concrete to the surface of the trench. (g)  The contractor shall furnish and place sufficient barricades and lights to adequately protect the work on subdivision water improvements and to protect all vehicular and pedestrian traffic. No street shall be completely blocked without the permission of the governing body. (h)  A thorough cleanup shall be made before final acceptance of subdivision water improvements by the county. All excess rock shall be removed, private and public property shall be restored to original condition, and all excess pipe and fittings shall be returned to the county's storage yard. (i)  Upon completion of the job of installing water improvements in a subdivision, the subdivider/developer's engineer and the county will measure the work done showing station numbers to all valves, fire hydrants, and other pertinent fittings including stub locations. The subdivider/developer will furnish the county a copy of this report showing the work done. He will then furnish the county with a final cost of the labor to install the materials. (j)  The contractor shall submit to the county an as-built drawing showing the location, lot number, and street address for each service lateral installed in a subdivision. (k)  The contractor shall maintain for a period of one (1) year from the date of final acceptance by the county all subdivision water mains, appurtenances, trenches, and other disturbed surfaces. The contractor shall be responsible for repairs to any leaking pipe, fittings, etc. Should any trench settle, the contractor shall promptly furnish and place fill to original grade. Should any leak or trench settlement occur under any pavement, the contractor will be held responsible for the cost of replacing pavement. (l)  The subdivider/developer shall comply with all requirements of the county pertaining to the water system installation. 
Sec. 20-78. - Sewer system. (a)  Sanitary sewers shall be laid in all streets, service connections installed to property lines, and connections made to trunk line sewers in all subdivisions. (b)  The subdivision sewer installation shall be done under the direction of the county public works department and shall conform exactly to the approved plan with no exceptions unless approved by that department. Sewer installation may be done by the developer or a contractor approved by the county public works department on the basis of past performance, experience, equipment, and ability to do acceptable work. (c)  Materials used in subdivision sewer improvements shall conform to the specifications of the county as to pipe, brick, fine aggregate, water, cement, cement mortar, concrete, castings and other materials. Installation shall conform to all standards and specifications as set forth by the county public works department. (d)  The subdivision sewer installation will not be accepted by the county until the developer has complied with all sewer requirements of the county. 
Secs. 20-79—20-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sec. 20-91. - Access.     Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a public street. 
Sec. 20-92. - Conformance to land use plan and thoroughfare plan.     All streets and other features of adopted comprehensive land use, major thoroughfare, or master plans, if any, of the city shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the requirements indicated on the adopted plans. 
Sec. 20-93. - Park sites. (a)  When features of other plans adopted by the city, such as parks or other land for public uses, are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall be identified and dedicated by the subdivider to the city when the final plat is recorded. (b)  Parks and playgrounds may be dedicated to the city with the approval of the governing body. If so dedicated and accepted, the land shall be used exclusively by the city for recreational purposes. (c)  Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land for public use that the city finds not required or unsuitable for such public use, the city shall refuse to approve the dedication and shall notify the subdivider of the reasons for such action. 
Sec. 20-94. - Sewer system. (a)  The proposed subdivision sewer system shall be designed by a registered civil engineer and the design shall be in accordance with all standards and specifications of the county. These standards and specifications may be obtained from the county public works department. (b)  In addition to the above standards and specifications, sanitary sewer laterals for individually developed lots shall be located so as to prohibit driveways, patios, and other such improvements being installed over the lateral and/or over the sanitary sewer service line to a structure. 
Sec. 20-95. - Streets. (a)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all subdivision streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by the streets. (b)  Minor subdivision streets shall be so designed that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. (c)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the governing body may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. (d)  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, principal arterial, or limited-access highway right-of-way, the governing body may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of this right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. These distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. (e)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys, and public grounds in a subdivision shall not be permitted unless their control and title is placed in the hands of the city and under conditions approved by the governing body. (f)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided in subdivisions. (g)  Subdivision street right-of-way widths shall be no less than as follows: Type Right-of-way (feet) Paving width (feet) Principal arterials 100 48 curb to curb Minor arterials  80 30 curb to curb Collector streets  70 30 curb to curb Local streets  60 26 curb to curb Alleys, service drives  20 10 curb to curb  The city, after considering all related factors, may authorize deviations from the minimum right-of-way if: (1)  The adjoining frontage is developed and the predominate existing right-of-way is less than the above standards; or (2)  Existing use of property is not to be substantially changed as a result of proposed development or construction; or (3)  Existing government construction plans for the roadway indicate lesser right-of-way would be required for dedication. Prior to approval of the final plat, the streets in the proposed development shall be improved and right-of-way dedicated to the city. (h)  If street parking is permitted, parking lanes shall be as follows: Principal arterial ..... 12 feet Minor arterial ..... 11 feet Collector street ..... 10 feet (i)  Temporary dead-end streets may be platted where the governing body deems desirable and where the land adjoins property not subdivided. In such case, the streets shall be carried to the boundaries thereof. (j)  Streets which terminate in a cul-de-sac shall not be longer than eight hundred (800) feet unless absolutely impractical due to topographical or other unavoidable conditions. The cul-de-sac shall have an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty (80) feet and a street right-of-way diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet, unless a deviation is approved by the governing body. (k)  Subdivision street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves: Type Percent grade Major arterial .....  7 Minor arterial ..... 10 Collector street ..... 12 Local street ..... 12  No street grade shall be less than one (1) percent and no one-percent grade shall be longer than three hundred (300) feet. (l)  No subdivision street shall have a horizontal curve radius of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. (m)  All subdivision streets shall have a minimum sight distance of at least two hundred (200) feet. (n)  Street intersections in subdivisions shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable. They shall not be designed in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard. A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet clear sight distance in each direction from the intersection shall be provided. Where a subdivision street enters an existing principal or minor arterial, a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet sight distance in each direction shall be maintained. If, due to other restrictions, this minimum sight distance cannot be maintained, the developer shall, at the developer's expense, provide adequate traffic control devices or other physical improvements subject to the approval of the city and county and with installation by the county. (o)  At each street intersection in a subdivision, the property line at each block corner shall be rounded with a curve of radius R varying with the interior angle as specified in the following table, unless sufficient data is presented to show that strict adherence to this requirement is impractical due to topographical or engineering considerations. Table of Intersection Returns Interior angle in degrees Intersection of residential streets R Intersection of all other streets R 150—145 12  15 145—140 12  18 140—135 12  20 135— 85 12  25  85— 75 20  40  75— 65 30  70  65— 55 40  80  55— 45 50 100  45—  0 75 140  (p)  No street names shall be used in a subdivision which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets, except for courts, culs-de-sac or loop streets leading off a main street. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the governing body. 
Sec. 20-96. - Surface drainage. (a)  A five-foot-interval contour map shall be submitted as part of preliminary plans; any lots within the subdivision which, in the opinion of the county public works department, are undesirable for building due to bad drainage conditions shall be excluded, and no building shall be permitted thereon until these conditions have been corrected as specified by that department. (b)  All storm drain pipes or culverts carrying stormwater from the street and adjacent property between or through lots shall be extended to at least thirty (30) feet behind the rear of the principal building. Stormwater must be released into a channel without causing scouring, erosion, or resulting sedimentation to the receiving channel. When necessary, the outlet channel shall include structural and vegetative measures to assure nonerosion velocities. (1)  An exception to extending pipes thirty (30) feet behind the rear of the house may be granted for pipes fifty-four (54) inches and larger where the building site is proposed to be more than thirty (30) feet from the center of the drainageway. (2)  An exception to extending pipes thirty (30) feet behind the rear of the building may be granted when soil conditions prohibit erosion. This requirement for pipe extension shall only apply to the discharge ends of piped systems. (c)  All pipes shall have a minimum cover of one (1) foot and headwalls or inlet basins constructed at the end of each pipe. (d)  The design of drainage structures shall be based on recognized hydrological formulas and shall conform to all standards and specifications of the county. 
Sec. 20-97. - Sidewalks. (a)  Sidewalks shall be five (5) feet in width. (b)  Sidewalks shall be designed for access by handicapped persons as set forth by state and federal regulations. 
Sec. 20-98. - Planting strip. (a)  A strip, five (5) feet in width, shall be located between each street and sidewalk. Such strips shall be planted with appropriate hardwood trees as allowed in the city's tree ordinance, and trees shall be no less than eight (8) feet in height. All plantings should be, where feasible, no less than twenty (20) feet apart. (b)  Any modifications to the requirements of this section must be approved by the governing authority. 
Sec. 20-99. - Parking.     Off-street parking, surface-treated and hardened, shall be provided at the rate of no less than two (2) spaces per residential dwelling unit. 
Sec. 20-100. - Easements. (a)  Easements having a minimum width of ten (10) feet and located along the side or rear lot lines shall be provided, as required, for future utilities. (b)  Pedestrian easements, not less than ten (10) feet may be required in subdivisions where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. (c)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, natural channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage easement conforming substantially to the limits of such watercourse plus additional width as necessary to accommodate future construction, but not to exceed the floodplain plus five (5) feet as recommended by the county public works department. 
Sec. 20-101. - Blocks. (a)  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks in subdivisions shall be determined with due regard to: (1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; (2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; (3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic; and (4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. (b)  The desirable maximum block length in a subdivision is one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet and the desirable minimum length is six hundred (600) feet. 
Sec. 20-102. - Lots. (a)  The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building setback, side yard and rear yard lines in subdivisions shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city zoning ordinance unless modifications are approved by the governing body. (b)  Corner lots for residential use in a subdivision shall have an extra width of not less than fifteen (15) feet more than required for inside lots by the city zoning ordinance for the zoning district within which they are located in order to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. (c)  Each subdivision lot shall front upon a publicly maintained street. (d)  Double frontage or reverse frontage lots shall be avoided in subdivisions except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen reservation of at least twenty (20) feet in width, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. (e)  Side lot lines in subdivisions shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
Sec. 20-103. - Utilities underground.     All utilities as herein required shall be installed underground. All communication distribution systems and all electrical distribution systems of twenty-five thousand (25,000) volts or less shall be placed underground. 
Sec. 20-104. - Signage.     No signage shall be erected in or adjacent to a subdivision denoting the name of such subdivision. 
Sec. 20-105. - Open space.     Dedicated open space, landscaped areas, and/or recreational areas shall be provided and deeded to the city in the same proportion that exists in current residential areas. No parking, drives, or other such uses shall be permitted within the landscaped, recreational, or open space areas. 
Sec. 20-106. - Preservation of trees.     When feasible, the developer shall preserve all trees of major growth in the subdivision. 
Secs. 20-107—20-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FINAL PLAT 
Sec. 20-111. - Final plat—Application.     After the preliminary plat and engineering plans of a proposed land subdivision have been approved by the county and the governing body and the required improvements have been completed and approved, the subdivider shall submit to the building official the following: (1)  A completed letter of application; (2)  One original and twelve (12) copies of the final plat and other documents as required in this article; (3)  Covenants and restrictions, if any; (4)  A final plat fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per lot (with a minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00)) and fifty dollars ($50.00) per street intersection. 
Sec. 20-112. - Same—Preparation. (a)  Final plats for subdivisions shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer and a registered land surveyor as follows: (1)  One (1) original tracing and twelve (12) black or blue line copies. The original tracing shall be clearly and legibly drawn in permanent drafting ink on linen or of comparable tracing material; (2)  Clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not less than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch; (3)  A maximum sheet size of not more than twenty-four (24) inches in width and thirty-six (36) inches in length, and a minimum sheet size of not less than twelve (12) inches in width and sixteen (16) inches in length; (4)  A blank space of ninety (90) square inches shall be provided on the final plat to allow room for any stamps, or notes, and certifications required to be placed thereon by the city and by county agencies and for the certification of the governing body that the final plat has been reviewed and approved. (b)  The final plat shall compare favorably with the approved preliminary plat. It may constitute a "stage" or "unit" of development of the preliminary plat, provided that the stage or unit of development was approved as a part of the preliminary plat approval process. 
Sec. 20-113. - Same—Required information.     The following information is required to be shown on the final plat: (1)  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line and building setback lines, whether curved or straight. This shall include, but not be limited to, the radius, length of arc, internal angles and tangent distance for the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets. (2)  Tract boundary lines, land lot and district lines, city and county limit lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites. (3)  All dimensions shall be accurate to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and all angles accurate to the nearest minute. (4)  Name and right-of-way width of each street including necessary right-of-way required for present or future widening of principal, minor, collector, local, or other streets as shown on the city or county thoroughfare plan. (5)  Sidewalks and planting strips. (6)  House numbers (as approved by the governing body). (7)  Title, north arrow, date, scale, land lot numbers, and district numbers. (8)  Location, dimensions and purpose of easements and areas to be dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notices stating their purpose and limitations. (9)  Intermediate regional floodplain contour line and setback line. (10)  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and lots lettered alphabetically; all lot and block numerals shall be kept in a uniform sequence on all plats and units of the subdivision. (11)  Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers. (12)  Locations of required street lights. (13)  A statement, either on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any protective covenants; the final plat shall not contain protective covenants stipulating lower standards than the minimum restrictions required by the zoning ordinance unless approved by the governing body. (14)  Lots which shall not be built upon until detailed plans for grading and drainage have been approved by the county and the city. (15)  The location and size of all pipe[s], valves, fire hydrants, fittings and stubs to lot as designed by the county public works department and installed by the subdivider/developer. (16)  The size, length, and location of all surface drainage pipe or structures as approved by the county public works department and installed by the subdivider/developer. (17)  Certification by the civil engineer and land surveyor bearing their signatures and state registration numbers and stating: "I hereby certify that, in my opinion, this plat is a correct representation of the land platted and has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of law"; (18)  Witnessed and notarized acknowledgment and certification by the owner of the subdivision bearing his signature and stating: "I, ___________, the owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, acknowledge that this plat was made from an actual survey, and do hereby convey all water mains and sewer lines shown hereon in fee simple to DeKalb County and all streets and rights-of-way shown hereon in fee simple to the City of Avondale Estates, and further dedicate to the use of the public forever all alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements, and public places hereon shown for the purposes and considerations herein expressed. In consideration of the approval of this development plan, the owner further releases the City of Avondale Estates and DeKalb County from any and all claims, damages, or demands arising on account of the design, construction, and maintenance of the property shown hereon; on account of the roads, fills, embankments, ditches, cross-drains, culverts, water mains, sewer lines, and bridges within the proposed rights-of-way and easements shown; on account of backwater, the collection and discharge of surface water, or the changing of courses of streams. And further warrant that I own fee simple title to the property shown hereon and agree that the City of Avondale Estates and DeKalb County shall not be liable to me, my heirs, successors, or assigns for any claims or damages resulting from the construction or maintenance of cross-drain extensions, drives, structures, street, culverts, curbs or sidewalks, the changing of courses of streams and rivers, flooding from natural creeks and rivers, surface waters, and any other matter whatsoever. I further warrant that I have the right to sell and convey the land according to this plat and do hereby bind myself and owners subsequent in title to defend by virtue of these present. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this _____ day of ________, ___. Owner: _____ Witness: _____ Notary Public: _____(SEAL)" 
Sec. 20-114. - Same—Other required certifications. (a)  The submitted final plat shall be forwarded by the building official to the following county agencies for certification on the final plat that required improvements are complete: (1)  The chief engineer of the county water system; (2)  The county public works department relative to the sewer system; (3)  The county public works department relative to surface drainage and street improvements; (4)  The county soil and water conservation district relative to soil sedimentation and erosion control. (b)  The city building official shall certify that the final plat has been approved by all affected county agencies and complies with all environmental, zoning, and subdivision requirements, including any modifications previously approved by the governing body. 
Sec. 20-115. - Same—Review by governing body. (a)  The building official shall submit complete applications to the governing body no later than three (3) days after certification by all county agencies. (b)  The application shall be considered at a public meeting. (c)  The city clerk shall notify the applicant of the time and place of the public meeting by mail at least ten (10) days before the meeting. (e)  [(d)] At the public meeting, the governing body shall approve, deny, or defer the final plat application. An action by the board to defer the final plat application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered and no further notice shall be required. 
Sec. 20-116. - Same—Denial by governing body.     If the final plat varies substantially from the approved preliminary plat and engineering plans and, as a result, approval of the final plat is denied by the governing body, this shall be indicated on all copies of the final plat and certified by the building official. The building official shall retain one (1) copy and supporting information and return all other copies to the subdivider/developer. 
Sec. 20-117. - Same—Approval by governing body. (a)  If approved by the governing body, the original and all copies of the final plat shall bear the following certification: This plat has been submitted to and approved by the Board of Mayor and Commissioners of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia. This _____ day of ________, ___. _____Mayor, City of Avondale Estates, Georgia Attest: _____City Clerk, City of Avondale Estates, Georgia (b)  After the final plat has been approved and certified by the mayor, the building official shall cause the final plat to be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. (c)  After the final plat has been recorded, the building official shall cause sufficient copies of the certified plat to be made for filing with the city clerk, the building official, and the county public works department. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider/developer. (d)  Recording of the final plat shall be deemed an acceptance of the dedication of the streets and other public land to the city on behalf of the public as shown on the final plat. 
Secs. 20-118—20-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - REVISIONS TO FINAL PLAT 
Sec. 20-121. - Final plat revisions—Procedures. (a)  When it becomes necessary to revise a recorded final plat due to some error, required adjustment or desired adjustment, the subdivider/developer shall confer with the building official to verify if this proposed revision will comply with the requirements of the zoning ordinance and the land subdivision regulations. (b)  If it is established that this revision complies with the requirements of the zoning ordinance and the land subdivision regulations and is feasible, the subdivider/developer shall have his engineer make the necessary corrections on the original linen of the final plat or prepare a new linen tracing of that portion of the subdivision involved. The date and book and page number of the original recording shall be noted on the new plat. Revisions and a notation explaining these revisions shall be shown in ink on the revised plat. Revised plats shall be prepared at a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. (c)  The revised plat shall be filed with the building official and shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) (payable to the City of Avondale Estates) to defray recording and copying costs. (d)  The building official shall forward the revised plat to the proper county agencies involved in checking and certifying the revision(s). (d)  [(e)] Upon receipt of certification by the proper authorities in the various county agencies involved, the revised plat shall be certified by the building official. (e)  [(f)] A blank space consisting of not less than twelve (12) square inches shall be provided on the revised plat to accommodate required certifications. 
Sec. 20-122. - [Same—]Approval by governing body. (a)  The building official shall submit the revised plat to the governing body for approval at its next regularly scheduled meeting. If approved, the revised plat shall show the following certification in ink: This revised plat has been submitted to and considered by the Board of Mayor and Commissioners, City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, and is hereby approved subject to any protective covenants shown hereon. This _____ day of ________, ___. _____Mayor, City of Avondale Estates Attest: _____City Clerk, City of Avondale Estates (b)  The approved and certified revised plat shall be recorded by the building official with the clerk of the superior court of the county. (c)  The building official shall cause sufficient copies of the certified and recorded revised plat to be made for filing with the city clerk, the building official, and the county public works department. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider/developer. (d)  Any revised plat that does not receive approval shall be returned to the developer with written notification stating reason for denial attached thereto. 
Sec. 20-123. - Protective covenants not to be changed.     All revisions shall be bound by the protective covenants on the original final plat and a statement to that effect shall be noted in ink on the revised plat unless noted otherwise. 
Sec. 20-124. - Additional information.     A final engineering design report on proposed revisions may be required and such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications as may be required by city officials in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
APPENDIX C - FRANCHISES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Printed herein are the franchise ordinances and resolutions of the city. Amendments to the franchises are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance or resolution. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
ARTICLE I. - CATV FRANCHISES 
DIVISION 1. - ORDINANCE NO. 746     An Ordinance providing for granting of nonexclusive franchise to erect, maintain and operate in, under, over, along, across, and upon the streets, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, and highways and other public places in the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, and subsequent additions thereto, towers, poles, lines, cables, necessary wiring and other apparatus, for the purpose of transmission and distribution by cable of television signals to enable sale of community television antenna service to the inhabitants of said [the] city, and other purposes, and providing for compensation to the city.     Be it ordained by the mayor and city councilmen of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia: 
Sec. I. - [Nonexclusive franchise granted.]     In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the conditions and reservations which are hereinafter specified, the nonexclusive right is hereby granted DeKalb Cablevision Corporation, hereinafter referred to as grantee, and to said grantee's successors, assigns or designees, to erect, maintain and operate towers, poles, lines, cables, necessary wiring, and other apparatus and additions thereto, in, under, over, along, across and upon the present and future streets, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, and other public places in the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, and subsequent additions thereto, for the purpose of transmission and distribution of audio, visual, electronic and electric impulses and television energy, through cables and/or wires, commonly called a Community Antenna Television System, in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States of America, and the State of Georgia, and the ordinances and regulations of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, commencing from and after the adoption of said ordinance. 
Sec. II. - [All-band system to be installed; compliance with FCC regulations.]     Grantee shall install an "all-band" community antenna television system capable of distributing up to twelve (12) television channels or their equivalent, said [the] system to be installed and maintained in accordance with the best accepted standards of the community antenna television industry and in compliance with rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. Grantee shall construct and maintain said [the] system in compliance with FCC regulations regarding installation, operation and technical standards. 
Sec. III. - [Performance bond required.]     Before grantee shall be allowed to proceed with the installation of its community antenna television system hereunder, it shall first file with the city clerk of the City of Avondale Estates a performance bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), with sufficient sureties, in favor of the City of Avondale Estates; conditioned on said [the] grantee's faithful execution of the obligations under this ordinance. 
Sec. IV. - [Office; maintenance requests.]     Grantee shall maintain an office to be available immediately upon commencement of service, and all maintenance requests shall be promptly dealt with and accomplished in a workmanlike manner. 
Sec. V. - [Television defined.]     Wherever used in this ordinance, the word "television" shall mean a system for transmission of audio signals and/or visual images by means of electrical impulses and/or cable, wire or any other appropriate means. 
Sec. VI. - Further rights of grantee.     There is hereby granted the further nonexclusive right, privilege, and authority to grantee, as defined herein, to lease, rent, or in any other manner obtain the use of towers, poles, lines, cables, and other equipment, and facilities from any and all holders of public licenses and franchises within the corporate limits of the City of Avondale Estates, including but not limited to the Southern Bell Telephone Company and the Georgia Power Company, and to use such towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment facilities, subject to all existing and future ordinances and regulations of the city. The poles used by grantee's distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by existing public utility systems, when and where practicable, providing mutually satisfactory agreements can be entered into with said companies.     Grantee shall provide and keep current a map of the City of Avondale Estates showing the exact type, style and location of any and all lines, poles and other fixtures of grantees within the city limits of Avondale Estates, Georgia.     Grantee shall have the right to erect and maintain its own poles, as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the television distribution system, provided written prior approval is obtained in such instances from the City of Avondale Estates or its representative.     Such contracts for the use of poles shall specify that they are nonexclusive, and grantee shall make copies of such contracts available for public inspection upon request. 
Sec. VII. - [Selling, renting, etc., television sets; commercial advertising; limitation of authority.]     Neither grantee, their subsidiaries, nor their employees, shall engage in the business of selling, renting, or leasing television sets or other receivers which make use of signals transmitted by their system, nor shall grantee, their subsidiaries or their employees, engage in servicing of television sets or receivers owned or leased by their subscribers, or the sale of parts for the same.     Grantee shall not delete the commercial advertising portion of a signal which they are carrying from a Federal Communications Commission licensed television station and substitute therefor other commercial advertising over such signal.     The authority hereby granted to grantee shall not include the authority to transmit or assist in the transmission of TV programs for which customers would pay dependent upon the number or amount of programs received in contrast to full-time cable service as proposed herein. 
Sec. VIII. - Limitations of right granted.     Grantee's transmission and distribution system poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or to interfere with new improvements the city may deem proper to make, or to hinder unnecessarily or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, or other public property; removal of poles to avoid such interference shall be done promptly upon receiving written request to do so from the City of Avondale Estates, or its designated official, and will be at grantee's expense.     Construction and maintenance of the transmission distribution system shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code of the American Insurance Association, and such applicable ordinances and regulations of the City of Avondale Estates affecting electrical installations, which may be presently in effect, or changed by future ordinances.     All installations of equipment shall be of permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with good engineering practices, and of sufficient height to comply with all existing city regulations, ordinances, and state laws so as not to interfere in any manner with the right of the public or individual property owner, and shall not interfere with the travel and use of public places by the public and during the construction, repair, or removal thereof, shall not obstruct or impede traffic. Further, said construction shall be subject to inspection by and approval by the City of Avondale Estates or its representative.     No poles are to be erected upon the public streets, alleys, avenues and public grounds and no excavation of any type shall be done or caused to be done unless permission in writing is first obtained from the City of Avondale Estates or its representative. No poles can be erected on private property without permission of the owner of the property.     Grantee agrees that if any of their cables or wires are installed on existing aboveground systems which are placed underground at any future date, the grantee will likewise place their cables or wires underground.     In the event that a change is made in the grade, width or location of public streets, alleys, avenues, and grounds by authority of the city, which shall necessitate the removal of any poles, wires, transmission and distribution lines to conform to the change of grade, grantee shall make the necessary changes in their lines, at their own expense, upon due notice from the City of Avondale Estates.     In the maintenance and operation of their television transmission and distribution system in the streets, alleys, and other public places, and the course of any new construction or addition to their facilities, grantee shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by grantee in the course of their operations shall be made only after having obtained prior written permission from the city to do so, and shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences, or boardings, the bounds of which, during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by red warning lights.     All work in any way necessitated by the business of grantee which may involve the opening, breaking up or tearing up of a portion of a street, sidewalk or other part of any city-owned or city-controlled property, shall be done and repaired in a manner approved by the City of Avondale Estates, and shall, at the option of the city, be done by the city at the expense of grantee. Grantee shall save the city harmless against all loss or damage to any person or property caused by the construction, laying, maintenance or operation of any of its lines or other undertakings under the authority of this ordinance. Nothing herein shall be construed as a requirement that the City of Avondale Estates conduct as excavation or repair on behalf of or as agents for grantee.     Grantee shall, at their expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate on the same street, alley or public place, or remove from the street, alley or public place, any property of grantee when required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and bridge construction, change or establishments of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, waterpipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or any other types of structures or improvements by governmental agencies when acting in a governmental or proprietary capacity, or other structures of public improvement; provided, however, that grantee shall in all such cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of grantee in place as provided in section XVII hereof. 
Sec. IX. - [City's use of poles.]     Grantee shall grant to the city, free of expense, joint use of any and all poles owned by them for any proper municipal purpose, insofar as it may be done without interfering with the free use and enjoyment of grantee's own wires and fixtures. Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules covering construction and maintenance in effect at the time of construction. If, in accommodating the city's joint use of their poles grantee is required to change or replace poles or install new poles, the city shall compensate grantee for such additional expense. 
Sec. X. - Indemnification of city.     Grantee shall, at all times, keep in effect the following types of insurance coverage: (a)  Workmen's Compensation upon their employees engaged in any manner in the management, operation, installation or servicing of their plant and equipment within the City of Avondale Estates. (b)  Property damage liability insurance to the extent of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) as to any one (1) person and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) as to any one (1) accident, and personal injury liability insurance to the extent of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) as to any one (1) accident and three hundred thousand [dollars] ($300,000.00) as to any one (1) person.     Grantee shall indemnify, protect and save harmless the city from [and] against losses and physical damage to property, and bodily injury or death to persons, including payments made under any Workmen's Compensation law which may arise out of or be caused by the erection, maintenance, presence, use or removal of said attachments or pole or poles within the city, or by any act of grantee, their [its] agent or employees. Grantee shall also pay for the cost to the city of defending in any court any action brought against the city arising out of the operations of the grantee hereunder. Grantee shall carry insurance in the above-described amounts to protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities which may arise or result directly or indirectly, from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. Grantee shall also carry such insurance as deem[ed] necessary to protect them from all claims under the Workmen's Compensation laws in effect that may be applicable to grantee. All insurance required shall be written with a company or companies approved by the City of Avondale Estates and shall remain in full force and effect for the entire life of the rights granted hereunder. Said policy or policies of insurance, or a certified copy thereof, shall be approved by the City of Avondale Estates, and then deposited with and kept on file by the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia. 
Sec. XI. - Franchise and gross receipts payments.     Grantee shall, at the time it receives its franchise pursuant to this ordinance, pay to the City of Avondale Estates the sum of seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00), and, in addition, shall thereafter pay the gross receipts payments hereinafter set forth. For the rights granted hereunder, grantee shall pay to the city, at the time hereinafter specified, a sum equal to four (4) percent of the monthly total gross receipts derived from that portion of its CATV System situated in the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia. "Gross receipts" shall include monthly service charges and all other operating revenues but shall not include monies received as installation charges and charges and fees for reconnections, inspections, repairs, or modifications of any installation and shall be paid monthly. Nothing herein contained, however, shall in any way relieve grantee or their [its] assigns or successors from the obligation of paying any property taxes to the City of Avondale Estates, or any other governmental subdivision of the State of Georgia or any other taxes lawfully levied by the State of Georgia on the operation of grantee.     Grantee shall file with the city, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of any calendar year during the term of the rights granted hereunder, a statement prepared by a certified public accountant showing the gross receipts as defined herein. It shall be the duty of grantee to pay to the city within fifteen (15) days after the time for filing such statements, any unpaid balance for the calendar year covered by such statement. In any year or portions thereof, during which payments under this section amount to less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month, grantee shall pay the city the minimum amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month, said payments to commence immediately. Failure to begin operation of the system authorized hereby for a period of twenty-four (24) months, or failure to operate for any consecutive period of six (6) months after operation has begun, shall serve automatically to terminate the franchise rights granted pursuant to this ordinance. 
Sec. XII. - Time of performance.     Grantee shall proceed as soon as possible from the date of this ordinance with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which may be required in the conduct of its business, including utilities, joint use attachment agreements and microwave carrier licenses to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies. Further, grantee shall commence the installation of said system with due diligence and within a reasonable time subsequent to the obtaining of all the aforementioned necessary permits and authorizations, and shall proceed with all due diligence to render service to subscribers following the commencement of installation of the system. 
Sec. XIII. - [Privilege, right or exemption.]     No privilege, right or exemption shall be granted or conferred under this ordinance except those specifically prescribed herein. 
Sec. XIV. - [Assignment or transfer of rights.]     The rights hereunder granted to grantee shall not be assigned or transferred for a period of twenty-four (24) months from the date of the adoption of this ordinance except to a company, corporation or partnership controlled by grantee. Thereafter any sale, assignment or transfer of the rights hereunder shall be made only with the prior consent of the City of Avondale Estates expressed by resolution. The said consent of the city may not be arbitrarily refused; provided, however, that the proposed transferee or assignee must show financial responsibility to the satisfaction of the city and must agree to comply with all the provisions of this ordinance; and provided, further, that no such consent shall be required for a transfer by trust deed, deed to secure debt, or other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness. 
Sec. XV. - [Grantee subject to requirements of city ordinances, rules, etc.]     Grantee is subject to all requirements of the city ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications of the city, including, but not limited to, those concerning street work, street excavation, use removal and relocation of property within a street, and other street work. 
Sec. XVI. - Rights reserved to city.     There is hereby reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any state statute or ordinance of the city, and grantee, by their acceptance of the rights granted hereunder, agree to be bound thereby, and to comply with any action or requirement of the city in its exercise of any such right or power. Further, the rights granted hereunder shall not preclude the city from granting to any other person a right to provide similar services in the City of Avondale Estates. 
Sec. XVII. - Abandonment.     In the event that the use of any part of the system should cease for any reason for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of this ordinance, or the rights granted hereunder have been terminated, cancelled or have expired, grantee shall promptly remove from the streets and public places all such property and poles of such system, other than any which the city may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the city.     Any property of grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the city may prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of grantee in place, grantee shall submit to the city an instrument to be approved by the city, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. 
Sec. XVIII. - [Failure of grantee to complete work.]     Upon failure of grantee to complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this ordinance to be done in any street, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may cause such work to be done and grantee shall pay the city the cost thereof in the itemized amount reported to grantee within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report. 
Sec. XIX. - [Term.]     The term for which each franchise is granted as provided herein shall be for a period of twenty (20) years. 
Sec. XX. - [Severability.]     If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional or void all other sections thereof not so held shall be and remain in full force and effect.     Adopted March 8, 1971. 
DIVISION 2. - ORDINANCE NO. 777     An ordinance approving transfer of community antenna television system franchise     Whereas, by ordinance adopted on March 8, 1971, (the "ordinance") the City of Avondale Estates granted DeKalb Cablevision Corporation ("DCC") and its successors and assigns, a nonexclusive franchise to construct, maintain, and operate a community antenna television ("CATV") system in the City of Avondale Estates, (the "franchise") which system is presently operated by DCC; and,     Whereas, on May 15, 1980, Cable DeKalb, Inc., ("Cable DeKalb") purchased eighty (80) percent of the shares of outstanding common stock of DCC, and contracted for an option to acquire the remaining shares of DCC which actions grant Cable DeKalb effective control of DCC; and,     Whereas, section XIV of the ordinance grants DCC the power to sell, assign, and transfer its rights under the franchise, subject to the prior consent of the City of Avondale Estates; and,     Whereas, DCC is proposing to merge its operations into Cable DeKalb, and Cable DeKalb has agreed to comply with all of the provisions of the ordinance as hereinafter modified.     Now, therefore, be it ordained by the City of Avondale Estates as follows: 
1. - [Validation of franchise; modification.]     The City of Avondale Estates does hereby confirm, ratify, and validate the franchise owned by DCC as of the date hereof, except as hereinafter modified. 
2. - [Conditional approval.]     The proposed liquidation and merger of DCC into Cable DeKalb and the subsequent assignment and transfer to Cable DeKalb of the franchise owned by DCC is hereby approved, such approval to be effective as of the effective date of the merger of DCC into Cable DeKalb and subject to the following conditions: 
3. - [Amendments.]     The Ordinance is hereby amended as follows: (a)  Section II is amended by adding thereto the following: "The grantee shall provide the same number of channels and level of service to subscribers within the City of Avondale Estates as it provides to any area in DeKalb County which receives its maximum service." (b)  Section XI is amended by striking the words "twenty-five dollars ($25.00)" wherever they appear and inserting in lieu thereof the words "one hundred dollars ($100.00)." (c)  Section XII is amended by adding after the last sentence thereof the following: "Grantee shall offer service to all residences in the City of Avondale Estates within twelve (12) months herefrom." (d)  The City of Avondale Estates reserves the right to raise the "gross receipts" payment set out in section XI from four (4) percent to five (5) percent, provided the expense of regulation warrants same. 
4. - [City bound by ordinance.]     Cable DeKalb shall execute an agreement consenting to be bound by the ordinance as amended hereby. 
5. - [Notification of date of merger; time limit.]     DCC and Cable DeKalb shall notify the City of Avondale Estates in writing, through the mayor, of the effective date of the merger of DCC's business into Cable DeKalb. If such merger is not consummated within two (2) years of the date of this ordinance, then the parties shall be required to submit this matter again for approval. 
6. - [Emergency ordinance.]     This ordinance shall be adopted as an emergency ordinance in order to approve said transfer prior to October 1, 1980.     So ordained, this 22nd day of September, 1980. 
DIVISION 3. - RESOLUTION OF SEPTEMBER 26, 1983     Whereas, the City of Avondale Estates (the "city") granted to DeKalb Cablevision Corporation a nonexclusive franchise to construct, maintain, and operate a Community Antenna Television System in the city (the "franchise") by ordinance adopted March 8, 1971; and     Whereas, by Ordinance No. 777, adopted September 22, 1980, the city approved of the transfer of the franchise to Cable DeKalb, Inc. ("Cable DeKalb") and amended the ordinance adopted March 8, 1971; and     Whereas, Cable DeKalb submitted an application to the mayor and members of the city council on September 2, 1983 for the approval by the city of the assignment by Cable DeKalb of the Franchise to Prime Cable of Georgia Limited, a Georgia limited partnership; and     Whereas, the city has investigated the proposed assignment and has made certain findings.     Now, therefore, be and it is hereby ordained by the council of the City of Avondale Estates, as follows: 
1. - [Qualifications; compliance with Ordinance Nos. 746 and 777.]     That, after investigation, the city hereby finds that Prime Cable of Georgia Limited demonstrated satisfactory qualifications, as required by section XIV of the ordinance adopted on March 8, 1971; and that the proposed assignment and Prime Cable of Georgia Limited comply with all provisions of the ordinance adopted on March 8, 1971, and Ordinance No. 777. 
2. - [Consent.]     That, the city does hereby consent to the assignment of the franchise from Cable DeKalb to Prime Cable of Georgia Limited. Such consent satisfies the requirement of section XIV of the ordinance adopted on March 8, 1971 regarding the city's consent. Such consent shall become effective upon the agreement by Prime Cable of Georgia Limited to comply with all the provisions of the ordinance adopted on March 8, 1971, as amended by Ordinance No. 777.     All so adopted this 26th day of September, 1983. 
DIVISION 4. - RESOLUTION OF NOVEMBER 23, 1987     Whereas, the City of Avondale Estates (the "city") granted to DeKalb Cablevision Corporation a nonexclusive franchise to construct, maintain, and operate a community antenna television system in the city (the "franchise") by ordinance adopted March 8, 1971; and     Whereas, by Ordinance No. 777, adopted September 22, 1980, the city approved the transfer of the franchise to Cable DeKalb, Inc. ("Cable DeKalb") and amended the ordinance adopted March 8, 1971; and     Whereas, by resolution dated September 26, 1983, the City approved the transfer of the franchise to Prime Cable of Georgia Limited, a Georgia limited partnership; and     Whereas, Prime Cable of Georgia Limited submitted an application to the board of mayor and commissioners on October 22, 1987, for approval by the city of the assignment by Prime Cable of Georgia Limited of the franchise to Georgia Cable Partners, a Georgia general partnership, the financial ownership of which is held by Georgia Cable Holdings Limited Partnership of Texas and Prime Venture I, Inc., a Prime Cable Group affiliate; and     Whereas, the city has investigated the proposed assignment and has made certain findings.     Now, therefore, be it resolved by the Board of Mayor and Commissioners of the City of Avondale Estates, as follows: 
1. - [Satisfactory qualifications; compliance with Ordinance Nos. 746 and 777.]     After investigation, the city hereby finds that Georgia Cable Partners demonstrated satisfactory qualifications, as required by section XIV of the ordinance adopted on March 8, 1971; and said proposed assignment complies with all provisions of the ordinance adopted on March 8, 1971, and Ordinance No. 777. 
2. - [Consent.]     The city does hereby consent to the assignment of the franchise from Prime Cable of Georgia Limited to Georgia Cable Partners. Such consent satisfies the requirement of section XIV of the ordinance adopted on March 8, 1971, regarding the city's consent. Such consent shall become effective upon the agreement by Georgia Cable Partners to comply with all the provisions of the ordinance adopted on March 8, 1971, as amended by Ordinance No. 777.     Resolved this 23 day of November, 1987. 
DIVISION 5. - RESOLUTION OF MAY 29, 1990     Whereas, by ordinance adopted March 8, 1971, the City of Avondale Estates (the "city") granted to DeKalb Cablevision Corporation, and its successors and assigns, a nonexclusive franchise (the "franchise") for a term of twenty (20) years to construct, maintain, and operate a community antenna television system in the city; and     Whereas, by Ordinance No. 777, adopted September 22, 1980, the city approved the transfer of the franchise to Cable DeKalb, Inc. and amended the ordinance adopted March 8, 1971; and     Whereas, by resolution dated September 26, 1983, the city approved the transfer of the franchise to Prime Cable of Georgia Limited, a Georgia limited partnership; and     Whereas, by resolution dated November 23, 1987, the City approved the transfer of the franchise to Georgia Cable Partners ("Georgia Partners"), a Georgia general partnership; and     Whereas, the franchise by its terms shall expire on March 8, 1991; and     Whereas, pursuant to the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 USC 546) (the "cable act"), Georgia Partners has submitted its proposal that the franchise be renewed on the same terms and conditions as presently set forth therein for a period of ten (10) years from and after March 8, 1991; and     Whereas, pursuant to the requirements of the cable act, the public has been provided adequate notice and opportunity to comment on (1) the future cable-related community needs and interests and (2) the performance of Georgia Partners under the franchise during the current franchise term.     Now, therefore, be it resolved by the Board of Mayor and Commissioners of the City of Avondale Estates, as follows: The franchise presently held by Georgia Cable Partners is hereby renewed on the same terms and conditions as presently set forth therein for a period of ten (10) years beginning March 8, 1991; provided, however, that the franchise fee payable to the city under the franchise shall be increased from four (4) percent to five (5) percent of gross receipts; and provided, further, that the franchise as renewed, shall be subject to the provisions of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and any other governmental authority having jurisdiction over the matters described therein.     Resolved this 29th day of May, 1990. 
DIVISION 6. - RESOLUTION OF AUGUST 22, 1994 A resolution of the City of Avondale Estates to approve the transfer of the franchise and the assignment of the assets to operate a cable television system in the City of Avondale Estates from Georgia Cable Partners, a Georgia General Partnership, to Southern Multimedia Communications, Inc., a Delaware Corporation.     Whereas, the cable television franchise in the City of Avondale Estates (the "franchise") is currently owned and operated by Georgia Cable Partners (the "franchisee") pursuant to a valid existing franchise dated March 8, 1971, and subsequently renewed on May 29, 1990, the terms and conditions of which franchise are in full force and effect as of the date of this resolution; and     Whereas, the franchisee and Atlanta Cable Partners, L.P., an affiliated partnership, have entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the "agreement") dated July 15, 1994, with U S West, Inc. ("U S West") and U S West Multimedia Communications, Inc. ("Multimedia"), a Colorado corporation, providing for the sale, assignment and transfer of the assets of its cable system, as well as its rights and obligations under the Franchise to U S West with an immediate assignment and transfer to WOMETCO Cable Corp., a Delaware corporation which will subsequently be known as Southern Multimedia Communications, Inc. ("Southern Multimedia"); and     Whereas, Southern Multimedia will be an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of U S West, Inc., a Colorado corporation; and     Whereas, the franchise requires that prior to a transfer of the franchise, the city must grant its consent thereto; and     Whereas, franchisee and Southern Multimedia have submitted an application requesting consent by the city to transfer the franchise; and     Whereas, Southern Multimedia has demonstrated that it possesses the financial, technical, and legal qualifications to operate the cable television in the city.     Now, therefore, be it resolved by the Board of Mayor and Commissioners of the City of Avondale Estates that the city hereby consents to and approves the transfer of the franchise, including the transfer to Southern Multimedia and its successors, or to any affiliated company controlled by U S West, and Southern Multimedia's or such affiliate's assumption of all rights and obligations under the franchise relating to the period from and after the date of the consummation of the agreement.     Be it further resolved that the assumption by Southern Multimedia or such affiliate of all the rights and obligations under the franchise shall take effect on and after the consummation of the agreement.     Resolved this 22nd day of August, 1994. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRIC UTILITY FRANCHISES 
DIVISION 1. - ORDINANCE NO. 727[2]     Ordinance granting permission and consent to the Georgia Power Company successors, lessees and assigns, to occupy the streets and public places of the City of Avondale Estates in constructing, maintaining, and extending poles, lines and appliances for transmitting and distributing electricity, and for other purposes. Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ordinance No. 727 was passed on April 12, 1965. 
Sec. I. - [Permission to use streets, alleys and public places.]     Be it ordained by the board of mayor and commissioners of the City of Avondale Estates (hereinafter referred to as the "city"), that the authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to the Georgia Power Company, its successors, lessees and assigns for a period of ninety-nine (99) years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the present and future limits of the said city as from time to time the said Georgia Power Company, its successors, lessees and assigns, may deem proper or necessary for the erection and maintenance of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, insulators, transformers and all appliances or connections for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for light, heat, power and other purposes for which electric current may be useful or practicable for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as may be necessary for the extension, operation, repair and renewal of the same or any portion thereof, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of the company, to insure safe and efficient service. 
Sec. II. - [Terms and conditions.]     Be it further ordained that the rights, permission and consents herein contained are made for the following consideration and upon the following terms and conditions, to-wit: 1.  The said Georgia Power Company, its successors and assigns, shall pay into the treasury of the city on or before the first day of March each year, beginning with the year 1966, a sum of money equal to four (4) percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential and commercial rate schedules (as prescribed by the Georgia Public Service Commission), within the corporate limits of the city for the preceding calendar year, so long as the city itself shall not engage in any such competing utility business; and on condition that in the event the city shall grant to any other corporation the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those herein contained, including the payment of a license, privilege or occupation tax in an amount at least equal to that herein specified. 2.  The payment of the percentage of gross sales above provided for shall be in lieu of all occupation, license, excise and special franchise taxes, and in full of all money demands and charges, except ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of appliances; and whatever amount, if any, shall at any time be required or exacted for the benefit of the city on any of said accounts or on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of appliances, shall operate to reduce to that extent the amount due from the percentage above provided for. 3.  That should the city itself ever at any time construct, purchase, lease, acquire, own, hold, use or operate an electric lighting or power plant and/or distribution system, then and in that event the payment of the percentage gross sales herein provided to be paid by the Georgia Power Company, its successors and assigns, shall abate, cease, and be no longer due and shall forever thereafter be uncollectible. 4.  That the work of erecting poles and all other work upon the streets and public places of said city shall be done under the supervision of the board of mayor and commissioners (or other legally constituted governing body) of the city, and that all sidewalks or street payments [pavements] or street surface which may be displaced by reason of such work shall be properly replaced and relaid by the said Georgia Power Company, its successors, lessees and assigns, to the satisfaction of the board of mayor and commissioners (or other legally constituted governing body) of the city. 5.  That the Georgia Power Company, its successors and assigns, shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from all damages to person[s] or property caused by the erection or maintaining of poles, wires, or other works, or condition of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom for which the city would otherwise be liable or on account of which judgment may be rendered against the city. 6.  The said Georgia Power Company, its successors, lessees and assigns, shall further, in constructing and maintaining its system of overhead lines, poles, wires and other structures, submit and be subject to all reasonable police laws, rules and regulations of the city for the regulation or control of such structures. 7.  Provided that no poles shall be set in streets of the city without first obtaining permission from the city and further provided that no shrubbery and/or trees shall be cut or trimmed except in an emergency without first obtaining permission from the city. 
Sec. III. - [Acceptance.]     Be it further ordained that the said Georgia Power Company, its successors or assigns, shall within ninety (90) days from the approval of this ordinance file its written acceptance of the same with the city clerk. 
Sec. IV. - [Repeal of conflicting provisions.]     Be it further ordained that all laws and ordinances in conflict herewith be and the same are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE III. - GAS FRANCHISES 
DIVISION 1. - ORDINANCE NO. 843[3]     An ordinance, granting to Atlanta Gas Light Company, a Georgia corporation, its successors and assigns, the exclusive right and franchise to use and occupy the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks, and other public places of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, for constructing, maintaining, renewing, repairing, and operating a gas works and gas distribution system, and other necessary means for manufacturing, transmitting, distributing and selling of manufactured, natural or commingled gas within and through the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia; fixing the terms and conditions of such grant; to repeal conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes.     Be it ordained by the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia, as follows: Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ordinance No. 843 was adopted on November 25, 1991. 
Section 1. - [Adoption.]     The document entitled "Chapter 13, Occupational Licenses, Taxes and Regulations, Article V. Franchises: Gas Works and Gas Distribution System" attached hereto and comprising three (3) pages, is hereby adopted as an ordinance of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia. Sec. 13-60. Definitions.     For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: (1)  City shall mean the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia. (2)  Grantee shall mean the Atlanta Gas Light Company, a Georgia corporation, its successors and assigns. (3)  Governing body means the Board of Mayor and Commissioners of the City of Avondale Estates. Sec. 13-61. Nature of grant.     The authority, right and privilege is hereby granted to said grantee, for and in consideration of and subject to the conditions and provisions of this article, to engage in the business of the purchase, production, distribution and sale of natural and manufactured gas in the city.     The term for which said authority, right and privilege is granted is for a period of thirty (30) years from December 10, 1991, to December 9, 2021. Sec. 13-62. Extension by annexation.     The city shall notify the grantee within thirty (30) days of annexation of any territory to the city. Upon such notification, the portion of any of the said utility that may be located or operated within such annexed territory shall thereafter be subject to all the terms of this grant of franchise. Sec. 13-63. Compensation for grant of franchise.     For and in consideration of the grant of this franchise, the grantee shall pay to the city within forty-five (45) days following the end of each quarterly period a sum equal to three (3) percent of the gas sales receipts received by grantee from customers served under all rate schedules except for interruptible rate schedules or special contracts as defined and approved by the Georgia Public Service Commission (or any successor state regulatory group) within the territorial limits of the city during the preceding quarterly period.     It is provided, however, that should the city require grantee to pay any license fee or tax, excise tax, indirect tax, occupation tax, franchise tax, privilege tax, regulation charge or related fees, taxes or charges, excepting ad valorem taxes and business license taxes for sale of appliances, the aggregate amount of such fees, taxes and charges shall be deducted in full by grantee from the quarterly payment or payments subsequently accruing to the city. The quarterly periods for which such payments shall be made shall commence upon the first day of the month immediately following proper adoption, acceptance and effectiveness of this franchise ordinance. The governing body of the city through its authorized representative or representatives shall have the right to inspect and audit the books and records of grantee for the purpose of determining the amount of its revenues received from the sale of gas as set forth above within said territorial limits of the city. Sec. 13-64. Lease or assignment of franchise.     Grantee shall notify the governing body of the city prior to leasing, assigning, or otherwise alienating this grant. Sec. 13-65. Indemnification of the city.     The grantee shall at all times protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from all claims against the city, its officers, agents or employees, on account of damage, injury or loss to persons, natural and artificial, and to public and private property, caused by or arising out of any acts of negligence of the grantee, its officers, agents, or employees doing work for the grantee. The city shall promptly notify the grantee in writing of any claim against the city on account thereof and shall be given ample opportunity to defend the same. Sec. 13-66. Use of streets and public places.     The rights granted by the city to the grantee under the provisions hereof include the right on the part of the grantee to lay, construct, extend, maintain, renew, replace and repair gas pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances and all appurtenances and appendages under, along, through and across any streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places in the city, and to use and occupy the said streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places for the purpose of therein laying, constructing, extending, maintaining, renewing, replacing and repairing mains, pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances and all appurtenances and appendages thereto, used and useful for the manufacture, transmission, distribution and sale of gas within and through the city.     In laying, constructing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, enlarging and extending its pipes, mains and necessary accessories in said streets and other public places, said grantee shall at all times be subject to and comply with all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city now or hereafter in force applicable to the use of said streets and other public places for purposes for which this franchise is granted.     No excavations or work shall be done by the company in the streets or other public places of the city until a permit has been applied for by the grantee and granted by the official of the city charged with such duty. No permit shall be refused where the request is made in conformity to the general ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and the purpose for which the permit is desired is not in violation of such general ordinances, rules and regulations nor in violation of the terms of this franchise.     In addition to complying with all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, where the use of the public streets and other public places is involved, the grantee shall at all times be subject to and comply with all other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city enacted or promulgated under the police powers of the city for the safety and protection of the general public. Sec. 13-67. Repair of streets and public places.     Grantee upon making an opening upon any of the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places in the city, for the purpose of laying, repairing or maintaining gas mains, pipes, and other accessories, shall use due care and caution to prevent injury to persons, and shall replace and restore all public ways to their former condition as nearly as practicable, and within a reasonable time, and shall not unnecessarily obstruct or impede traffic upon [sic.] Sec. 13-68. Rates charged by grantee.     Grantee shall be entitled to charge for gas furnished by it at such rates as are prescribed by the Public Service Commission or other lawful regulatory body of the State of Georgia. Sec. 13-69. Renewal of franchise.     Unless one hundred twenty (120) days written notice is given by one party to the other prior to the expiration of this agreement, this franchise shall be considered as renewed and binding in all its provisions for ten (10) years after such expiration and this franchise shall so continue in operation and effect for a further and second term of ten (10) years unless such notice be given by either party prior to the expiration of the first such renewed term. 
Sec. 2. - [Document made public record.]     The document referred to in Section 1 is hereby made public record and shall be maintained by the city clerk as such and be accessible to the members of the general public at City Hall during all normal business hours. 
Sec. 3. - [Gas franchises.]     The City of Avondale Estates, Georgia and the undersigned warrant and represent that, with the exception of the franchise granted to Atlanta Gas Light Company by ordinance passed December 11, 1961, for a period of thirty (30) years, which franchise was accepted by Atlanta Gas Light Company, there is no franchise granted by the city and in force and effect, to any other person, firm or corporation and that the city is under no contract or obligation to any other person, firm or corporation, in anywise relating to the installation of gas service in the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia. 
Sec. 4. - [Effective date.]     The effective date of this ordinance shall be no earlier than fifteen (15) days after final passage in accordance with the city Charter, and the effective dates of the attachments hereto shall so correspond. 
Sec. 5. - [Acceptance.]     Atlanta Gas Light Company shall signify its acceptance of this franchise agreement in writing duly filed with the city clerk. 
Sec. 6. - [Conflicting provisions.]     All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.     Adopted this 25th day of November, 1991. 
DIVISION 2. - ORDINANCE NO. 9807[4]     An ordinance to amend prior ordinances, including an ordinance dated November 25, 1991, granting Atlanta Gas Light Company (hereafter company) a franchise for the use of rights-of-way and other public property for the purpose of distributing gas within the City of Avondale Estates, so as to modify the franchise fee calculation provisions; to repeal conflicting laws; to provide an effective date; and for other purposes.     All prior ordinances, including an ordinance dated November 25, 1991, granting Atlanta Gas Light Company a franchise for the use of rights-of-way and other public property for the purpose of distributing gas within the City of Avondale Estates is hereby amended by inserting the following: Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— Ordinance No. 9807, an amendment to the Atlanta Gas Light Ordinance, was adopted on Aug. 31, 1998. 
Sec. 1. - Definitions. (a)  "Base year" means the fiscal year ending September 30, 1998. (b)  "Base year franchise fee factor" means the total franchise fees paid during the Base Year divided by the Design Day Capacity as recorded by the Company on the last day of the Base Year. (c)  "Design day capacity" means the sum of the individual capacity in dekatherms (Dt) attributable to all firm customers located within the city limits of the City, as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. (d)  "Firm customers" means all residential and business customers who purchase gas service that ordinarily is not subject to interruption or curtailment. (e)  "Fiscal year" means the 12 months ending September 30, of each year. (f)  "Inflation index" means the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or any successor index, for the period from September 30, 1997, to the beginning of the then current fiscal year. The percentage shall be reduced by any productivity factor adjustment for the same time period determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission for the Company. 
Sec. 2. - Franchise fee.     The total dollar amount of franchise fees paid by the Company to the City shall be calculated as follows:     The current Fiscal Year total franchise fee shall equal the product of the Design Day Capacity and the current franchise fee factor. The current franchise fee factor shall be equal to the product of the Base Year Franchise Fee Factor and one plus the Inflation Index expressed as a decimal to three significant digits.     The following formula quantifies this payment: FFc = FFFbyX(1 + (CPI-PFA)) x DDCc Where FFc = total franchise fees due the city for the current Fiscal Year FFFby = the Base Year Franchise Fee Factor CPI-PFA = the Inflation Index based on the cumulative change in the Consumer Price Index less the productivity factor adjustment determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission. DDCc = the Design Day Capacity as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. FFFby = FFby/DDCby where FFby = the total franchise fees paid in the Base Year and DDC by = the Design Day Capacity of the Base Year. 
Sec. 3. - Responsibility for payment of franchise fee.     The Company as the holder of the franchise privilege hereunder is responsible for the payment of all franchise fees payable hereunder, and shall file such reports and returns as required by the franchise ordinance as modified by this Amendment. In addition, the Company shall report annually the names of all Gas marketers for which Company is transporting natural gas on the distribution system within the City.     The franchise fee payments required hereunder shall be in lieu of any franchise fee license fee, occupation tax or other payment for use of the rights-of-way by the Company for the provision of gas service, but shall not prohibit imposition of a license fee or an occupation tax on gas marketers. 
Sec. 4. - Quarterly payments.     Effective for the Fiscal Year 1999, and for each Fiscal Year thereafter during the term of the franchise ordinance, the Company shall remit to the City quarterly franchise fee installments. The installments shall equal to one-fourth (¼) of the total annual franchise fee calculated in accordance with this ordinance.     The quarterly payment is due and payable on or before the 30th day following the last day of each calendar quarter. 
Sec. 5. - Annual return.     The Company shall file a return with its first quarterly installment in each Fiscal Year showing the details of the calculation of the annual franchise fee. 
Sec. 6. - Delay of inflation adjustment.     Notwithstanding any other provision in this ordinance, any inflation adjustments shall be made to the franchise fee only when the Company changes its rates. 
Sec. 7. - Conflicts.     In the event of a conflict between this ordinance and the original franchise dated November 25, 1991, this ordinance shall control. All terms, conditions and stipulations contained in such franchise ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that they do not conflict with this ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - TELEPHONE FRANCHISES 
DIVISION 1. - ORDINANCE NO. 736[5]     Authorizing the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company to use the public streets of the City of Avondale Estates, Georgia for the purpose of erecting, constructing, maintaining and operating lines of telephone and telegraph thereon and thereunder. Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— Ordinance No. 736 was passed on June 10, 1978. Cross reference— Telephone company, § 14-166 et seq. 
Sec. 1. - [Nature of franchise.]     Be it ordained by the City of Avondale Estates that permission be and the same is hereby granted to the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company, its successors and assigns, to construct, maintain and operate lines of telephone and telegraph, including the necessary poles, conduits, cables, fixtures and electrical conductors upon, along, under and over the public roads, streets and highways of the City of Avondale Estates as its business may from time to time require, provided that all poles shall be neat and symmetrical. 
Sec. 2. - [City supervision of poles.]     The work of erecting poles and constructing underground conduits under this ordinance shall be done subject to the supervision of the city, and the company shall replace or properly relay and repair any sidewalk or street that may be displaced by reason of such work, and upon failure of the company so to do, after twenty (20) days' notice in writing shall have been given by the mayor of the city to the company, the city may repair such portion of the sidewalk or street that may have been disturbed by the company, and collect the cost so incurred from the company. 
Sec. 3. - [Use of poles and conduits by city.]     In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, the company, when requested by the city, will designate and provide without cost to the city: (1)  On each pole owned and used by the company hereunder and during its ownership and use thereof, either: (a)  Space for a fixture for, or (b)  Space for a crossarm for wires of the police and fire alarm signalling system of the city, and (2)  In each underground conduit owned and used by the company hereunder and during its ownership and use thereof, one duct for the cables of the police and fire alarm signalling system of the city; provided, however, that no use shall be made by the city of said space on such poles or of said duct which will result in interfering with or impairing the operation or use of the company's property or service, or which will endanger, damage or injure the person or property of the public or employees of the company or city. 
Sec. 4. - [Indemnification of city.]     The company shall indemnify the city against, and assume all liabilities for, damages which may arise or accrue to the city for any injury to persons or property from the doing of any work herein authorized, or the neglect of the company or any of its employees to comply with any ordinance regulating the use of the streets of the city, and the acceptance by the company of this ordinance shall be an agreement by it to pay to the city any sum of money for which the city may become liable from or by reason of such injury. 
Sec. 5. - [Acceptance.]     The company shall file with the city clerk of the city its acceptance of this ordinance within sixty (60) days from the date when it shall take effect. 
Sec. 6. - [Rights and powers of city to regulate use of streets.]     Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as a surrender by the city of its right or power to pass ordinances regulating the use of its streets. 
Sec. 7. - [Term of franchise.]     This ordinance shall be in force for a period of ninety-nine (99) years from and after fifteen (15) days after its final passage. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1973 CODE This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1973 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1973 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 1973 Code Section Section  this Code 2-102 2-7 2-103 1-2 1-4 2-104 2-3 2-105 1-8 2-106 2-1 2-107 1-2 2-108 2-4 2-109 1-3 2-110 1-5 2-111 1-9 2-112 1-6 2-113 1-10 2-201—2-203 2-20—2-22 2-205 2-24 2-206 2-6 2-302 2-11 2-303 2-5 2-304 2-8 2-305 2-2 2-306, 2-307 2-9, 2-10 2-308, 2-309 9-3, 9-4 2-310 2-31 2-311 2-54 2-313 2-40 2-314 2-51 9-3 2-315 2-57 2-316, 2-317 2-52, 2-53 2-318 2-55 2-319 2-50 2-56 2-320 2-58 2-322, 2-323 2-60, 2-61 2-324 9-3 2-325, 2-326 2-62, 2-63 2-329, 2-330 2-64, 2-65 2-332, 2-333 2-66, 2-67 2-335 2-68 2-337, 2-338 2-69, 2-70 2-367 5-23 2-374 5-23 2-401 7-1 2-402, 2-403 7-6, 7-7 2-404 7-11 2-408, 2-409 7-3, 7-4 2-410(a) 7-5 2-411 7-14 2-412 7-12 2-414 7-13 7-16 2-415 7-15 2-416 7-12 2-417, 2-418 7-17 2-501—2-508 8-1—8-8 2-509 8-31 2-601 9-2 2-602 9-1 2-605, 2-606 9-20, 9-21 2-617(a) 14-167 2-617(b) 14-166 2-617(c) 14-168 2-617(f) 14-167 2-703 11-32 2-716 5-41 2-717 14-191—14-195 2-718 5-41 2-719 5-21 2-721(a), (b) 5-22 2-721(e) 5-22 2-722 5-26 2-723, 2-724 5-22 2-732 10-4 2-759, 2-760 15-2 2-779 11-26 2-790 17-10 2-793 7-2 2-801(1), (2) 12-3, 12-4 2-801(3) 12-5 2-801(5) 12-6 2-801(17) 12-15 2-801(21) 11-1 2-801(22) 12-9 2-801(23) 12-8 2-801(24) 12-23 2-801(25) 12-25 2-801(26) 10-2 12-11 2-801(29) 12-13 2-801(30) 12-17 2-801(41) 12-10 2-801(43) 12-24 2-801(48) 12-13, 12-14 2-801(52) 18-12 2-801(56) 12-11 2-801(57) 12-5.1 2-7100 11-22 2-7112—2-7114 14-2—14-4 2-7138 13-1 2-7142 17-11 2-7143 17-12, 17-13 2-7144—2-7146 17-1—17-3 2-7148, 2-7149 17-9 2-7150 17-8, 17-9 2-7151 17-22 2-7153 17-5 2-7154 17-7 2-7155 17-8, 17-9 2-7156, 2-7157 17-20, 17-21 2-7158—2-7160 17-21—17-23 2-7161 17-22 2-7164 11-30 2-7166 17-26 2-7169 11-22 2-7170 17-25 2-7171 12-11 2-7174 11-32 2-7175 17-24 2-7176 17-18 2-7177 14-5 2-7178, 2-7179 17-27, 17-28 2-7181 17-19 2-7182, 2-7183 17-16, 17-17 2-7185 17-29 2-7186 17-15 2-7188 17-31 2-7189 17-30 2-7190 14-1 2-7192 17-33 2-7193 11-25 2-7196 17-32 2-7199 17-4 2-7216 5-41 2-7217 10-1 2-7243 11-21 2-7252, 2-7253 10-2, 10-3 2-7283 5-41 app. A, § 84 18-151 app. II, § 2, app. II, § 3 18-7, 18-8 app. II, § 5 18-9 app. II, § 8 18-10 app. II, § 11 18-11 app. II, § 14 18-27 app. II, § 15, app. II, § 16 18-30, 18-31 app. II, § 17 18-27 app. II, § 18, app. II, § 19 18-21, 18-22 app. II, § 24 18-29 app. II, § 36 18-13 app. II, § 43 18-53 app. II, § 46 18-54 app. II, § 47A 18-50 app. II, § 50 18-52 app. II, § 56 18-20 app. II, § 68 18-81 app. II, § 70, app. II, § 71 18-121, 18-122 app. II, § 73, app. II, § 74 18-123, 18-124 app. II, § 77 18-125 app. II, § 86 18-152 app. II, § 93, app. II, § 94 18-154, 18-155 app. II, § 96 18-156 app. II, § 114— app. II, § 117 18-23—18-26 app. II, § 119 18-34 app. II, § 120 18-82 app. II, § 124— app. II, § 126 18-35—18-37 app. II, § 127 18-83 app. II, § 130, app. II, § 131 18-32, 18-33  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1973 Code which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. Ordinance Number Adoption  Date Section  Section this Code 727  4-12-65 App. C, Art. II 736  6-10-78 App. C, Art. IV 756  8-26-74 1 2-21 758 10-28-74 2 18-1 759 10-28-74 1 15-2 765  2-28-77 1(1) 13-21 1(2)(a), (b) 13-22 1(2)(c), (d) 13-26 3 13-27 13-29 13-31—13-33 4 13-24, 13-25 5 13-34 775  4-28-80 1 18-50 779  4-27-81 1 2-25 780  4-26-82 2 14-1 788  3-28-83 3 7-7 4 7-16 792 12-19-83 1 14-142 2 14-141 14-143 3 14-144 798 11-26-84 1 17-40 2—4 17-41 5, 6 17-42, 17-43 7—12 17-46—17-51 13 17-45 15 17-44 804 12-20-85 1 2-4 2 2-23 806  7-28-86 1 5-232 2 5-231 3(A)—3(E) 5-246—5-250 3(F), 3(G) 5-253, 5-254 3(H) 5-252 3(I) 5-251 4(A)—4(D) 5-270—5-273 5(A) 5-291 5(D) 5-293 5(F) 5-294 5(I) 5-296 5(J) 5-297 5(K)—5(P) 5-299—5-304 6(A)—6(D) 5-321—5-324 7(A)—7(C) 5-341—5-343 809  1-26-87 1(B) 5-362 1(C) 5-364 2 5-361 3 5-365 4 5-367 5 5-366 7, 8 5-370, 5-371 9—11 5-373—5-375 16 5-382 17 5-363 812  9-28-87 11.1 5-201 11.2 5-204 11.4, 11.5 5-214, 5-215 11.6 5-205 11.7 5-207 11.02, 11.03 5-202, 5-203 11.31—11.34 5-210—5-213 11.81, 11.82 5-208, 5-209 11.92 5-206 815  6-27-88 1 5-162 2 5-161 3—22 5-163—5-182 817 12-15-88 1—4 16-2 819 12-30-88 1, 2 2-12 824  9-25-89 1, 2 5-41 825 10-23-89 1(13-81)—1(13-83) 14-81—14-83 1(13-85)—1(13-87) 14-84—14-86 1(13-88) 14-57 1(13-89) 14-59 1(13-90) 14-58 1(13-91) 14-60 1(13-92) 14-56 1(13-93)—1(13-95) 14-87—14-89 826 10-23-89 1(5-50)—1(5-64) 5-201—5-215 829 11- 6-89 1 12-18 83 12- 4-89 App. C, Art. II 832  5-29-90 1(3-1) 3-31 1(3-2) 3-1 1(3-3) 3-3 1(3-4) 3-38 1(3-5) 3-34 1(3-6) 3-39 1(3-7) 3-33 1(3-8) 3-42 1(3-9), 1(3-10) 3-4, 3-5 1(3-11) 3-32 1(3-12)—1(3-17) 3-6—3-11 1(3-18) 3-40 1(3-19) 3-35 1(3-20)—1(3-23) 3-12—3-15 1(3-24) 3-41 1(3-25), 1(3-26) 3-36, 3-37 1(3-27) 3-16 1(3-28) 3-2 1(3-41)—1(3-43) 3-71—3-73 1(3-44) 3-76 1(3-45), 1(3-46) 3-74, 3-75 1(3-61), 1(3-62) 3-91, 3-92 1(3-63), 1(3-64) 3-94, 3-95 1(3-65) 3-97 1(3-66) 3-96 1(3-67) 3-93 1(3-71)—1(3-74) 3-111—3-114 1(3-75) 3-116 1(3-76) 3-119 1(3-77), 1(3-78) 3-117, 3-118 1(3-79) 3-115 1(3-81) 3-131 1(3-91)—1(3-94) 3-146—3-149 1(3-101) 3-161, 3-162 1(3-102)—1(3-104) 3-163—3-165 1(3-111) 3-56 3-171 1(3-112)—1(3-114) 3-172—3-174 833  5-29-90 1 16-2 834  9-27-90 1 5-248 836  1-28-91 1(5-140) 5-362 1(5-141) 5-361 1(5-143)—1(5-151) 5-363—5-371 1(5-152), 1(5-153) 5-373, 5-374 1(5-154(a)) 5-375 1(5-154(b)) 5-369 1(5-155)—1(5-162) 5-376—5-383 838  8-26-91 1 16-2 839  9-23-91 1(13-30)—1(13-37) 14-111—14-118 840  9-23-91 1(19-1)—(19-4) 12-35 841  9-23-91 1(14-1), 1(14-2) 12-3, 12-4 1(14-4) 12-1 842 11-25-91 1(6-1)—1(6-7) 6-1—6-7 843 11-25-91 App. C, Art. III 844 11-25-91 1(12-20)—1(12-35) 13-20—13-35 845 11-25-91 1 16-2 848  2-24-92 1, 2 18-51 851  1-18-93 1 2-4 852  5-24-93 1(4-1)—1(4-15) 4-1—4-15 854  8-30-93 1(13-90) 14-261 1(13-91) 14-291 1(13-92) 14-263 1(13-93) 14-269 1(13-94) 14-265 1(13-95) 14-292 1(13-96) 14-264 1(13-97), 1(13-98) 14-266 1(13-99) 14-267 1(13-100(a) 14-271 1(13-100(b)—(e)) 14-293 1(13-100(f)) 14-271 1(13-100(g)), 1(13-100(h)) 14-293 1(13-100(i)) 14-271 1(13-101)—1(13-105) 14-294—14-298 1(13-106) 14-301 1(13-107), 1(13-108) 14-299, 14-300 1(13-109) 14-268 1(13-110)—(13-112) 14-302 1(13-113) 14-262 1(13-114) 14-270 1(13-115)—(13-118) 14-272 855  9-27-93 1(5-70), 1(5-71) 5-231, 5-232 1(5-80)—1(5-88) 5-246—5-254 1(5-90)—1(5-93) 5-270—5-273 1(5-100)—1(5-113) 5-291—5-304 1(5-120)—1(5-123) 5-321—5-324 1(5-130)—1(5-132) 5-341—5-343 856  9-27-93 1 4-5 857  9-27-93 1 17-46 1(17-40)—1(17-45) 17-40—17-45 1(17-47)—1(17-51) 17-47—17-51 860  1-17-94 1—3 9-41—9-43 4 9-42 5—8 9-44—9-47 861  1-17-94 1(5-181), 1(5-182) 5-407, 5-408 1(5-183)—1(5-190) 5-410—5-417 1(app. A) 5-409 1(5-180) 5-406 866 12-15-94 1       Added 14-31—14-55.14 867  6-26-95 1—8       Added Adopting ordinance, p. ix 869 12-14-95 1 14-31—14-55.15 874 12-16-96 1       Added 20-1—20-5 2       Added 20-20—20-22 3       Added 20-41—20-48 4       Added 20-61 5       Added 20-81—20-84 6       Added 20-101-20-106 876 12-16-96 1 14-31—14-55.15 878  4-28-97 1 5-201—5-217 879  5-27-97 1       Added 5-431—5-441 9806  8-31-98 1       Rpld 5-205(a)(1) 2       Rnbd 5-205(a)(2)—(10)       as 5-205(a)(1)—(9) 9807  8-31-98 1       Added App. C, Art. III, Div. 2 9902  6-28-99       Added 5-450—5-460 9903  5-24-99 1—3       Added 16-3 9904  6-28-99 5-201—5-216       Added 5-217       Rnbd 5-217       as 5-218 9907 11-22-99 1       Added 12-36       Rpld 12-32, 12-33 9908 11-22-99 1       Added 18-15 9909 11-22-99 1       Added 12-37 0004 11- 8-00 1       Rpld 5-373(a)(10) 2       Rpld 5-373(a)(16) 3       Rpld 5-378(d) 4       Rpld 5-382(1)—(7) 5       Rpld 5-383(1) 0005 11-27-00 1 Ch. 14, Art. X(tit.) 2(1.1—3.5)       Added 14-351, 14-361—14-367, 14-376—14-378 0006 11-27-00 1(1.1—3.3)       Added 14-401, 14-421—14-428, 14-451—14-453 0105  4-23-01 1 9-43 0107  9-24-01 1—3       Added 4-16 0108 10-22-01 1 5-201—5-217 0109 11-26-01 1 5-361—5-376, 5-380—5-383 0110 12-10-01 1 14-401, 14-421—14-429, 14-451—14-455 0203 10-28-02 5.1—5.10       Added 2-91—2-100 0204 11-25-02 1 5-361—5-375       Added 5-376 5-380—5-383 0301  2-24-03 1 18-51(b) 0304  7-28-03 1       Rpld 2-91—2-100       Added 2-91—2-105 0305  8-25-03 1 16-2 0306  9-22-03       Added 3-10(a)(4) 0307  9-22-03 1 5-361—5-376, 5-380—5-383 0308 12-15-03 18-51(b) 0401  3-23-04 2 5-362 3 5-380(a)(1) 4       Added 5-380(b)(5) 5 5-380(a)(4) 6 5-372(e) 0403  6-28-04 1 14-423 0408 10-25-04 1       Added 5-274—5-280 0410 10-25-04 1 17-44 2 17-45 3 17-46 0413 12-21-04 1 18-51(b) 0415 12-21-04       Rpld 20-1—20-5, 20-21, 20-22, 20-41—20-48, 20-61, 20-81—20-84, 20-101—20-106       Added 20-1—20-26, 20-31—20-35, 20-40—20-45 0503  5-23-05 1 9-41—9-47 0505  7-25-05 1       Added 17-34—17-36 0506  8-22-05 2 5-363(f) 0510 11-21-05 1       Added Ch. 20, Art. II, 20-61—20-66, 20-81, 20-86—20-92, 20-101—20-108, 20-121, 20-122, 20-131—20-134, 20-141—20-143       Added Ch. 20, Art. III, 20-161—20-164       Added Ch. 20, Art. IV, 20-181—20-190 0512 11-21-05 1       Rpld 5-201—5-217       Added 5-201—5-209 0602  6-26-06 1       Added 12-38 0704  8-27-07 1       Rpld 5-276 2       Rnbd Ch. 5, Art. VIII, Div. 4, Div. 5       as Ch. 5, Art. VIII, Div. 5, Div. 6 3       Added 5-281—5-284 0705 10-22-07 I       Rpld 14-56—14-60, 14-81—14-89 II       Added 14-56—14-60, 14-81—14-89 0801  4-28-08 1       Added 14-368 2       Added 14-369 0802  2-25-08 I 5-362 II 5-372(p) III 5-380(b)6. 0803  5-19-08       Rpld 2-50—2-58       Added 2-50—2-58 0805 10-27-08 1       Rpld 17-40—17-51 2       Added 17-40—17-51 0904  9-28-09 1 9-4(tit.) 0905  9-28-09 1       Added 14-169 2       Added 14-170 0906 10-26-09 1       Added 5-470—5-474 0907 12-14-09 1       Added 20-201—20-208, 20-221—20-224, 20-231—20-236, 20-241—20-248 1001  1-25-2010 1 Ch. 14, Art. III(tit.) 14-56—14-60 14-81—14-89 10-05  7-26-2010 1       Added 20-301—20-309 10-06  7-26-2010 1       Rpld 3-1—3-16, 3-31—3-42, 3-56, 3-71—3-76, 3-91—3-97, 3-111—3-119, 3-131, 3-146—3-149, 3-161—3-165, 3-171—3-174 2       Added 3-1—3-15, 3-31—3-42, 3-56, 3-70—3-74, 3-90—3-96, 3-111, 3-112, 3-120, 3-130—3-132, 3-140—3-143, 3-161—3-165, 3-171—3-174, 3-181 10-08  9-27-2010 1       Rpld 5-361—5-376, 5-380—5-383 2       Added 5-361—5-377, 5-381—5-383 10-10 12-13-2010 1       Added Ch. 5, Art. IX, Div. 1 2       Added 5-384—5-388 10-14  8-23-04 1       Added 17-60—17-65 11-02  5-23-2011 1—3 3-1 4       Added 3-143(7) 11-04 11-17-2011 1 3-130 2 3-140 12-02  4-16-2012 1 5-368(b)(1) 2 5-368(b)(2) 3 5-372(b)(3) 4 5-374 5 5-375(c) 6 5-375(e) 7 5-381 12-05  8-20-2012 1       Added Ch. 20, Art. VII, 20-400, 20-401 12-06  8-20-2012 1       Added Ch. 5, Art. XIV, 5-501 12-07  8-20-2012 1(Att.)       Added 5-502—5-512 12-08 10-22-2012 1       Rpld Ch. 5, Art. IV, 5-116—5-127 2(Att.)       Added Ch. 5, Art. IV, 5-116, 5-118—5-121, 5-123—5-126 12-10 12-17-2012       Added 18-181—18-192 13-01  2-25-2013 1       Rpld 12-12 13-02  6-24-2013 1       Rpld 9-41—9-47 2       Added 9-41—9-47 3       Added 9-81—9-85 13-04 12-16-2013 1       Rpld 5-21       Added 5-21 2 5-26 3 5-41(a) 13-05 12-16-2013 1       Rpld 10-1       Added 10-1 14-01  1-27-2014 1       Rpld 3-1—3-181       Added 3-1—3-193 14-03  2-24-2014 1       Rpld 3-191—3-193 2       Added 3-191—3-193 15-02  3-18-2014 1, 2 5-362 3 5-363(d) 4 5-367 5       Added 5-368(b)(3)a.5. 6 5-375(c) 15-04  8-24-2015 1 17-46 16-03  7-27-2016 1       Added 2-26 16-04  8-22-2016 1 9-4-(b) 16-05  8-22-2016 1 2-21(a) 16-07 12-12-2016 1 5-76 16-08 12-12-2016 1 15-1 2 15-3 17-01  4-24-2017       Rpld 15-2 17-02  5-17-2017 1 20-42 17-03  5-17-2017 1       Rpld 5-79       Added 5-79 2 5-95 3 5-100 18-03 10-22-2018 1       Rpld 20-301—20-309 2(Att.)       Added 20-301—20-310 18-04 10-22-2018 2(Att.) 20-201—20-208, 20-221—20-224, 20-231—20-236, 20-241—20-248 18-05 10-22-2018 1       Rpld 5-406—5-417 2(Att.)       Added 5-401—5-409 3(Att.)       Added 5-410—5-416 18-06 11-19-2018 1 3-72(a) 19-01  1-28-2019 1       Rpld 12-4 2(Att.)       Added 12-4—12-4.3  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. O.C.G.A. Section Section  this Code 1-3-1(d)(1), 1-3-1(d)(3) 1-2 1-3-3 5-202 20-303 1-4-1 1-2 2-10-105 14-51(4) 3-1-5 3-8 3-3-1, 3-3-2 3-31 3-3-2 3-32, 3-33 3-37 3-41 3-3-2.1 3-41 3-3-3 3-38 3-3-7 3-73, 3-74 3-94 3-116, 3-117 3-3-20 3-12 3-3-21 3-10 3-3-21 3-41 3-3-21(a)(1) 3-41 3-3-23 3-13 3-3-24 3-7 3-3-24.2 3-8 3-3-41 3-11 3-3-46 3-41 3-4-80 3-162 3-4-130 3-93 3-115 3-4-132 3-115 3-5-4(d) 3-191 3-5-25, 3-5-26 3-15 3-5-28 3-3 3-15 3-161 3-5-40 3-41 3-161 3-5-80 3-162 3-6-26 3-3 3-6-40 3-41 3-161 3-6-60 3-162 3-7-1 3-111 3-7-40 3-112 3-9-3 3-131 3-11-2—3-11-4 3-171—3-173 3-11-4 3-174 tit. 4, ch. 1 4-2 4-1-1 et seq. 4-2 4-8-5 Ch. 4 4-8-20 et seq. 4-6 4-11-1 et seq. 4-14 5-3-29 5-506 7-1-730 et seq. 14-143 tit. 8 Ch. 5 tit. 8, ch. 2 5-503 8-2-20 et seq. 5-41 8-2-204 5-164 8-2-206—8-2-222 5-166—5-182 9-6-1 et seq. 5-381(c)(5) 10-1-1 et seq. 14-60 10-1-390 et seq. 14-60 10-2-1 et seq. 14-4 12-2-8 5-203 20-304 20-305 12-4-72 5-202 20-303 tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2 5-203 tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 5, pt. 6 5-203 12-5-20 et seq. 5-201 20-4 12-5-20 20-302 12-5-23(a)(5) 5-204 20-305 12-5-30 20-302 20-303 20-304 12-5-30(f) 5-201 5-203 20-302 20-304 12-5-282 20-302 12-5-286 20-304 12-5-440 et seq. 5-201 20-302 Ch. 12-7 20-302 12-7-1 et seq. 5-203 20-304 12-7-6 5-202 20-303 12-7-6(b) 5-201 5-203 20-303 20-304 12-7-6(c) 20-304 12-7-7(e) 5-205 20-306 12-7-7(f)(1) 20-305 12-7-7.1 5-202 20-303 12-7-8(a) 5-201 5-205 20-302 20-305 20-306 12-7-17(9), (10) 5-204 20-305 12-7-19 5-201 12-7-19(b)(1) 20-308 12-7-19(b)(4) 20-308 12-7-20 5-204 5-207 20-305 20-308 12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 11, Art. II Ch. 13, Art. II 12-9-55 18-32 tit. 16 12-21 tit. 16, ch. 13 12-21 tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2 5-503 16-4-8 12-15 16-7-21 15-1 15-3 16-7-21 et seq. 12-10 16-7-22 et seq. 12-8, 12-9 16-7-40 et seq. Ch. 11, Art. II 16-10-25 12-32 16-10-30 12-2 16-10-71 14-83 16-11-30 et seq. 12-3 16-11-33, 16-11-34 12-15, 12-16 16-11-36 12-18 16-11-42 12-7 16-11-44 12-5 16-11-103 et seq. 12-11 16-12-4 Ch. 4 4-14 16-12-20 et seq. 12-5 12-5.1 12-616-12-35 3-143 16-12-80 5-373 16-12-120 11-1 16-13-1 et seq. 12-21 17-6-10 7-7 17-6-70—17-6-72 7-8—7-10 17-15A-2 5-471 ch. 21-3 8-1 21-3-51 2-12 21-3-60 2-12 21-3-90 8-6 21-3-91 8-5 21-3-405 8-33 21-3-422—21-3-430 8-31—8-39 22-1-6 et seq. 17-21 tit. 25, ch. 2 5-503 25-2-2 5-161 25-2-4 10-1 25-2-12.1 10-1 25-10-1 et seq. 10-2 27-5-6 Ch. 4 31-19-3 4-12 32-6-83 5-370(e) 33-3-5 14-111 33-8-4 14-115 33-8-8 et seq. 14-51(5) 33-8-8(b)(1), 33-8-8(b)(2) 14-112, 14-113 33-8-8(c) 14-118 33-8-8(d) 14-114 33-8-8.1 14-115 33-8-8.1(e) 14-118 33-8-8.2 14-116 33-8-8.2(b)(1) 14-118 36-1-15 12-28 36-18-1 5-202 20-303 36-32-3 7-1 36-35-4(c) 2-25 36-60-4 Ch. 18, Art. IV, Div. 2 36-61-11 5-127 38-3-1 et seq. 6-2 tit. 40, ch. 6 18-1 tit. 40, ch. 7 18-172 18-188 tit. 40, ch. 8, art. 3 18-186 40-1-1 18-1 40-5-29 18-33 40-5-29(c) 18-33 40-5-53(a), 40-5-53(b) 18-28 40-5-58 14-243 40-5-64 14-243 40-6-1 et seq. 18-1 40-6-2 12-2 40-6-7 18-12 40-6-8 18-2 40-6-47 18-59 40-6-183 18-50 40-6-203 18-14 40-6-206 Ch. 18, Art. IV, Div. 2 40-6-242 18-10 40-6-249 Ch. 11, Art. II 40-6-273 18-29 40-6-290 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. V 40-6-371(a) 18-12 40-6-371(a)(2) 18-21 40-6-371(a)(4) 18-59 40-6-372 et seq. 18-1 40-6-372—40-6-376 18-1 40-7-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VI 18-172 40-7-6 18-172 40-8-7 18-7 40-8-200 18-32 40-9-31 18-31 40-11-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. IV, Div. 2 40-13-1 18-34 40-13-27 18-27 40-13-50 et seq. 18-23 tit. 41, ch. 39A 5-504 41-1-1 et seq. Ch. 11 18-7 41-2-1 et seq. 5-127 41-2-7—41-2-10 5-510 41-2-7—41-2-17 5-503 5-510 41-2-8—41-2-17       5-434(e), (f) 5-441 41-2-9 5-121 41-2-12 5-122 41-2-12—41-2-17 5-510 41-2-13 5-504 5-121 41-2-17 5-431 42-8-62 14-243 tit. 43 14-45(a) 43-6-25.1 Ch. 14, Art. VII 43-17-1 et seq. 14-60 44-1-13 Ch. 19 44-10-1—44-10-8 5-249 45-10-1 2-91 tit. 46, ch. 3 14-51(2) 46-5-1 14-169 46-5-1 et seq. 14-170 46-7-15 14-51(6) tit. 48, ch. 4 5-505 48-3-9 5-503 48-4-78 5-505 48-4-80 5-505 48-4-81 5-505 48-5-355 14-51(7) 48-5-356 14-51(8) 48-6-93 14-142 14-51(9) 48-6-93(d) 14-144 48-13-5 14-32(note) 48-13-5—48-13-26       14-40 48-13-6 14-31(note) 14-55.12(note) 48-13-7 14-31, 14-34(a), (f) 14-35(note) 48-13-8(b) 14-33(note) 48-13-9(b) 14-33(b) 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) 14-38(a) 48-13-10 14-34(note) 14-39(note) 14-55.13(note) 48-13-10(d) 14-33(note) 48-13-10(f) 14-38(note) 48-13-12 14-36(note) 48-13-13 14-34(note) 48-13-13(3) 14-38(note) 48-13-14 14-34(note) 14-42(note) 48-13-15 14-55.1(note) 48-13-16 14-51(note) 48-13-17 14-31(note) 14-34(a), (e), (note) 48-13-19 14-33(note) 48-13-20 14-41(note) 48-13-21 14-41(note) 48-13-23 14-45(note) 48-13-25 14-55.5(note) 48-13-26 14-41(note) 14-55.5(note) 48-13-55 14-51(10) tit. 50, ch. 13 5-181 50-14-1 et seq. 2-21 50-27-3(22) 3-143  