THE CODE OF TIFTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted: January 6, 2003 
Effective: January 7, 2003 
____________ 
Published in 2002 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
TIFTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
J.G. "Jamie" Cater, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Johnny Terrell, Jr.  Vice Mayor 
  
Marianna Keesee 
  
Christopher Parrott 
  
Julie Smith 
  
City Council 
____________ 
Larry D. Riner 
City Manager 
____________ 
Robert C. Wilmot 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Rona Martin 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
TIFTON, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Paul O. Johnson 
Mayor 
____________ 
W. Joe Lewis 
David L. Hetzel 
Richard B. Chalfant 
Roosevelt Russell, Sr. 
City Council 
____________ 
Charles H. Howell 
City Manager 
____________ 
Gregory C. Sowell 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Carla D. Cooper 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Tifton, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1974 Code, as supplemented through October 1998, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1974 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Ron K. McLaughlin, Senior Code Attorney, and William B. Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Carla Cooper, City Clerk, and Gregory Sowell, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tifton, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tifton, Georgia. 
© ;hg;Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tifton, Georgia. 2002. 
Adopting Ordinance  Ordinance No. 2003-001 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Tifton, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained By the Mayor and City Council: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Tifton, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 90, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 1, 2002, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment not exceeding 1 year or both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after April 1, 2002, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective January 7th, 2003. 
Passed and adopted by the January this 6th day of 2003. 
By: /s/  Paul O. Johnson       Mayor 
ATTEST: 

Recodification Bridge Ordinance  Ordinance No. 2003-004 
An Ordinance of the City of Tifton, Georgia, to provide a bridge from the old Code of Ordinances of the City of Tifton, Georgia to the new Code of Ordinances for the City of Tifton, Georgia for certain omitted ordinances. 
WHEREAS, by Ordinance No. 2003-01, the City Council adopted the Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Tifton, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 90, each inclusive; and 
WHEREAS, this new recodification of the Code of Ordinances published by Municipal Code Corporation involved an extensive review and reformulation of the then-existing Code of Ordinances of the City of Tifton including reorganizing and renumbering many of the sections and chapters; and 
WHEREAS, it has now been determined by the City of Tifton that Municipal Code Corporation, through inadvertence, has unintentionally omitted several ordinances that are to be continued in force and are not to be repealed by the adoption of the new Code of Ordinances referenced in Ordinance No. 2003-01. 
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Tifton, Georgia that: 
I. AMENDMENT 
The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Tifton, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 90, each inclusive, is hereby amended to save from repeal those portions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Tifton existing prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 2003-01 which, through inadvertence, were omitted from publication by Municipal Code Corporation. Such ordinances shall be attached to the official Code of Ordinances maintained in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Tifton and shall be included in the first revision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Tifton to be published by Municipal Code Corporation later this year. All other provisions of Ordinance No. 2003-01 are ratified and reaffirmed. 
II. EFFECTIVE DATE 
The effective date of this ordinance shall be retroactive to January 6, 2003, the date of adoption of Ordinance No. 2003-01. 
Read, passed and adopted on first reading at a regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Tifton held on the 3rd day of February, 2003. 

 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
CITY OF TIFTON—NEW CHARTER.  No. 179 (House Bill No. 1048).  AN ACT 
To provide a new charter for the City of Tifton; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, vacancies, compensation, expenses, qualifications, prohibitions, conflicts of interest, and suspension and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for oaths, organization, meetings, quorum, voting, rules, and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for a mayor and vice mayor and certain duties, powers, and other matters relative thereto; to provide for administrative affairs and responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, a city clerk, a city finance director, a city accountant, and other personnel and matters relating thereto; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof and other matters relative to those judges; to provide for the court's jurisdiction, powers, practices, and procedures; to provide for the right of certiorari; to provide for elections; to provide for taxation, licenses, and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for auditing, accounting, budgeting, and appropriations; to provide for city contracts and purchasing; to provide for the conveyance of property; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for prior ordinances and rules, pending matters, and existing personnel; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide council districts; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal a specific Act; to provide for effective dates; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this Part I is the Charter of the city, as adopted by 1997 Ga. Laws, page 3970. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.10. - Name. 
The City of Tifton, in Tift County, Georgia, is reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style Tifton, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The corporate boundaries of this city shall be as described and set forth its Appendix B attached to this charter. 
(b)  The city council may provide for changes in Appendix B by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. 
Section 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams or bodies of water within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Eminent domain. To acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof and, for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future; 
(10)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire districts and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(11)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(12)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(13)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(14)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(15)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares or other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(16)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(17)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(18)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(19)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(20)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(21)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which such utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21.1)  Telecommunications. The city shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, maintain, operate and contract with respect to a telecommunications systems network in order to provide telecommunications services and similar other services, including cable television services (CATV) internet services, to establish and charge rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished or made available by such undertaking; to interconnect its system or services or both with the systems or services of consumers and other providers, to use telecommunications to respond to community needs, encourage the development of information-based organizations in the City of Tifton, Georgia, to finance from time to time any such telecommunications systems through the issuance of revenue bonds as then permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; and to make any contract with respect to and furnish the services of any said systems to consumers within or outside the corporate limits of the city; 
(22)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(23)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(24)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(25)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(26)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(27)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(28)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(29)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(30)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(31)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(32)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(33)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands arid to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(34)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(35)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(36)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of any intoxicating liquors or alcoholic beverages, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(37)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(38)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(39)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(40)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(41)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(42)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to execute all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2004-035, § 1, 12-6-2004) 
Section 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Section 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this charter. However, until such election is held, the city council established in this charter shall in all respects be successor to and continuation of the city governing authority under prior law. 
(b)  For the purposes of electing members of the city council, the city shall be divided into four council districts. Those districts shall consist of the territory of the City of Tifton as contained in the description of the districts attached to this Act as Appendix D and made a part hereof and further identified as: "Operator: local Client: tifton Plan: tiftwk7." 
(c)  For purposes subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  The terms "Tract," "Block," and "VTD" shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; 
(2)  The term "Precinct" is synonymous with the term "voting precinct" and means a geographical area designated by Article 7 of Chapter 2 or 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., within which all electors vote at one polling place; 
(3)  Whenever the description of any council district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; 
(4)  Precinct names and designations following VTD designations are included for convenience only; and in the event the description of any council district contains a conflict between the geographical boundaries of any VTD and the boundaries of the following named precinct, the geographical boundary of the VTD as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia shall control; 
(5)  Any part of the City of Tifton which is not included in any council district described in subsection (b) of this section shall be included within that council district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; and 
(6)  Any part of the City of Tifton which is described in subsection (b) of this section as being included in a particular council district shall nevertheless not be included within such council district if such part is not contiguous to such council district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that council district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia. 
Section 2.11. - City councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless: 
(1)  That person has attained 21 years of age; 
(2)  That person has been a city resident for 12 months immediately preceding the date of taking office; and 
(3)  That person is a resident of the city and, for councilmembers, a resident of that particular council district, as of the date of qualifications for election to the particular position. 
Section 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of Vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  Vacancies —  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter. 
(b)  Suspension —  Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter. 
Section 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Conflict of interest —  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which that person is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of that person or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to that person's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which that person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which that person has a financial interest. 
(b)  Disclosure —  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that person shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  Use of public property —  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Contracts voidable and rescindable —  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Ineligibility of elected official —  Except where authorized by law, no councilmember nor the mayor shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by the government or any agency thereof during the term for which that person was elected. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Penalties for violation — 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit that person's office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Section 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this charter. 
Section 2.17. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the first Monday in January of 1998. The meeting shall be called to order by the city attorney and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: "I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America." 
Section 2.18. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
Section 2.19. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Section 2.20. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Three councilmembers or two council- members and the mayor shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  The mayor and vice mayor shall each be entitled to vote on all questions. The mayor or in his or her absence the vice mayor may not make a motion but may second a motion made by another councilmember. 
(c)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Section 2.21. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The City Council of Tifton hereby ordains..." and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 2.23 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Section 2.22. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Section 2.23. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Section 2.24. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.21 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to Section 2.25 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Section 2.25. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Tifton, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city manager. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed as soon as practicable following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city manager. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Section 2.26. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the city manager's compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of that person's executive and administrative qualifications. 
Section 2.27. - Removal of city manager. 
(a)  The city council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, that person may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall he held within 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; 
(3)  If the city manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the city manager has requested a public hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the public hearing. 
(b)  The city manager shall continue to receive the city manager's salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
Section 2.28. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the city manager's temporary absence or disability which shall, in no case, be longer than 30 days. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or the city manager's disability shall cease. 
Section 2.29. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the city manager's charge by or under this charter. The city manager: 
(1)  Shall appoint and, when the city manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the city manager appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  Shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Shall attend all city council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion, but the city manager may not vote; 
(4)  Shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Shall prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)  Shall submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Shall make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Shall keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the city manager deems desirable; and 
(9)  Shall perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city council. 
Section 2.30. - Council's interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.15 of this charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Section 2.31. - Selection of vice mayor. 
By a majority vote of all its members, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as vice mayor who shall serve a term of two years. The vice mayor shall be elected at the first regular meeting in each even-numbered year. The vice mayor shall continue to vote and otherwise participate as a councilmember. 
Section 2.32. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to appoint all council committees; 
(4)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; and 
(5)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved ordinances and resolutions. 
Section 2.34. - Vice mayor. 
During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the vice mayor of the city council, or in such person's absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the city council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Section 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by the budget resolution or ordinance establishing position classifications and pay plans. 
(d)  There shall be a director or department head of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director or department head shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's or department head's department or agency. 
(e)  The city manager may appoint, suspend, or remove all nonelective officers and employees of the city except the city attorney and city auditor and may consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments, or units of the city. The city council shall deal with and communicate with the officers and employees of the city solely through the city manager, but nothing contained in this charter shall prevent the city council from conducting such inquiries into the operation of the city government and the conduct of the affairs of the city as it may deem necessary. 
(f)  Neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or the removal from, office by the city manager or any of his or her subordinates or in any manner, take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees of the City of Tifton. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the mayor and councilmembers shall deal with the administrative personnel of the city solely through the city manager, and neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager either publicly or privately. 
(g)  The city manager may perform such other duties as may be given him or her by the city council which are not inconsistent with the charter or ordinances of the city and shall have charge of all property of the city. All public utilities owned and operated by the city shall be under the control and management of the city manager. 
(h)  The city manager shall sign all agreements, contracts, deeds, leases, and covenants in behalf of the city. 
(i)  The city manager shall be solely responsible for collection of all taxes, business license fees, assessments, and moneys due the city. 
Section 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. The city council may also by ordinance provide for liability coverage for all members of any board, commission, or authority while such members are conducting official business of the city. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of the members of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Section 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; shall administer the oath of office to each member of the city council, including the mayor; and shall draft or review every ordinance submitted to the city council and, as a matter of course, shall sign each such ordinance indicating such drafting or review; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of the city attorney by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. 
Section 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city manager shall appoint a city clerk who shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for keeping and preserving the city seal and all records of the city council. 
(2)  Attend all meetings of the city council and keep minutes of the proceedings at such meetings. 
(3)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the city council or the city manager. 
Section 3.14. - City finance director. 
The city manager shall appoint a finance director to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes by the city. The finance director shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. 
Section 3.15. - City auditor. 
The city council shall appoint a city auditor to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Section 3.16. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. The city manager, city attorney, and city auditor shall receive such compensation as provided by the authority which appoints them to their respective offices. 
Section 3.17. - Personnel policies. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of personnel policies which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Personnel policies shall be adopted consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Section 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Tifton. 
Section 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as deemed necessary or desirable by the city manager. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by budget resolution. 
(d)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the city attorney, that such judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the judge's office to the best of the judge's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered in the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.19 of this charter. 
Section 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as necessary and prudent. 
Section 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $1,000.00 or six months in jail, or by one or both or any part thereof, in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court. 
(c)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided; and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city or county jail not exceeding 180 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operations and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served and executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
( Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1 , 6-2-2014) 
Section 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Tift County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city manager, and where appropriate the city council by ordinance, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Section 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.11. - Election of the city council and mayor. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election biennially on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  There shall be elected the mayor and any two councilmembers at one election and at every other election thereafter. The remaining city council seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created as provided for in the initial election held under this charter pursuant to Section 7.12. Persons elected to such offices shall take office and begin their terms of office on the first day of January immediately following their election. 
Section 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designation. 
Section 5.13. - Election by majority vote. 
The mayor and city council shall be elected by a majority vote of the votes cast for each position. 
Section 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
ALTERNATIVE 1 
Section 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, vice mayor, or any other councilmember shall forfeit his or her office if he or she: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during his or her term of office any qualification of the office as prescribed by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Willfully and knowingly violates any expressed prohibitions of this charter. 
(3)  Is convicted of a felony. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor, vice mayor, or any other councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided in Section 5.14. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Section 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Section 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling in this city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling in this city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Section 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 6.22. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Section 6.23. - Budget resolution. 
The city council shall provide a resolution on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. The city council shall also comply with the budgeting and auditing provisions of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
Section 6.24. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the city manager may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 6.25. - Adoption. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council shall by ordinance adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than July 1 of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation resolution adopted pursuant to Section 6.23 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. 
( Ord. No. 2015-08, § 1 , 6-1-2015) 
Section 6.26. - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Section 6.27. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Section 6.28. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with the city manager's recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.23 of this charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than October 1 of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by the city manager's recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Section 6.29. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Section 6.30. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.19 of this charter. 
Section 6.31. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 6.32. - Sale of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the city manager to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Section 7.11. - Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations. 
Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of this city not in conflict with this charter shall continue in force, unless repealed or amended, for two years from the effective date of this charter. During such two-year period, the city council shall review all such provisions and shall readopt, repeal, or amend each, so that a codification as provided by subsection (b) of Section 2.25 of this charter is accomplished. 
Section 7.12. - First election under this charter. 
If that Act introduced during the regular 1997 session of the General Assembly providing for the annexation of property into the corporate limits of the City of Tifton becomes law and is approved by the electors, the first municipal election shall be on Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1997, at which the position of mayor and five council members' positions shall be filled. City council seats presently held by Jamie Cater, Spud Bowen, Frank Doles, and Joe Lewis shall be designated Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively, and the seat presently held by Paul Grisham shall be designated as mayor. All persons giving notice of candidacy for a city council seat shall be a resident of the district represented by that particular seat. Districts are designated under the official district map showing the geographical boundaries of each district. This map shall be maintained by the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection. Successful candidates shall likewise meet the other residency requirements for maintaining office as set forth in Section 2.11 of this charter. In order to establish continuity, some of the initial council terms shall be for two years but each councilmember elected thereafter shall serve a full term years provided in Section 2.11 of this charter. As a further measure of continuity, Joe Lewis, who was the incumbent most recently elected and who has been elected to a four-year term by voters comprising 100 percent of his constituency in District 4, shall continue to serve his current term under the designation of District 4 until the 1999 election cycle. The initial terms of office and the year in which each council seat shall be up for election, until all such seats are established on a quadrennial cycle, is attached hereto as Appendix F. 
Section 7.12[A]. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of this city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 60 days before or during which time the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointed officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Section 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 7.14. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Section 7.15. - Specific repealer. 
An Act entitled "An Act to provide a new charter for the City of Tifton," approved March 30, 1977 (Ga. L. 1977, p. 4333), and all amendatory Acts thereto, are repealed. 
Section 7.16. - [When charter to become effective.] 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Section 7.17. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
APPENDIX "B" [2] 
All that land lying and being in the Sixth Laud District of Tift County, Georgia, and being described as all that property located within the current outer boundaries of the City of Tifton which shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The current outer boundaries of the City of Tifton, at all times, shall be shown on a map to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designed: "City of Tifton." Alterations in these outer boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entries upon or additions to such map. Such entries or additions shall be made by and under the direction of the city manager. Photographic, typed or other copies of such map certified by the city clerk shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map. 
APPENDIX "D" 
District No. 1 
Tract: 9603. 
Block: 3003, 3066, 3067, 3069, 3071, 3072, 3132, 4000, 4001, 4003, 4004, 4005, 4007, 4008, 4009, 4010 
Tract: 9604. 
Block: 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 3004, 3005, 3006, 3009, 3010, 3011, 3012, 3013, 3014, 3015, 3016, 3017, 3018, 3019, 3022, 3023, 3024, 3027, 3029, 3031, 3032, 3033, 3034, 3035, 3036, 3039, 3042, 3043, 3044, 3046, 3047, 3048, 4016, 4026, 4027, 4028, 4029, 4030, 4031, 4032, 4033, 4034, 4035, 4036, 4037, 4038, 4039, 4040, 4042, 4043, 4044, 4045, 4046, 4047, 4048, 4049, 4050, 4051, 4052, 4053, 4054, 4055, 4056, 4057, 4058, 4059, 4065, 5000, 6000, 6001, 6002, 6003, 6004, 6005, 6006, 6007, 6008, 6009, 6010, 6011, 6012, 6013, 6014, 6015, 6016, 6017, 6018, 6019, 6020, 6021, 6022, 6023, 6024, 6025, 6026, 6027, 6028, 6029, 6030, 6031, 6032, 6033, 6034, 6035, 6036, 6037 
District No. 2 
Tract: 9603. 
Block: 1041, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025, 2026, 2027, 2028, 2029, 2030, 2031, 2032, 2033, 2034, 2035, 2036, 2037, 2038, 2039, 2040, 2041, 3004, 3037, 3038, 3039, 3045, 3046, 3047, 3048, 3053, 3054, 3055, 3056, 3057, 3058, 3059, 3060, 3061, 3062, 3063, 3064, 3065, 3070, 3073, 3074, 3075, 3076, 3077, 3078, 3079, 3080, 3081, 3082, 3084, 3085, 3087, 3091, 3092, 3093, 3094, 3097, 3098, 3099, 3100, 3101, 3102, 3103, 3104, 3106, 3107, 3108, 3109, 3110, 3113, 3114, 3115, 3116, 3117, 3118, 3119, 3121, 3122, 3123, 3124, 3135, 3126, 3127, 3129, 3130, 3131, 3133, 3134, 3135, 3136, 3137, 3138, 3139, 3143, 3144, 3145, 3146, 3147, 3148, 4002, 5000, 5001, 5002, 5003, 5004, 5005, 5006, 5007, 5008, 5009, 5010, 5011, 5012, 5013, 5014, 5015, 5016, 5017, 5018, 5019, 5020, 5021, 5022, 5023, 5024, 5025, 5026, 5027, 5028, 5029, 5030, 5031, 5032, 5033, 5034, 5035, 5036, 5037, 5038, 5039, 5040, 5041, 5042, 5043, 5044, 5045, 6000, 6001, 6002, 6003, 6004, 6005, 6006, 6007, 6008, 6009, 6010, 6011, 6012, 6013, 6014, 6015, 6016, 6017, 6018, 6034, 6035 
Tract: 9607. 
Block: 2016, 2021, 2022, 2023, 2031, 2032, 2037, 2038, 2040, 2045, 2047, 2051, 2052, 2053, 2054, 2073, 2076, 2195 
District No. 3 
Tract: 9602. 
Block: 1058, 1076 
Tract: 9606 
Block: 1039, 1040, 1041, 1042, 1043, 1044, 1045, 1046, 1047, 1048, 1049, 1050, 1051, 1052, 1053, 1054, 1055, 1056, 1057, 1058, 1059, 1061, 1062, 1063, 1064, 1065, 1066, 1067, 1068, 1069, 1070, 1071, 1072, 1073, 1074, 1075, 1076, 1077, 1078, 1079, 1080, 1081, 1082, 1083, 1084, 1088, 1089, 1090, 1091, 1092, 1093, 1094, 2036, 2037, 2038, 2039, 2040, 2041, 2042, 2043, 2046, 2047, 2048, 2049, 2051, 2052, 2060, 2071, 3003, 4000 
Tract: 9607. 
Block: 1002, 1003, 1004, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1009, 1010, 1011, 1012, 1013, 1014, 1015, 1016, 1017, 1018, 1019, 1020, 1021, 1022, 1023, 1024, 1025, 1026, 1027, 1028, 1029, 1030, 1031, 1032, 1033, 1034, 1035, 1036, 1037, 1038, 1039, 1040, 1041, 1042, 1043, 1044, 1045, 1046, 1047, 1048, 2019, 2020, 2029, 2030, 2055, 2056, 2057, 2058, 2059, 2060, 2061, 2062, 2063, 2064, 2065, 2066, 2067, 2068, 2070, 2071, 2072, 2077, 2082, 2083, 2084, 2085, 2086, 2087, 2088, 2089, 2090, 2091, 2092, 2093, 2094, 2095, 2096, 2097, 2098, 2099, 2100, 2101, 2102, 2103, 2104, 2105, 2106, 2107, 2108, 2109, 2110, 2114, 2118, 2119, 2120, 2121, 2122, 2123, 2124, 2125, 2126, 2127, 2129, 2131, 2134, 2135, 2136, 2138, 2150, 2151, 2155, 2156, 2157, 2160, 2161, 2162, 2164, 2165, 2184, 2190, 3000, 3001, 3002, 3003, 3004, 3005, 3008, 3013, 3015, 4000, 4001, 4002, 4003, 4004, 4005, 4006, 4007, 4008, 4009, 4010, 4011, 4012, 4013, 4014, 4015, 4016, 4017, 4018, 4019, 4020, 4021, 4022, 4023, 4024, 4025, 4027, 4028, 4029, 4030, 4031, 4035 
Tract: 9608. 
Block: 1000 
Tract: 9609. 
Block 3026, 3033 
District No. 4 
Tract: 9603. 
Block: 1000, 1001, 1002, 1003, 1004, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1008, 1009, 1010, 1011, 1012, 1013, 1014, 1015, 1016, 1017, 1018, 1019, 1020, 1021, 1022, 1023, 1024, 1025, 1026, 1027, 1028, 1029, 1030, 1031, 1032, 1033, 1034, 1035, 1036, 1037, 1038, 1039, 1040, 1042, 1043, 1044, 1045, 1046, 1047, 1048, 1049, 1050, 1051, 1052, 1053, 1054, 1055, 1056, 1057, 1058, 1059, 1060, 4006, 4011, 4012, 4013, 4014, 4015, 4016, 4017, 4018, 4019, 4020, 4021, 4022, 4023, 4024, 4025, 6019, 6020, 6021, 6022, 6023, 6024, 6025, 6026, 6027, 6028, 6029, 6030, 6031, 6032, 6033, 6036 
Tract: 9604. 
Block: 1000, 1001, 1002, 1003, 1004, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1008, 1009, 1010, 1011, 1012, 1013, 1014, 1015, 1016, 1017, 1018, 1019, 1020, 1021, 1022, 1023, 1024, 1025, 1026, 1027, 1028, 1029, 1030, 1031, 1032, 1033, 1034, 1036, 1036, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025, 5001, 5002, 5003, 5004, 5005, 5006, 5007, 5008, 5009, 5010, 5011, 5012, 5013, 5014, 5015, 5016, 5017, 5018, 5019, 5020, 5021, 5022, 5023, 5024 
Tract: 9606. 
Block: 1000, 1001, 1002, 1003, 1004, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1008, 1009, 1010, 1011, 1012, 1013, 1014, 1015, 1016, 1017, 1018, 1019, 1020, 1021, 1022, 1023, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2013, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2023, 2028, 2053 
Tract: 9607. 
Block 1000, 1001, 1008 
(Ord. No. 2011-13, § 1, 11-7-2011) 
APPENDIX "F"  STAGGERED ELECTIONS  UNDER PROPOSED NEW CHARTER  FOR CURRENT CITY LIMITS 

 
(1998 Ga. Laws, p. 3513, § 2) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Appendices "A," "C," and "E" have been omitted from this compilation as the annexation referred to therein failed, rendering such appendices moot. 

CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of ordinances amending the Charter. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3(a). 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Tifton, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Tifton City Code." 
(Code 1974, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of council or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Advice and consent. The term "advice and consent" of the city council means an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire council. 
Alley. The term "alley" shall mean a public right-of-way, not intended to be a vehicular arterial or to provide the primary means of access to abutting property, but used for service access to the rear or side properties otherwise abutting a public street. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The term "the city" shall mean the City of Tifton in the County of Tift and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City council. The terms "city council" and "the council" shall mean the city council of the City of Tifton, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean The Code of Tifton, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The terms "county" and "the county" shall mean the County of Tift, State of Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the mayor and council. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Tifton" were added to such name or title. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or adjacent open space, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office, which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the city council. 
Seal. The term "seal" shall mean the city seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" shall mean the sheriff of Tift County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The terms "state" and "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, viaduct or bridge and their approaches within the city. Notwithstanding the broad meaning of "public way," the term "street" expressly excludes the term "alley" or any right of way less than 26 feet in width. 
Tenant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Written and in writing. The terms "in writing" and "written" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1974, § 1-2; Ord. No. 2004-010A, § I, 6-21-2004) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1974, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of Code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1974, § 1-5) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained in the ordinance, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance that repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1974, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Tifton, Georgia is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered, which section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1974, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1974, § 1-7) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty, continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided; and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city or county jail not exceeding 180 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(Code 1974, § 1-8; Ord. No. 2014-13 , 6-2-2014) 
Charter reference— Punishment for municipal ordinances, § 4.13(c). 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(3); the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(13); hearing officers, § 6-191 et seq.; administration and enforcement of animal regulations, § 14-41 et seq.; court, ch. 30; administration of flood damage prevention regulations, § 42-61 et seq.; planning and zoning, ch. 54; Greater Tift County planning and zoning commission, § 54-31 et seq.; administrative enforcement of historic preservation, § 54-144; public safety, ch. 58; administration of sewer use regulations, § 62-32; administrative enforcement remedies for sewer use, § 62-281 et seq.; taxation, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 82; tree board, § 86-31 et seq.; administrator, zoning, app. A, § 2-3; administration, enforcement, and penalties of zoning regulations, app. A, § 11-1 et seq.; zoning board of appeals, app. A, § 12-1 et seq.; duties of zoning administrator, board of appeals, city council and courts on matters of appeal, app. A, § 14-1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipalities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-30 et seq.; powers of municipalities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Oath of office. 
The following oath of office is required for all elected officials and public officials appointed pursuant to Charter of the City of Tifton: 
"I, ____________ , a citizen of the City of Tifton, Georgia, and being a public official of the City of Tifton and the recipient of public funds for services rendered, do hereby solemnly swear and affirm that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of Georgia and the Charter of the City of Tifton and that I will faithfully perform my duties as (Mayor) (councilmember) (a public officer) of this city. 
I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. 
I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which, by the laws of the State of Georgia, I am prohibited from holding, and I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. 
As the elected representative from District ____________ , I swear that I have been a resident thereof for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and the City Charter of the City of Tifton." 
(Ord. No. 2001-020, 7-26-2001; Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-2. - Deposit and withdrawal of city funds. 
(a)  All funds and monies of the city shall promptly following receipt thereof be deposited into accounts of the city established with such banks, institutions and other entities as the city council shall from time to time designate as depositories of funds of the city. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall establish such accounts for the deposit of funds and monies of the city as the city manager shall from time to time determine to be appropriate with such banks, institutions and entities as are designated from time to time by the city council as depositories of funds of the city. 
(c)  All funds and monies of the city on deposit with any and all depositories thereof shall be withdrawn therefrom only pursuant to check, draft, authorization or other order which shall contain the signature (or facsimile thereof) of both the city manager plus either: 
(1)  The city clerk; 
(2)  The finance director; 
with the signatures of both the city manager and either the city clerk or the finance director (or a facsimile thereof) being required to withdraw funds or to direct payment of funds from the depository accounts of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-3. - Social security. 
The city hereby pledges an amount, which it would receive in state grant funds, as security for assurance that it will make collections from its employees, submit required reports and remit payments to the state agency as agreed to in its plan of coverage of employees for social security benefits. The city further agrees that if the amount of state grant funds, which it is entitled to receive in a calendar year, is less than its annual payment to the state agency, as may be determined by the state agency, then the city shall deposit in escrow, when so notified in writing by the state agency and in accordance with its rules and regulations, an amount which, when added to the city's state grant funds, would total an amount sufficient to meet its obligations of reporting and remitting collections to the state agency. 
(Code 1974, § 2-3(b)) 
Sec. 2-4. - Execution of deeds. 
The city manager shall have power and authority to execute all deeds for and on behalf of the city, which relate to sales under execution or deeds to property acquired under sale for taxes, when such offer to redeem such property is made within the statutory period for redemption. 
(Code 1974, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-5. - Personnel provisions. 
Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance or resolution adopting, establishing or amending any job classification and compensation plan for the employees of the county or any other personnel rules, regulations, policies or procedures, which has been adopted by the mayor and council. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out in this Code. 
Sec. 2-6. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the City of Tifton shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of the next immediate calendar year. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
( Ord. No. 2015-07, § I , 4-6-2015) 
Secs. 2-7—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-31. - Regular meetings required; time, place. 
The city council shall hold a regular meeting at least once each month at such place and at such hour as may be provided by the rules of the council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-15) 
Sec. 2-32. - Calling special meetings. 
The mayor, or in his absence, the vice-mayor or a majority of the council, may call a meeting at any time he or they think necessary, by giving notice to each councilmember not absent from the city. 
(Code 1974, § 2-16) 
Sec. 2-33. - Duty to attend meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the mayor and each councilmember to attend all meetings of the council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-17) 
Sec. 2-34. - General duties of councilmembers. 
It shall be the duty of each councilmember to faithfully discharge his duties as chair or member of such standing or special committees as he may be appointed to, and to perform such other duties as may be required by the laws of the state or the Charter or the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 2-19) 
Sec. 2-35. - Removal from office. 
If the mayor or any councilmember shall, by continued absence from the meetings of the council for a term of three consecutive months, or other willful neglect or refusal to perform his duties or in any other way be guilty of gross official misconduct or shall be guilty of abuse of power or malpractice in office of any kind or in any other way become liable to removal from office, he shall be notified to appear before the council to answer such charge, and if found guilty by a vote of two-thirds of the council, he shall be removed from office. 
(Code 1974, § 2-20) 
Sec. 2-36. - Special committees. 
All special committees shall be appointed and the chairman indicated by the officer presiding at the meeting at which they are appointed, unless otherwise ordered by the council, in which event the committee and chairman may be appointed by vote of the council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-21) 
Sec. 2-37. - Powers, duties, oath of vice-mayor. 
The vice-mayor shall be clothed with all the rights, privileges and duties of the mayor during the illness or absence for any cause of the mayor. The vice-mayor shall take the same oath prescribed for the mayor before entering upon his duties as such. 
(Code 1974, § 2-22) 
Sec. 2-38. - Ordinance passage procedure. 
(a)  Proposed ordinances shall be adopted upon one reading at a regular meeting or a special or called meeting of the city council. 
(b)  All ordinances shall be reduced to writing upon passage and signed by the mayor and city clerk. 
(c)  The minutes and ordinance record of the clerk shall be made up from such original ordinance. 
(d)  Any ordinance passed contrary to the above provisions shall be void and of no effect; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any matter contained in any code of ordinances ordered to be compiled and published by the council; nor to any building code or set of rules or regulations governing the construction of buildings which may hereafter be adopted by the council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-23; Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-39. - Compensation of council. 
Each member of the city council, with the exception of the mayor and vice-mayor, shall receive compensation of $575.00 per month. That councilmember who is then serving as vice-mayor shall receive compensation of $650.00 per month. The mayor shall receive compensation of $800.00 per month. 
(Code 1974, § 2-24) 
Sec. 2-40. - Council districts approved by Justice Department. 
The city shall be divided into four council districts of population as near equal number as possible. The mayor shall be elected city-wide and a council member shall be elected from each of the four council districts as more fully set forth in the Charter. The composition of each of the four council districts shall be adjusted, as necessary, following each decennial census to comply with all applicable local, state and federal law including, but not limited to, the United States Voting Rights Act of 1965. Any adjustment in council district lines is not final until precleared by the United States Department of Justice and following all required public notices. Following the 2010 Census, the various census blocks shall be allocated or aligned among the four council districts according to the Charter attached hereto as exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference which was prepared by the Southern Georgia Regional Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § I, 6-16-2011) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that exhibit A is not set out at length herein but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 2-41—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-61. - Duties. 
The city clerk shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Issue all licenses, summons, notices or other instruments required of them by the city manager. 
(2)  Keep an office and be present during the business hours of each weekday. 
(3)  Attend all meetings and sessions of the council and keep a fair and correct record of its proceedings in a book kept for that purpose. 
(4)  Administration of tax, tax collection, and tax compliance activities; 
(5)  Administration of license and permit activities as well as license and permit compliance; and 
(6)  Perform all other duties pertaining to his office or which he may be required to perform by the city manager. 
(Code 1974, § 2-35; Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-62. - Books, records required. 
The city clerk shall keep the following books and records, in addition to any others he may be required to keep by law or by the council or the manager: 
(1)  A book of minutes of council proceedings. 
(2)  A book of all licenses, showing the type, to whom issued and the amount paid. 
(3)  An ordinance book distinct from the minutes, with an index, containing all ordinances and amendments. 
(Code 1974, § 2-36) 
Secs. 2-63—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE DIRECTOR[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-6(2); any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-6(4). 

Sec. 2-91. - Status, appointment and compensation. 
The finance director of the city shall be the administrative department head of the department of finance and budget of the city, shall be appointed to such position by the city manager, and shall receive such salary and other compensation as the city manager shall from time to time prescribe. 
(Code 1974, § 2-47; Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-92. - Bond. 
The finance director shall, as a condition of initial and continued qualification for such office, make and maintain a bond or bonds with good security, to be approved by the city manager, in such amount or amounts as may be set by the city council by resolution from time to time, payable to the city, conditioned upon: 
(1)  The faithful discharge of the duties and responsibilities of such office; 
(2)  Proper and prompt accounting for all moneys, deposits and other funds which may come into the hands of such official; and 
(3)  Such other conditions as shall be imposed by the city council by resolution from time to time. 
(Code 1974, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-93. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The finance director shall perform the following duties and have the following responsibilities, all in accordance with the Charter of the city, this Code, ordinances adopted by the city council relative thereto and the written directions of the city manager to the extent that the directions are not a variance with the foregoing: 
(1)  Administration of the department of finance and budgets; 
(2)  Supervision of and accountability for the receipt, collection, and management of all funds, grants, income, revenue, taxes, fees, fines, forfeitures and other monies and amounts due and payable to, or receivable by, the city; 
(3)  Supervision of and accountability for the dispersal of all monies and funds of the city; 
(4)  Maintenance of complete and accurate books and records relative to receipts of, and dispersals by, the city as well as all other activities of the department of finance and budgets; 
(5)  Preparation of all financial reports, statements and projections as shall from time to time be requested by the city manager or the city council; 
(6)  Supervision of and accountability for the investment and custody of all monies and funds of the city; 
(7)  Preparation of such budgets, subject to the supervision of the city manager, as shall from time to time be prescribed by Charter, ordinance or resolutions of the city council as well as compliance by officials and departments of the city with such budget requirements and restraints as shall be adopted or incorporated therein; 
(8)  Accounting, data processing, and auditing functions and activities of the city; 
(9)  Grant application and administration; 
(10)  Purchase and procurement of all real and personal property; 
(11)  Sale and disposition of all real and personal property; 
(12)  Inventories and inventory control of all property and assets of the city; 
(13)  Selection, purchase and administration of all forms of insurance; 
(14)  Administrative responsibility for all bidding and letting of bids; and 
(15)  Such other duties and responsibilities as may assigned by the city manager from time to time. 
(Code 1974, § 2-49; Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-94. - Oath. 
The finance director shall, as a condition of qualification for such office, take an oath or affirmation that he will faithfully and honestly, to the best of his ability, perform the duties and responsibilities of such office. 
(Code 1974, § 2-50) 
Sec. 2-95. - Purchasing policy. 
Consistent with the provisions of section 6.31 of the Charter, the purchasing policy, as amended from time to time, shall be expressed by resolution of the city council following presentation and recommendation of the finance director. 
This section clarifies the duties and responsibilities of the finance director set forth in section 2-93 of this Code. Further, all heretofore existing purchasing policies of the city expressed by resolution, as amended from time to time, are hereby ratified and readopted consistent with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 3-7-2011) 
Secs. 2-96—2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF ETHICS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-18, § I, adopted Dec. 6, 2010 repealed the former Art. V, §§ 2-131—2-139, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to the code of ethics and derived from Ord. No. 2001-35, Arts. I—VI, Art. VIII, adopted 12-7-2001. 

Sec. 2-131. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(a)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(b)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(c)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(d)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § I, 12-6-2010) 
Sec. 2-132. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § I, 12-6-2010) 
Sec. 2-133. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
(a)  City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
(b)  Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
(c)  Employee means any person who is a fulltime or parttime employee of the city. 
(d)  Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
(e)  Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
(f)  Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
(g)  Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed: 
a.  $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services; or 
b.  Ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less. 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § I, 12-6-2010) 
Sec. 2-134. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the municipal court of the city nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the city on any matter pending before the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § I, 12-6-2010) 
Sec. 2-135. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § I, 12-6-2010) 
Sec. 2-136. - Board of ethics. 
Board of ethics members. The board of ethics shall consist of five members, two members shall be appointed by the county circuit bar association, two members by city council, and one member by the senior judge of the county superior court. Action and decisions by the board of ethics shall be by majority vote. 
(a)  All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. 
(b)  All members of the board of ethics shall serve a two-year term or until their successors are appointed. 
(c)  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. 
(d)  Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. 
(e)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city commission shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(f)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. 
(g)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the city. 
(h)  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. 
(i)  Members of the board of ethics may serve consecutive terms and be removed by majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § I, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, 4-1-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, adopted April 1, 2013, changed the title of § 2-136 from municipal court as arbiter of complaints to board of ethics. 
Sec. 2-137. - Filing and service of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the City Attorney's Office, 204 North Ridge Avenue, Tifton, Georgia 31794. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the city attorney shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official who is the subject of the inquiry as well as members of the ethics board all within seven calendar days of the filing. Service upon the city official may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this section. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics board shall review it and make an initial determination as to whether the complaint is patently frivolous or unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The ethics board is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are patently frivolous or unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. for complaints that are not dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, take evidence and information concerning any complaint, hold hearings and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for complaint and notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(e)  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, ethics complaints against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, which are filed between the date of qualifying for municipal office and the date of certification of the election results will be held and will not be processed until the election results for that office have been certified. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § I, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, 4-1-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, adopted April 1, 2013, changed the title of § 2-137 from receipt of complaints to filing and service of complaints. 
Sec. 2-138. - Duties of board of ethics. 
The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation to submit evidence and call witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be in writing and served upon the city official and the city council. Service upon the city official may be via the same method(s) involving the complaint. Service upon the city clerk (via hand delivery) shall be considered service upon the city council. Service of the decision is to be made within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this subsection shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § I, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, 4-1-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, adopted April 1, 2013, changed the title of § 2-138 from service of complaint to duties of board of ethics. 
Sec. 2-139. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the county superior court within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § I, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-140. - Penalty. 
Any city official found to have violated any of the aforementioned prohibitions or engaged in an aforementioned conflict of interest is subject to public reprimand or censure by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § I, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 2013-03, § I, 4-1-2013) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-12 , adopted Sept. 9, 2013, repealed the former ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-11, 6-30—6-36, 6-61—6-90, 6-100, 6-121—6-141, 6-161—6-167, 6-191—6-206, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2004-28, § I, adopted Nov. 29, 2004; Ord. No. 2005-07, §§ IA, IB, adopted Jan. 31, 2005; Ord. No. 2008-24A, § I, adopted Dec. 1, 2008; Ord. No. 2009-6, § I, adopted April 20, 2009; Ord. No. 2010-14, § I, Nov. 1, 2010; Ord. No. 2011-16, § I, adopted Dec. 5, 2011; and Ord. No. 2013-10, § I , adopted Aug. 5, 2013. 
Cross reference— Businesses and business regulations, ch. 22; public drunkenness; consumption of alcoholic beverages on municipal property, § 46-5; alcoholic beverages prohibited in parks, § 50-6; intoxication, § 78-7; transporting alcoholic beverages, § 90-37. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49; levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; local license required for wholesale or retail sales of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
Bar means any establishment (by whatever name it may be known including but not limited to bar, barroom, club, juke joint, honky tonk, night club, pool hall, pool room, pub, recreation center and any other like or similar name describing the same or similar type of activity) which holds any consumption on premises alcoholic beverage license but which does not meet the requirements of restaurant, private club, entertainment establishments or licensed alcoholic beverage caterer as defined herein. 
Brown bagging: The act of entering any private club, restaurant, music hall, theater, bowling alley, or other establishment and bringing in and consuming ones' own alcoholic beverages. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverages obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid to any member, officer, agent or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any council on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purposes of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to bills of members and their guests under club regulations shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Fortified wines means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Grocery store means a business which holds a grocery store retail business license issued by the city, and which: 
(1)  Is engaged primarily in the retail sale of food and beverage items by the package designed for non-premises consumption; and 
(2)  Maintains at no time a retail inventory of alcoholic beverages which in more than 30 percent, valued at its retail sales price, of the total retail inventory of merchandise of such business, valued at its retail sales price. 
Growler: A bottle made of glass or other material or other material customary to the industry provided that the bottle is capable of being sealed with twist-type closure, cork, stopper, plug or screw cap and then sealed with a plastic collar, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve which shall be applied to the container or bottle and extend over the top of the twist-type closure, cork, stopper, plug or screw cap forming a seal that must be broken upon opening of the container or bottle. Such bottle shall be at least 32 oz. but not exceed 64 oz. in capacity. 
Legal age means the age established by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended from time to time, as the age below which alcoholic beverages may not lawfully be sold to, furnished to, purchased by or possessed by a person. 
License means the authorization granted by the city to engage in the sale of specified alcoholic beverages upon the premises so licensed for a calendar year, or the remaining portion of a calendar year. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer who has been licensed pursuant to this Chapter and in accordance with state law. 
Licensed premises: Includes all the space or area owned, leased and/or controlled by the licensee and used for the purpose of operating under the license, including but not limited to all rooms wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, furnished, served, or consumed, except when such a room is located in a hotel, motel, or similar facility or in a shopping center in which case only such room and any adjoining storage, office, toilet, and other similar rooms shall constitute the licensed premises. Licensed premises shall also include adjoining patios, decks, porches or sidewalk cafes. A floor plan for each licensed premises as defined herein must be submitted with each application for a license under this chapter. 
Licensee means a person holding a license issued pursuant the terms of this chapter. 
Live musical concert means a vocal or instrumental performance by a natural person(s) who is physically present in the establishment while delivering the performance and specifically excludes disc jockeys. 
Live presentation of the performing arts includes dance, music, opera, theatre and musical theatre, magic, illusion, mime, spoken word, puppetry, circus arts, performance art, recitation and public speaking. 
Lounge means a separate room or seating area connected with a part of and adjacent to the premises of a restaurant, hotel or private club, or its adjacent lobby or reception area. 
Malt beverages means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer provided that the term "malt beverage" does not include sake, also known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manager means the individual who supervises the regular operations of a business licensed under this chapter and who is physically present on site at such business (a) at least 35 hours per week, or (b) at least 90 percent of the hours such business is open to the public, whichever is less. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased, or controlled by the licensee and used by the licensee for the purpose of operating under the license and shall include that area circumscribed by the property lines of the property for which an alcoholic beverage license is issued by the city; except that in the case of hotels and motels, the term "premises" shall include only that portion of the property where alcoholic beverages are sold, delivered, or served. 
Private club means a nonprofit organization which is organized under state law which meets each of the following requirements: 
(1)  Has either a tax exempt status under section 501 of the United States Internal Revenue Code or operates pursuant to a charter from a state or national parent organization which has such tax exempt status; 
(2)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for an alcoholic beverage license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(3)  Has at least 50 members paying dues on a regular periodic basis; 
(4)  Is organized and operated exclusively for the pleasure and recreation of its members and their guests or for other non-profitable purposes; 
(5)  Has facilities which are available for use only by the membership thereof and their guests and not by the general public; 
(6)  Owns, rents or leases a building or space within a building for facilities for the use of its members and their guests; 
(7)  Maintains kitchen and dining room space, equipment and items necessary to appropriately provide food service of full course meals for its members and their guests; 
(8)  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for the preparation and service of meals for its members and their guests; 
(9)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits, beyond a fixed salary, from the sale of alcoholic beverages to the club or to its members or their guests; and 
(10)  Has such licenses as are required for the operation thereof. 
Restaurant means a business kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served for a period of at least five hours per day on at least five days per week with the exception of (i) holidays, (ii) vacations not exceeding two weeks duration, and (iii) periods of redecorating not exceeding 30 calendar days duration except to the extent extended by the city council in its discretion upon request therefor; and which meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Meets all health and sanitation requirements for food service establishments required under applicable federal, state and local laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations; 
(2)  Maintains upon the premises thereof in operative condition cooking and kitchen facilities and equipment appropriate to accommodate the preparation of meals for 30 food service customers at one time; 
(3)  Maintains upon the premises thereof seating facilities, at booths or tables designed for food service, sufficient for at least 30 food service customers at one time, not including seating provided by counters and stools, with booths and tables for purposes hereof being large enough to adequately accommodate at least two place settings of cutlery and dishes; 
(4)  Maintains at all times such additional facilities, equipment and items as well as employees as shall be necessary for the cooking, preparation and service of meals for consumption at tables or booths located upon the premises for at least 30 food service customers at one time; 
(5)  Is at all times during the hours of operation thereof prepared to serve full course meals with substantial entrees from a substantial variety of culinary choices, or substantial substitutes therefor, chosen by food service customers from a printed menu available to all food service customers at prices which are competitive with other restaurants in the community whether or not such other restaurants engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages; and 
(6)  Derives at least 50 percent of its total gross food and beverage sales from the sale of full course meals prepared, served and consumed upon the premises thereof. 
Retail sale means the sale or offer of sale of any alcoholic beverage to any member of the public. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combination of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(b)  As used in this chapter, the singular and the plural shall each include the other, the masculine and feminine shall each include the other, and any verb tense may include any other verb tense. 
(c)  As used in this chapter, the term "may" is permissive and the term "shall" is mandatory. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 2014-10, § I , 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 2016-06, § I, 6-16-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-2. - Activities are privileges. 
The manufacture, distribution, sale and possession of alcoholic beverages within the city are privileges and not rights with any privilege with respect thereto granted pursuant to this chapter to the holder of any alcoholic beverage license being held and enjoyed only for so long as the holder of such license issued pursuant to this chapter shall fully and completely comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-3. - Compliance required. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Distribute, sell, or offer to sell, either at retail or wholesale, any alcoholic beverage in the city except to the extent permitted pursuant to a current alcoholic beverage license issued by the city; 
(2)  Distribute, handle, possess, sell, or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage in the city in violation of any provisions of this chapter or any provision of any law or regulation of the state relative to any alcoholic beverage; 
(3)  Distribute, handle, possess, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage in the city except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-4. - Sales permitted. 
The sale of malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits, subject to the provisions of this chapter, as this chapter may be amended from time to time, are permitted in the city. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-5. - Consumption in public places. 
Except to the extent otherwise specifically permitted, no person shall consume any alcoholic beverage while such person is located in or upon any public street, road, alley, lane or sidewalk of the city or upon the premises of any building owned or leased by the city or upon the premises of any other property, either real or personal, owned or leased by the city. Functions sponsored by the city or any other governmental unit shall be exempt from this prohibition. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-6. - Open containers. 
(a)  "Open container" defined. The term "open container", as used in this chapter, means any bottle, can, glass, cup or other vessel which contains an alcoholic beverage not in its original container. The term "open container" shall also mean the original container of an alcoholic beverage and which contains an alcoholic beverage on which the seal has been broken or which is otherwise ready for consumption. 
(b)  "Semipublic parking facility" defined. The term "semipublic parking facility" shall include any privately owned area wherein motor vehicles may be parked by the public in conjunction with any business, enterprise, commercial establishment, office building, church, school, or multiple-family residential building. 
(c)  Possession of open container prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverages in any open container while on the public streets, sidewalks, alleyways or rights-of-way, in any public or semipublic parking facility including areas of ingress and egress, or on any outdoor public patio within the city. 
(d)  Application to special events. This prohibition shall not apply to any exceptions or exemptions as may be provided for by ordinance or resolution regulating special events within the city or functions sponsored by the city or any other governmental unit. 
(e)  Exemption not applicable to persons in automobiles. The exemption contained in subsection (d) above shall not apply to persons in automobiles. 
(f)  Possession in automobiles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverages in any open container while an occupant of any motor vehicle, whether such vehicle is underway or not, while such vehicle is on the public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way, or in any public or semipublic parking facility within [the] city. An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger or is not located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk or other locked non-passenger area of the vehicle. 
(i)  Application of subsection (h) to passengers of limousines; buses and campers. Subsection (h) shall not apply to: 
(1)  A passenger of a limousine or other similar vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for hire and such driver holds a valid commercial driver's license pursuant to Georgia law or any other state; 
(2)  A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid commercial driver's license pursuant to Georgia law or any other state; 
(3)  Or to the occupants in the living quarters of a camper or motor home. 
(j)  Posting of notice by establishments. All licensed alcohol establishments are hereby required to post in a conspicuous location inside such establishment a notice informing patrons that open containers are prohibited on the public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way, or in any public or semipublic parking facility within the city. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-7. - False and misleading statements. 
No person shall make, cause to be made, or present to the city any application for issuance, application for renewal, report, or other notification with respect to any alcoholic beverage license issued or sought to be issued or renewed by the city or any tax on alcoholic beverages due to the city which contains as of the date made or presented, any untrue or misleading statement or representation. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-8. - Knowledge of chapter. 
The holder of any alcoholic beverage license as well as all employees, agents and servants of any business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall be conclusively presumed, for purposes of this chapter, to have at all times complete and full knowledge of all provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-9. - Notification to state revenue department of violations. 
Upon determination of the existence of circumstances which are required pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21 to be reported to the state department of revenue, the finance director shall promptly report the existence of such circumstances to the state department of revenue as required. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-10. - Criminal conviction not required. 
Any proceeding or action which may be taken by the city with respect to the suspension or revocation of any alcoholic beverage license or the grant, denial or renewal of any such license shall be and are administrative in nature with respect to the privileges of the holder of such license and the right of such holder to continue to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in accordance with the provision of this chapter. No conviction, dismissal, acquittal, other plea or other disposition with respect to any criminal violation involving the sale, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages or any other alleged criminal conduct shall be necessary for any action by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter relative to any such license or otherwise effect any action taken by the city relative thereto. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-11. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The following guidelines for the disposition of alcoholic beverage license violations are hereby adopted. It is emphasized that these are guidelines only and can be altered based upon the facts of any individual case. The guidelines for disposition of alcoholic beverage license violations are as follows: 
(1)  First offense within past two years: 30 days suspension and $150.00 reinstatement fee; 
(2)  Second offense within past two years: 90 days suspension and $250.00 reinstatement fee; unless 
(3)  Second offense within past 12 months: Revocation; 
(4)  Third offense within past two years: Revocation. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Secs. 6-12—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM AGE 

Sec. 6-30.1. - Presence of persons not of legal age. 
(a)  No individual under the age of 21 shall enter or be allowed to enter the licensed premises which has been issued a license for on-premises consumption except as follows: 
(1)  A restaurant as hereinbefore defined; 
(2)  An individual while he or she is attending a live musical concert or live presentation of the performing arts for which he or she has paid an admission charge. 
(b)  When a licensee operates a bar/lounge on the premises of or in conjunction with the operation of a restaurant, hotel/motel or private club wherein the on-premise consumption of alcohol has been licensed, such bar/lounge shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Except as to the prohibitions contained in section 6-35, nothing contained in this Code section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: 
(1)  Dispensing, serving, selling, or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment; 
(2)  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or 
(3)  Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(d)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his or her identity or use any false identification for the purpose of gaining admission to the premises of any on-premises beer and wine licensee or any on-premises mixed drinks licensee. 
(e)  All establishments holding a license for on-premise consumption are required to verify the age of all persons entering the establishment with a photo identification such as a drivers license. Any person who has attained the age of 18 years shall be permitted to enter an establishment holding a license for on-premise consumption when he or she is attending a live musical concert or live presentation of the performing arts for which he or she has paid an admission charge. Any person age 21 and over entering such an establishment must be identified by a wrist band and containing the words "Over 21" to demonstrate they are of legal age to purchase and consume alcohol. Any person consuming alcohol without the required wrist band or any bartender or employee who serves any customer without the required wrist band, or any customer who provides or allows an under age 21 customer to consume a drink purchased by that customer will be guilty of a violation of this chapter. Violations of this section will result in an individual fine of $250.00 for a first offense, $500.00 for a second offense, and a fine to be determined by the municipal court judge for any third and subsequent offense. The business owner will also be subject to additional penalties, including suspension or revocation of their alcohol license. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 2016-06, § I, 6-16-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-30.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-06 , § I, adopted June 16, 2016, repealed former § 6-30.2 in its entirety which pertained to the presence of persons not of legal age in entertainment establishments and derived from Ord. No. 2013-12 , adopted Sept. 9, 2013. 
Sec. 6-31. - Consumption by persons not of legal age. 
No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized, permit or allow any person who has not attained legal age to consume any alcoholic beverage upon the premises licensed. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-32. - Possession by persons not of legal age. 
No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant, or employee of any business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operations of the business in which such license is utilized, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, permit or allow any person who has not attained legal age to possess any alcoholic beverage upon the premises licensed. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-33. - Furnishing to persons not of legal age. 
No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized sell, provide, give, furnish or distribute any alcoholic beverage to any person who has not attained legal age, except for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person shall be in violation of the provisions hereof in the event that (i) such person has been furnished with identification showing that the person who is being furnished with alcoholic beverages has attained legal age and (ii) under the surrounding circumstances the person so furnished such identification could reasonably conclude that the person furnishing such identification had attained legal age. For purposes of this section, the term "identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person such as the person's photograph or other written description of and providing the person's date of birth, and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, a military identification card, or a driver's license. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-34. - Acquiring for persons not of legal age. 
No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of any person who has not attained legal age, or otherwise procure for or furnish to any person who has not attained legal age any alcoholic beverage, except for medical purpose upon the prescription of a physician duly licensed under the laws of the state. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-35. - Employment of persons not 18 years of age. 
(a)  No holder of an alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which such license is utilized shall permit or allow any person who has not attained 18 years of age and who is employed by any business operated upon premises for which an alcoholic beverage license is issued by the city to engage in the sale, distribution, or acceptance of orders for alcoholic beverages; provided, however, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to nor prohibit persons who have not attained 18 years of age who are employed by a business in connection with the operation of a grocery store, supermarket, convenience store, brewery, or drugstore from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(b)  No holder of an alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which such license is utilized shall permit or allow any person who has not attained 18 years of age to be employed by any business operated upon premises for which a license for the consumption of alcoholic beverages upon such premises is issued by the city; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to nor prohibit the employment of persons who have not attained 18 years of age in connection with the operation upon such premises of a restaurant, provided further, that persons who have not attained 18 years of age shall not engage in the sale, service, or acceptance of orders of alcoholic beverages in connection with the operation of any such restaurant. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 2016-06, § I, 6-16-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-36. - Failure to check identification. 
In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and to be furnished with proper identification in order to verify the age of such person; and the failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly. 
No person shall be in violation of the provisions hereof in the event that (i) such person has been furnished with identification showing that the person who is being furnished with alcoholic beverages has attained legal age and (ii) under the surrounding circumstances the person so furnished such identification could reasonably conclude that the person furnishing such identification had attained legal age. For purposes of this action, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person such as the person's photograph or other written description and providing the person's date of birth, and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, a military identification card, or a driver's license. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Secs. 6-37—6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-61. - License required for sales. 
No person shall sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages which is permitted to be sold in the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless such sale is made or is to be made pursuant to the authority of a current effective alcoholic beverage license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-62. - Classification of licenses. 
Alcoholic beverage licenses authorized to be issued by the city and required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to be held for the sale of alcoholic beverages are classified as follows: 
(1)  Wholesale malt beverage license; 
(2)  Retail malt beverage package license; 
(3)  Retail malt beverage consumption license; 
(4)  Wholesale wine license; 
(5)  Retail wine package license; 
(6)  Retail wine consumption license; and 
(7)  Retail distilled spirits consumption license. 
(8)  Retail off-premises caterer license. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-63. - Activities authorized pursuant to licenses. 
The holder of an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city, as well as the employees of such holder, shall be authorized subject to the provisions of this chapter, the laws of the state relative thereto and the rules, regulations and requirements of the state department of revenue relative thereto to engage in the following respective activity but none other than those which are specifically authorized with respect to each such license: 
(1)  Wholesale malt beverage license, wholesale sale only of malt beverage in original unbroken and sealed containers to the holders of effective retail malt beverage licenses issued by the state department of revenue for the purpose of resale only; 
(2)  Retail malt beverage package license, retail sale only of malt beverages in original unbroken and sealed containers to consumers for take out only and not for consumption upon the licensed premises; 
(3)  Retail malt beverage consumption license, retail sale only of malt beverages to consumers for consumption only upon the licensed premises; 
(4)  Wholesale wine license, wholesale sale only of wine in original unbroken and sealed containers to the holders of current retail wine licenses issued by the state department of revenue for the purpose of resale only; 
(5)  Retail wine package license, retail sale only of wine in original unbroken and sealed containers to consumers for take out only and not for consumption upon the licensed premises; 
(6)  Retail wine consumption license, retail sale only of wine to consumers for consumption only upon the licensed premises. 
(7)  Retail distilled spirits consumption license, retail sale only of distilled spirits to consumers for consumption only upon the licensed premises. 
(8)  Retail off-premises caterer license retail sale only of alcohol for which the licensee is licensed to dispense. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-63.1. - Sale and refilling of growlers. 
(a)  The sale and refilling of growlers in compliance with this chapter is authorized for establishments holding a license issued pursuant to Section 6-62(2) of this Chapter. 
(b)  The filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or any provision or section of this chapter. 
(c)  Growlers may only be filled from kegs or containers procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. 
(d)  Growlers may only be filled with a malt beverage, craft beer, or hard cider. 
(e)  Only growlers that are properly sanitized may be filled and made available for retail sale. It shall be the responsibility of the entity filling the growler to sanitize such growler prior to filling it 
(f)  Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. Each growler shall bear a twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug. At the time of the sale and/or refilling, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extend over the top of the twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that must be broken upon opening of the container or bottle. The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the business filling the growler. The containers or bottles shall be identified as a malt beverage or craft beer, contain the name of the malt beverage or craft beer, and bear the name, address and telephone number of the business selling the malt beverage or craft beer. 
(g)  Consumption of the contents of any growler on the premises where it was filled is strictly prohibited. However, the licensee may provide samples of any malt beverages or craft beer on tap. Each such sample shall not exceed one fluid ounce. The licensee shall not serve more than three samples to any individual within a 24-hour period. Only the licensee or an employee shall open, handle, and serve, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. In no event shall samples of any malt beverage be provided to any individual who is in an apparent state of intoxication. 
(h)  Sales of growlers shall be limited to the legal hours during which the licensee may sell such alcoholic beverages and must be removed from the premises before the applicable closing time. 
( Ord. No. 2014-10, § I , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 6-63.2. - Growlers. 
An establishment duly licensed for the sale of growlers may also be authorized to sell wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises, so long as said establishment meets the requirements of the city and obtains a second on-premises license from the city in accordance with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-20, 12-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-64. - Qualifications for license. 
No alcoholic beverage license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be issued to any person or for any location unless and until it has been successfully demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city council that: 
(1)  Such person, or the person who shall actually and actively be in charge and management of the day to day operation of the business in which such license shall be utilized is a citizen of the United States of America; 
(2)  Such person by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, moral character, mental capacity, physical capacity, trade associations, record of arrest, and reputation in communities in which he has lived is, in the opinion of the city council, likely to operate the business in which the license will be utilized in conformity with federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, and requirements, including particularly the provisions of this chapter and the laws, rules and regulations of the state and the United States relative to the manufacture, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages, and, in making such determination, the city council shall, in addition to the other and further provisions of this section, consider all information that would be considered by the city council if this person was being denied a renewal license pursuant to the requirements of section 6-82 or, if this person was having his license suspended or revoked pursuant to the requirements of section 6-86; provided further that no license shall be issued to or for: 
a.  Any person whose business in which the license will be utilized is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possessed and meets all of the qualifications required hereunder for the holder of an alcoholic beverage license and would not be prohibited from being the holder of such a license; 
b.  A partnership unless all partners, members and managers of such partnership, as well as the manager of the business in which the license will be utilized, possess and meet all of the qualifications for the holder of an alcoholic beverage license and would not be prohibited from being the holder of such a license; 
c.  A corporation unless all officers thereof, all directors thereof and all shareholders thereof who shall either directly or beneficially as such word is defined and utilized in the Internal Revenue Code of the United States and regulations issued pursuant thereto own more than 20 percent of the outstanding shares of stock thereof, as well as the manager of the business in which the license will be utilized, possess and meet all of the qualifications for the holder of an alcoholic beverage license and would not be prohibited from being the holder of such a license; 
d.  Any person who has been convicted, has entered a plea of nolo contendere or has forfeited a bond with respect to any felony within ten years prior to the filing of any such application or with respect to any misdemeanor within five years prior to the filing of any such application including particularly but not being limited to those offenses involving force or violence, prostitution, gambling, or tax law violations in the event that such conviction, plea or bond forfeiture tends to indicate, in the opinion of the city council, that the applicant may not maintain or operate the business in which the alcoholic beverage license sought by the applicant would be utilized in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. The terms "felony" and "misdemeanor" as used in this subsection shall include the violation of any criminal law of the United States of America, the state, or any other state of the United States of America; provided that the term "misdemeanor" shall not include those violations which are commonly referred to as "traffic violations." The term "conviction" as used in this subsection shall include an adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council, in its sole discretion, may decide to authorize the issuance of a license to a person who has in the past been convicted of, plead guilty to, entered a plea of nolo contendere to, or forfeited a bond on any crime when, after a thorough investigation of all the facts including parole or probation officer's reports, judge's recommendations, and any other evidence bearing on the character of the applicant, it has determined, in the sole discretion of the city council, that such action is in keeping with the ends of justice and the public interest and welfare; 
e.  Any person who has been convicted of, has entered a plea of nolo contendere to, or forfeited a bond to any charge of violation of any state, federal, or local law involving the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession of alcoholic beverages, contraband, or any "controlled substances" as such term is utilized under laws of the state, or any other substance, the control or possession of which is controlled or prohibited under laws of the state or the United States of America, or any other state of the United States. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council, in its sole discretion, may decide to authorize the issuance of a license to a person who has in the past been convicted of, plead guilty to, entered a plea of nolo contendere or forfeited a bond on any crime when, after a thorough investigation of all the facts including parole or probation officer's reports, judge's recommendations, and any other evidence bearing on the character of the applicant, it has determined, in the sole discretion of the city council, that such action is in keeping with the ends of justice and the public interest and welfare; 
f.  Any person who as either the previous holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by any authority, or as a party interested in any business in which any alcoholic beverage license issued by any authority was utilized, either conducted, or allowed the conduct of, the business with respect to which such license was issued in such a manner as to cause, in the opinion of the city council, greater than normal police activity, observation or inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law or regulation either relating to such license or the business associated therewith or in order to maintain public order; 
g.  Any person who has not attained the age of 21 years; 
h.  Any person who either held any alcoholic beverage license issued by any authority which was revoked by such authority within a one-year period immediately prior to the date of the filing of an application or was a party interested in any business in which any alcoholic beverage license issued by any authority was revoked by such authority within the one-year period prior to the date of the filing of an application; 
i.  Any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection 6-66(2), (3) or (4) who has not paid or satisfied any tax or other financial obligation due to the city which is not then the subject of appeal or litigation. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 2015-10, § I , 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 6-65. - Distances and location. 
(a)  (1)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell: 
a.  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus; 
b.  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any church building, school building, school grounds, or college campus. Nothing in this subparagraph shall prohibit a grocery store licensed for the retail sale of only wine and malt beverages for consumption off the premises from selling wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any college campus, where so permitted by resolution or ordinance of the county or municipality. As used in this subparagraph, the term "grocery store" means a retail establishment which has at least 85 percent of its total retail floor space reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic items, conducts all of its sales inside the building containing its retail floor space, and meets such other criteria as may be required by the local governing authority of the county or municipality; or 
c.  Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(2)  As used in this subsection, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
(3)  As used in the subsection, "church building" or "church" shall mean a stand-alone building owned in fee simple by the religious organization where regular worship services are performed and shall not mean a commonly platted area which has common or shared parking such as shopping centers, strip malls, etc. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the licensing of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages by: 
(1)  Hotels of 50 rooms or more which have been in continuous operation for a period of at least five years preceding July 1, 1981; 
(2)  Bona fide private clubs, owning their own homes, subject to licensing under O.C.G.A. tit. 3, ch. 7; and 
(3)  Licensees for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only. 
(c)  For purposes of this Code section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(d)  (1)  The distances provided in subparagraph (a)(1)a. through (a)(1)c. of this section for separation of businesses licensed under this title shall be measured as follows: 
a.  In a straight line from the front door of the business regulated under this title; 
b.  To the front door of the church or alcohol treatment center as hereinbefore defined; or 
c.  To the nearest property line of the real property of a school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(2)  No location which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the effective date of the ordinance shall be denied continued operation under an existing license, nor shall any new owner of the location be denied a new license based upon the measurements set forth in subsections (a)(1)a. through (a)(1)c. 
(3)  As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibited in this section shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or renewal of a license or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. Provided, further, that the distance requirements herein shall not apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(4)  The distances provided in subparagraph (a)(1)a. through (a)(1)c. shall not apply to any bona fide non-profit charitable organization, non-profit civic organization, or authorized catered function that qualifies for a special temporary event as provided in sections 6-100 and 6-175 of this article or events sponsored by the City of Tifton. 
(e)  (1)  As used in this subsection, the term "housing authority property" means any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 3, art. 1, the "Housing Authorities Law." 
(2)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any housing authority property. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued to sell alcoholic beverages on the effective date of the ordinance nor shall any new owner of the location be denied a new license based upon the measurements set forth in subsections (a)(1)a. through (a)(1)c. Nor shall this subsection apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the location with respect to which an alcoholic beverage license has been issued by the city shall remain eligible for issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses by the city notwithstanding subsequent changes which would otherwise render the locations non-licensable under subsections (a)(1)a. through (a)(1)c. for so long as an alcoholic beverage license remains issued for such location by the city, or in the event of the termination or non-renewal of any such license issued with respect to such location, the location itself shall thereafter remain eligible for the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses if within six months following such termination an alcoholic beverage license is issued by the city for such location. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the general distance provisions of subsection subsections (a)(1)a. through (a)(1)c., pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21(b)(3) licensees for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only shall be subject to regulation as to distances from church buildings, school buildings, educational buildings, school grounds, or a college campus as follows: 
(1)  No minimum distance requirements shall apply to the downtown area defined as all of the C-D [commercial downtown] zoning district together with the following area located immediately north of and abutting the C-D zoning district and within—and not abutting or adjacent to the outside edges of—the following borders: On the south by the C-D zoning district, on the east by Love Lane, on the north by 10th Street and on the west by Central Avenue. 
(2)  In all other areas of the City of Tifton in which the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is allowed, there shall be a minimum of 100 yards as measured in a straight line from the front door of the premises from which on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages is furnished and consumed to the front door of the building of a church, school or college. 
(h)  Any location not suitable therefor, in the opinion of the city council, because of either traffic congestion or the general character of the neighborhood or by reason of the effect which the utilization of such license at such location would have upon adjacent and surrounding properties or upon adjacent neighborhoods; 
(i)  Any location for which there is an unpaid or unsatisfied tax or other financial obligation due to the city which is not then the subject of appeal or litigation; 
(j)  An alcoholic beverage license may be denied to any location at which the utilization of the licensee would cause or create any violation of the zoning ordinance of the city or of the building code or fire code of the city. 
(k)  An alcoholic beverage license may be denied to any location at which an alcoholic beverage license has previously been suspended or revoked by either the city or the state department of revenue and where, in the opinion of the city council, there exists the likelihood that the utilization of such license at such location would cause or necessitate greater than normal police activity, observation or inspection in order to either prevent violation of laws and regulations relating to such location or to maintain public order, due to the history of either (i) violations of the provisions of this chapter or of the laws, rules and regulations of the state relative to alcoholic beverages by the holder of the previous license at such location or agents, servants or employees thereof or (ii) activities or conduct of patrons of the business in which such previous license was utilized at such location, all as compared to the locations of other licenses, or would cause or tend to cause, in the opinion of the city, council, greater than normal community problems or conflict as compared to the locations of other licenses. 
(l)  An alcoholic beverage license may be denied to any location at which an alcoholic beverage license has previously been suspended or revoked by either the city or the state department of revenue and where, in the opinion of the city council, problems associated with the utilization of a prior alcoholic beverage license at such location were such that it would not be in the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare to grant any other alcoholic beverage license for such location. 
(m)  An alcoholic beverage license may be denied to any location with respect to which the granting or utilization of a license would constitute a violation of laws, rules or regulations of the state or the City of Tifton. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, § I , 6-1-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-10, § I , adopted June 1, 2015, repealed the former § 6-65, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 6-65 pertained to location and derived from Ord. No. 2013-12, adopted Sept. 9, 2013. 
Sec. 6-66. - Applications. 
Prior to the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant therefor shall file with the city a written application, in such form and substance as shall from time to time be determined by the city manager, together with separate certified checks payable to the city or cash for both the application fee provided for in this article and for the licensee fee provided for in this article. Applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be presented to the finance director or his designee, shall be signed by the applicant if any individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by a duly authorized agent if a corporation, shall be verified by oath or affidavit, shall contain the following statements and information and shall otherwise meet the following requirements: 
(1)  In the case of an individual applicant who will actually and actively be in charge and management of the day to day operation of the business in which the license applied for will be utilized, then the name, age, sex, height, weight, birthdate, social security number, current residence address, business addresses, and all previous such addresses of the applicant within the last ten years; 
(2)  In the case of an individual applicant who will not actually and actively be in charge and management of the day to day operation of the business in which the licensee applied for will be utilized, then the name, age, sex, height, weight, birthdate, social security number, current residence address, business addresses, and all previous such addresses within the last ten years of both the applicant and the person who will actively manage such business; 
(3)  In the case of a partnership, then the name, date and location of formation, federal tax identification number, current principal business address, and all prior business addresses within the past ten years of such partnership as well as the name, age, sex, height, weight, birthdate, social security number, current business address, current residence address, and all prior such addresses within the past ten years of all partners, members and managers of such partnership and the manager or managers of the business in which the license applied for will be utilized; 
(4)  In the case of a corporation, then the name, date and location of incorporation, federal tax identification number, current principal business address, name and address of registered agent in the state for service of process, and all prior business addresses within the last ten years of such corporation as well as the name, age, sex, height, weight, social security number, current business address, current residence address, and all prior such addresses within the last ten years of all officers thereof, all directors thereof, and all shareholders thereof who own either directly or beneficially, as such word is defined and utilized in the Internal Revenue Code of the United States and regulations issued pursuant thereto, more than 20 percent of the outstanding shares of stock thereof, and of the manager or managers of the business, in which the license applied for will be utilized; 
(5)  A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section has made at any prior time any application to any governmental entity for any alcoholic beverage license of any nature and, if so, the circumstances thereof, including the disposition and current status thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; 
(6)  A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section has ever held any alcoholic beverage license issued by any governmental entity, the circumstances thereof, and the present status of such license all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; 
(7)  A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section has ever held any alcoholic beverage license issued by any governmental entity which has been suspended or revoked and, if so, the circumstances thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; 
(8)  A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section has ever been convicted of, entered a plea or nolo contendere to, or forfeited a bond on, any crime other than traffic violations and, if so, the nature and circumstances thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; 
(9)  A statement with respect to whether any person or entity other than the applicant and those persons with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section is or will be either directly or indirectly interested in the profits or losses of the business in which the license applied for will be utilized and, if so, the circumstances thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; 
(10)  The classification of license applied for; 
(11)  The location with respect to which the license will be utilized and the name and nature of the business in which the license will be utilized, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; 
(12)  A statement that both the applicant and all other persons with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section are fully qualified in all respects under this chapter to be the holder of an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city and that all such persons are entitled to have the license requested issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(13)  A statement that the location with respect to which the licensee is sought meets all conditions, qualifications and criteria established in this chapter for the location of a business utilizing the alcoholic beverage license applied for; 
(14)  Such other information and statements as shall from time to time be required by the city manager or the city council; 
(15)  A complete set of fingerprints administered by the police department of the applicant and all persons with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section; 
(16)  A head and shoulder photograph, such as is contained on a state driver's license, taken within the past three years of the applicant and all persons with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section; and 
(17)  Written consents of the applicant and all persons with respect to whom information is required under subsection subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section that the city has the continuing permission and authority of all such persons to monitor the public records of the city, county, the state and of the United States to ensure on-going compliance with the statements set forth in subsections (7) and (8) of this section. Any license granted upon an application that does not contain such written consent shall automatically expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued. Such license cannot be renewed under the provisions of sections 6-77 and 6-79. Rather, the city shall treat the request for renewal for such license as an application for a new license under section 6-66. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-67. - Designation of agent. 
All applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses made by a corporation or a partnership shall name in the application one or more persons as the agent and representative for the corporation or partnership to receive all communications, notices, service of process or other papers or documents on behalf of the corporation or partnership in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any such license. The application shall give the mailing address of such person, or persons, with the mailing of any notice to any such person at the address so furnished being sufficient notice to the corporation or partnership. If any such person shall cease to be the agent and representative of such corporation or partnership, another person shall immediately be appointed by the license holder and written notice shall be given the city stating the name and address of such new agent and representative. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-68. - Application fee. 
The application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be accompanied by a certified check payable to the city or cash in an amount as set from time to time by Resolution of the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk as an application fee to cover the cost of processing the application and conducting necessary investigations, which fee shall be nonrefundable upon denial of the application and shall not apply toward any licensee fee or excise tax payable by the licensee if the application is granted. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 2016-14, § I, 10-3-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-69. - Investigation of application. 
Upon receipt by the city clerk or designee of any application for an alcoholic beverage license, such application shall be forwarded to the chief of police for investigation, who, following such investigation, shall report his findings with respect thereto in writing and shall attach thereto the police record, if any, of every person named in the application. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-70. - Recommendation. 
The city clerk shall conduct investigation and study with respect to an application for the issuance of an alcoholic beverage license as he shall deem necessary and report the results of his investigation to the city manager. The results of the investigation shall then be reported to the city council with staffs recommendation as to what action should be taken with respect to the grant or denial of the application for such license. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-71. - Grant or denial of application. 
(a)  Following receipt by the city council of an application for an alcoholic beverage license together with the written report of the chief of police and the written recommendations relative thereto, the city council shall either: 
(1)  Grant such application and direct issuance of a license in connection therewith subject to compliance with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(2)  Table action on such application pending a hearing on such application as provided in this section. 
If such application is so tabled by the council then the city manager shall cause a written citation to be issued to the applicant requiring such applicant to show cause, if any the applicant can, at a hearing at a time and place specified therein which shall not be less than five nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the citation by mail or otherwise upon the applicant as to why the application should not be denied as well as written notice of the findings of the chief of police and the recommendation of the staff relative to such application. 
(b)  The hearing provided for above, which need not be a regular meeting of the city council, may be continued by announcement at such time and place due to the lack of a quorum of the city council or request of the applicant or for good cause shown. At such hearing the applicant shall have the opportunity to show cause why the application should be granted and should not be denied and shall be entitled to the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence against granting of the application, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceedings transcribed or recorded at the applicant's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time by the city council relative thereto. 
(c)  Following the conclusion of such hearing the city council shall, at a regular or called meeting thereof within 30 days of the date of such hearing, render its decision regarding the grant or denial of such application. 
(d)  Upon the denial of such application, the city manager shall cause the applicant to be notified in writing within ten days of such decision of the nature of the decision and the reasons therefor and shall cause to be returned to the applicant the licensee fee tendered in connection with the application but not the application fee which shall be nonrefundable. 
(e)  Upon the grant of such application the city clerk shall promptly notify the applicant and shall promptly proceed to cause the license applied for to be issued. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-72. - Issuance of license. 
Upon the approval of an application for an alcoholic beverage license by the city council, the city clerk, or his designee, shall cause to be issued to the applicant the license applied for with respect to the location listed in the application upon payment of all fees and charges required therefor and subject to the conditions and limitations imposed in this chapter relative thereto. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-73. - Conditions and limitation of license. 
The grant and issuance of an alcoholic beverage license to an applicant shall be conditioned upon: 
(1)  Payment of all fees, charges and taxes applicable thereto; 
(2)  Obtaining and maintenance of a license issued by the state department of revenue to the applicant for the location listed in the application for the same type activity which is authorized in the alcoholic beverage license issued by the city; 
(3)  Obtaining and maintaining a business license issued by the city with respect to the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is to be utilized; 
(4)  All statements, representations and information contained in the application for such license and all renewal and amended applications relative thereto continuing to remain materially unchanged except to the extent contained in amended application which have been granted pursuant to the provisions of section 6-89; and 
(5)  Compliance with all requirements and provisions of this chapter and all laws, rules and regulations of the state relative to the sale, distribution and possession of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-74. - License fees. 
(a)  In addition to all other charges, taxes, and fees relative thereto, annual alcoholic beverage license fees, in an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk, are imposed (which, consistent with city policy, are set by the city manager with the informal consent of city council) and shall be paid prior to the issuance of or renewal of any alcoholic beverage license; 
(b)  License fees for the sale of alcoholic beverages are due and payable immediately upon issuance thereof and immediately as of the date of renewal thereof; 
(c)  Any license issued at any time during a calendar year after March 1 shall require the payment of the license fee on the same proration schedule as utilized for the payment of occupation taxes first becoming due after July 1; and 
(d)  All license fees payable under this section shall be paid either in lawful currency of the United States of America or by certified or cashier's check payable to the city. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 2016-14, § I, 10-3-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-75. - Duration. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued for a period of time less than the remainder of such calendar year. In the event of the revocation, suspension, termination, lapse or surrender of a license before the expiration of a calendar year there shall not be any refund therefor. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-76. - Expiration. 
All alcoholic beverage licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued with all applications for a renewal of the license for the ensuing year to be treated as applications for new licenses except to the extent otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 6-77. - Application for renewal. 
The holder of any alcoholic beverages license who desires to renew such license shall annually file with the city clerk, or his designee, an application therefor in such form and content as shall be determined from time to time by the city manager on or before 12:00 noon on November 1 of the year preceding the year for which the application for renewal is made. Such application for renewal shall be accompanied by the applicable annual license fee for the ensuing year. Failure of any holder of any alcoholic beverage license to file such application for renewal by such time and to pay together therewith the required applicable annual license fee for the ensuing year shall render the license void, lapsed, and non-renewed effective as of the last minute of December 31 of that year; provided however, that for providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the city manager, the city manager may, in his sole discretion, extend the time for filing of such application for renewal and payment of such license fee for a period of time not later than January 31 of such ensuing year. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-78. - Lapse of license. 
(a)  If the holder of any alcoholic beverage license fails to timely file an application for renewal or to pay such annual license fee, as the time therefor may be extended pursuant to this chapter, then such license shall automatically become nonrenewed and lapsed. 
(b)  In such event, in order to obtain an alcoholic beverage license, such former licensee shall be required to file an application for another alcoholic beverage license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  In such event, pending receipt of other such alcoholic beverage license, such former licensee shall not be entitled to engage in the sale of the alcoholic beverages formerly authorized pursuant to such lapsed license and shall immediately cease and desist in conducting such sales. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-79. - Operation pending renewal. 
Upon the timely filing of an application for renewal of any alcoholic beverage license and the payment of the required license fee therefor pursuant to the provisions of section 6-77, the holder of such license shall be entitled to continue to engage in the activity authorized pursuant to the license issued for the previous year, subject to the provisions of this article, pending action on the application for renewal of such license. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-80. - Review of application for renewal. 
All applications for renewal of alcoholic beverage licenses shall be reviewed by the city clerk and/or his designees prior to the December regular meeting of the city council. 
(a)  All applications for renewal that have had: 
(1)  No change in ownership and no change in management; and 
(2)  No events that could trigger any ground for denial of nonrenewal set forth in section 6-82 of this Code shall be renewed administratively. The city clerk shall provide city council with a list of such administrative renewals. 
(b)  Those applications for renewal that have had: 
(1)  A change in ownership or management; and/or 
(2)  Any event that could trigger any ground for denial of nonrenewal set for in section 6-82 of this Code shall be submitted by the city clerk to city council along with a written recommendation with respect to the renewal or nonrenewal of each such alcoholic beverage license. Recommendations for renewal may be summary in form and may be collective; however, any recommendation for nonrenewal shall be made individually and shall specify the reasons for recommendation for nonrenewal. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-81. - Grant or denial of renewal. 
(a)  On or before the regular January meeting thereof, the city council shall with respect to each application for renewal coming to it pursuant to section 6-80(b) of this Code either: 
(1)  Grant such application for renewal; or 
(2)  Table action on such application pending a hearing on such application for renewal as provided in this section. 
(b)  If an application for renewal is so tabled then the city manager shall cause a written citation to be issued to the applicant requiring the applicant to show cause why the application for renewal should be granted at a hearing at a time and place specified therein which shall not be less than five days nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the citation by mail or otherwise upon the applicant as well as written notice of the recommendation and reasons of the staff relative to nonrenewal of such license or the recommendation of the city staff for renewal of such license, as the case may be. 
(c)  The hearing provided for in subsection (b) of this section, which meeting need not be a regular meeting of the council, may be continued by announcement at such time and place due to the lack of a quorum of the city council or at the request of the applicant or for good cause shown. At such hearing the applicant shall have the opportunity to show cause why the application for renewal should be granted and shall be entitled to the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence against granting the application for renewal, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceeding transcribed or recorded at the applicant's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time by the city council relative thereto. 
(d)  Following the conclusion of such hearing the city council shall, at a regular or called meeting thereof within 30 days of the date of such hearing, render its decision regarding the granting or denial of such application for renewal. 
(e)  Upon the denial of such application the city manager shall cause the applicant to be notified in writing within ten days of such decision of the nature of such decision and the grounds therefor and shall cause to be returned to the applicant the license fee tendered in connection with the application for renewal whereupon, effective 30 days following notification by the city manager to the applicant thereof, all rights of the applicant to operate under the license for the preceding year shall lapse and terminate and the applicant shall cease and desist from all activity authorized under the prior alcoholic beverage license sought to be renewed. 
(f)  Upon the grant of such application for renewal the city clerk shall promptly notify the applicant thereof and shall promptly proceed to cause the license applied for to be renewed. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-82. - Grounds for denial of application for renewal. 
The city council shall be entitled to deny renewal of any alcoholic beverage license upon a finding by the city council, following the hearing prescribed in connection therewith, of the existence, in the opinion of the city council, of any of the following: 
(1)  Any violation by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license or by any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license of any of the following: 
a.  Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, distribution, sale or possession of alcoholic beverages; 
b.  Any provision, condition, requirement or limitation contained in this chapter; 
c.  Any criminal law which is classified as a felony; or 
d.  Any criminal law involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Any violation by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license or by any employee, agent, or servant of the holder of such license or the business in which such license is utilized, in connection with the maintenance or operation of any business in which an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city is utilized, of any of the following: 
a.  Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages; 
b.  Any provision, condition, requirement, or limitation contained in this chapter; 
c.  Any other ordinance of the city; or 
d.  Any ordinance, rule, regulation or law of any governmental entity otherwise regulating the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized; 
(3)  The initial application for issuance of such alcoholic beverage license, any application for renewal thereof, or any amended application relative thereto contained, as of the time made, material false or misleading statements or information or was otherwise misrepresentative or misleading; 
(4)  Failure of the applicant for renewal, or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license, to meet, as of the time of the application for renewal, the requirements established in this chapter for the initial issuance of such license; 
(5)  Suspension or revocation during the period of time that the alcoholic beverage license issued by the city has been issued for such location by the state department of revenue of any alcoholic beverage license issued for the location of the business in which alcoholic beverage license issued by the city is utilized; 
(6)  Failure of the holder of the license or any employee or agent of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly report to the police department of the city: 
a.  Any violation of this chapter; 
b.  Any other violation of law; 
c.  Any violation of any other city ordinance; or 
d.  Any breach of the peace, disturbance or alteration which occurs upon the premises of the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized; 
(7)  Repeated failure of the holder of the license or the employees, agent and servants of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly control and prevent upon the premises of such business any of the following activities or conduct: 
a.  Fighting; 
b.  Disorderly conduct; 
c.  Utilization of controlled substances; 
d.  Gambling; 
e.  Indecent conduct; 
f.  Excessive noise; or 
(8)  Failure of the holder of the license or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license to promptly pay and satisfy all taxes and other financial obligations due to the city which are not the subject of appeal or litigation. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-83. - Transfer of licenses. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses issued by the city shall be personal to the person to whom issued and are applicable only to the location for which application therefor is made and accordingly no license shall be transferable to any person or entity or to any other location. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, in the event of the death of any person holding a license, or any interest therein, then upon application and approval by the city manager subject to the terms of this section, an alcoholic beverage license may be utilized by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person, or by the heirs at law of the deceased person, in the event that such administrator, executor, personal representative or heirs meet all of the qualifications contained in this chapter for the issuance of such alcoholic beverage license, with the license of such deceased person to be so utilized by the administrator, executor, personal representative, or heirs of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete administration of the estate of such deceased person, but in no event longer than six months from the date of the death of such deceased person, with such license to lapse upon the earlier of such six-month period, completion of such administration, or December 31 of the year in which death shall occur. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, in the event that the person to whom an alcoholic beverage license is issued certifies under oath in writing to the city manager that the business served by such alcoholic beverage license is relocating to another physical location within the city, the city manager may, upon payment to the city of an application amendment fee, provide for an amended license specific to the new location if such new location meets all of the requirements of this chapter. In no event shall any holder of an alcoholic beverage license operate under that license at more than one location at any time. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any change in the ownership interests of a partnership or corporation which holds any alcoholic beverage license, as reflected in the initial application for such license, shall cause the immediate cessation of sales of any alcoholic beverages and no sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made until such change in the ownership interests is approved by the city council based upon the qualification of all persons then interested therein in accordance with the provisions hereof or until the issuance of another license to such corporation or partnership upon a new application therefor; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply in a situation in which one or more individuals who have existing interest in the entity which holds the license cease to have such interest and the remaining ownership interest in such entity remains unchanged except as to the division of the remaining interests therein. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-84. - Emergency suspension. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter: 
(1)  The chief of police shall be authorized, upon concurrence with respect thereto by the city manager, to suspend the right of the holder of any alcoholic beverage license to sell or otherwise distribute any alcoholic beverage, and to close the business in which such license is utilized, for such period of time as shall be determined to be necessary, but in no event in excess of 24 hours duration, in the event of: 
a.  Any national, state or local emergency; 
b.  Any riotous or violent circumstances either with respect to such location only or the community generally; or 
c.  Any circumstances which require such action in order to prevent conditions which are contrary to public health, welfare or safety. 
(2)  The city council may, in its sole discretion, and either with or without notice or hearing, suspend the right of the holder of any alcoholic beverage license to sell or otherwise distribute any alcoholic beverage for such period of time as it may deem necessary, but in no event in excess of 30 days duration, in the event of: 
a.  Any national, state or local emergency; 
b.  Any riotous or violent circumstances either with respect to such location only or the community generally; or 
c.  Any circumstances which require such action in order to prevent conditions which are contrary to public health, welfare or safety; provided, however, that in no event shall such period of suspension exceed ten days duration without an opportunity to be heard being afforded to the holder of such license in connection with the continuance thereafter of such emergency suspension, with notice thereof and such hearing hereon being the same as provided in section 6-85 for suspension of alcoholic beverage licenses generally. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-85. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Upon a preliminary determination by the city manager that a ground or grounds exist for the suspension or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, then the city manager shall cause a written citation to be issued to the holder of such license requiring such holder to show cause, if any such holder can, at a hearing before the city council at a time and place specified therein which shall not be less than five days nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the citation, by mail or otherwise, upon such holder as well as written notice of the reasons believed by the city manager to authorize possible suspension or revocation of such license. 
(b)  The hearing provided for in subsection (a) of this section, which need not be a regular meeting of the council, may be continued by announcement at such time and place due to the lack of a quorum of the city council or at the request of the license holder or for good cause shown for a period of not longer than ten days. At such hearing the holder of the license shall have the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked and shall be entitled to the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence in favor of suspension or revocation, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceeding transcribed or recorded at the license holder's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time by the city council relative thereto. 
(c)  Following the conclusion of such hearing the city council shall, at a regular or called meeting thereof within 30 days of the date of such hearing, render its decision regarding whether the license in issue should be suspended or revoked and, if suspended, then the duration of such suspension and the amount of license reinstatement fee which amount shall not be in excess of $250.00, if any, as the city council shall in its sole discretion determine to be appropriate under the circumstances, which license reinstatement fee shall be paid as a condition to reinstatement of the license following suspension. 
(d)  Upon the suspension or revocation of such license then the city manager shall cause the license holder to be notified in writing within ten days of such decision of the nature of such decision and the grounds therefor and thereupon the license shall immediately become suspended or terminated in accordance with such decision and the license holder shall immediately upon receipt of such notice cease and desist from all activity authorized under such alcoholic beverage license in accordance with such decision and physically surrender such license to the finance director. 
(e)  If the city council determines that grounds do not exist to suspend or terminate such license or decides to not suspend or terminate such license notwithstanding the existence of grounds therefor then the city manager shall promptly notify the license holder thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-86. - Grounds for suspension or revocation. 
The city council shall be entitled, in its sole discretion, to either suspend or revoke any alcoholic beverage license upon a finding by the city council, following the hearing prescribed in connection therewith, of the existence of any of the following: 
(1)  Any violation by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license or by any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license of and of the following: 
a.  Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, distribution, sale or possession of alcoholic beverages; 
b.  Any provision, condition, requirement or limitation contained in this chapter; 
c.  Any criminal law which is classified as a felony; or 
d.  Any criminal law involving moral turpitude. 
(2)  Any violation by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license or by any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license or by any employee, agent, or servant of the holder of such license or the business in which such license is utilized, all in connection with the maintenance or operation of any business in which an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city is utilized, of any of the following: 
a.  Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages; 
b.  Any provision, condition, requirement, or limitation contained in this chapter; 
c.  Any other ordinance of the city; or 
d.  Any ordinance, rule, regulation or law of any governmental entity otherwise regulating the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized. 
(3)  The initial application for issuance of such alcoholic beverage license, any application for renewal thereof, or any amended application relative thereto contained, as of the time made, material false or misleading statements or information or was otherwise misrepresentative or misleading; 
(4)  Failure of the holder of such license or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license, to meet, as of the time of the notice of hearing relative thereto, the requirements established in this chapter for the initial issuance of such license; 
(5)  Suspension or revocation during the period of time that the alcoholic beverage license issued by the city has been issued for such location by the state department of revenue of any alcoholic beverage license issued for the location of the business in which the alcoholic beverage license issued by the city is utilized; 
(6)  Failure of the holder of the license or any employee or agent of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly report to the police department of the city: 
a.  Any violation of this chapter; 
b.  Any other violation of law; 
c.  Any other violation of any other city ordinance; or 
d.  Any breach of the peace, disturbance or alteration which occurs within or upon the premises of the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized; 
(7)  Repeated failure of the holder of the license or the employees, agent and servants of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly control and prevent within or upon the premises of such business any of the following activities or conduct: 
a.  Fighting; 
b.  Disorderly conduct; 
c.  Utilization of controlled substances; 
d.  Gambling; 
e.  Indecent conduct; 
f.  Excessive noise; or 
(8)  Failure of the holder of the license or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license to promptly pay and satisfy all taxes and other financial obligations due to the city which are not the subject of appeal or litigation. 
(9)  With respect to a retail distilled spirits consumption license, failure to derive at least 50 percent of its gross food and beverage sales, excluding tips and gratuities, from the sale of food prepared, served and consumed upon the licensed premises thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-87. - Termination. 
All rights and privileges of the holder of an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city shall terminate upon the first to occur of the following: 
(1)  Death of the holder of such license, except to the extent on any right to continue to utilize such license as provided in subsection 6-83(b); 
(2)  Dissolution of a corporation or partnership which are holder of such license; 
(3)  The filing of any voluntary bankruptcy proceedings under the bankruptcy code by the holder of such license or the failure of the holder of such license to, within 60 days of the date of filing thereof, obtain dismissal of and involuntary proceeding filed under the bankruptcy code against the holder of such license; 
(4)  Lapse of such license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; 
(5)  Denial by the city council of an application for renewal of such license; 
(6)  Revocation thereof by the city council; 
(7)  Surrender thereof by the licensee to the city; 
(8)  Automatically without any action on the part of the city upon revocation by the state department of revenue of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the state department of revenue to the holder of the license in issue with respect to such location; or 
(9)  The licensee ceases to be engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages permitted with such license. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-88. - License issued in error. 
No rights with respect to any license which is issued in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall attach thereto in favor of any person and the city shall be entitled at any time subsequent to the issuance of such license in error to terminate and cancel any such license. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-89. - Amended applications. 
In the event that either (i) the business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized cease to be actively managed or operated on a day-to-day basis by the person so designated with respect thereto in the latest application relative to such license whether an initial, amended or renewal application; or (ii) any other material change occurs in any of the statements, representations or other information contained in any application relative to such license whether in an initial, amended or renewal application which has not otherwise been modified pursuant to an amended application previously granted pursuant to the provisions of this section, then: 
(1)  Within 30 calendar days of such occurrence the licensee shall file with the city clerk an amended application with respect to such license, in such form and of such content as shall from time to time be prescribed therefore by the city manager, disclosing, in sufficient detail to evaluate the application, the nature and extent of such changes and, in the case of the cessation of management of such business as reflected in the latest such application, the full details and particulars relative to the person who is then actively managing or operating such business on a day-to-day basis, all to the same extent as required in an initial application; 
(2)  An amended application shall be accompanied by payment to the city by cashier's check or cash of an amended application processing fee which shall be nonrefundable regardless of the ultimate decision relative to such amended application; 
(3)  Upon receipt of an amended application, city officials shall conduct such investigations as shall be appropriate relative thereto and shall make recommendations relative thereto as in the case of an initial application; 
(4)  Upon receipt of recommendations relative thereto the city council shall proceed to act on such amended application as in the case of an initial application utilizing the same qualifications and criteria relative thereto as for an initial application and utilizing the same procedures with respect thereto; 
(5)  Grant or denial of an amended application shall be based upon a finding by the city council that, as of the date of the determination thereof by the city council, the amended application either meets or fails to meet the requirements, criteria and qualifications contained in this chapter which are necessary for the initial issuance of such alcoholic beverage license; 
(6)  Approval of an amended application by the city council shall constitute, effective as of the date of such approval, an amendment of the initial application; 
(7)  The licensee shall, following determination thereof by the city council, be notified by the city manager or his designee of such decision as in the case of an initial application; and 
(8)  Effective 15 days following notification by the city manager of denial of an amended application for such longer period of time as the city manager in his sole discretion determines appropriate under the circumstances, but in no event later than 30 days from the date of such notification: (i) such license shall lapse due to the failure of the licensee to continue to meet the qualifications, requirements and criteria for the grant of such license; (ii) all privileges relative to such license shall cease and terminate; (iii) such former licensee shall not be entitled to engage in the sale of the alcoholic beverages formerly authorized pursuant to such lapsed license; (iv) such former licensee shall immediately cease and desist from conducting such sales; and (v) in order to be authorized thereafter to engage in the sale of such alcoholic beverages the former licensee shall be required to file an application for another alcoholic beverage license and obtain approval thereof, all in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-90. - Waiting period before reapplication. 
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article, any unsuccessful applicant must wait 90 days from the date of final decision before reapplying. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Secs. 6-91—6-99. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-100. - Special use permit for bona fide nonprofit civic organization. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "bona fide nonprofit civic organization" means an entity which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of subsection (c), (d), or (e) of 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
(b)  Prior to application to the department of revenue for a temporary permit pursuant to O.C.G.A. 3-9-3, or a special use temporary permit pursuant to O.C.G.A. 3-9-4, the bona fide nonprofit civic organization shall make application and obtain an event permit pursuant to section 6-175 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 2016-14, § I, 10-3-2016 ) 
Secs. 6-101—6-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATIONAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-121. - Hours during which sales prohibited. 
(a)  The sale of any alcoholic beverage by the holder of any alcoholic beverage license, including package beer and/or wine, or by any employee of any business in which such license is utilized, is prohibited during the following periods of time: 
From 2:00 a.m., prevailing time, on Sunday until 7:00 a.m. prevailing time on Monday; from 2:00 a.m., prevailing time Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday until 7:00 a.m., prevailing time, of that same day. 
(b)  Sunday Sales Authorized. 
(1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages is hereby authorized for consumption on-premises in restaurants on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(2)  Package sales of malt beverages and wine by retailers on Sundays are authorized between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-122. - Hours during which other activities prohibited. 
(a)  Neither any holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any employee of any business in which such license is utilized shall allow or permit any alcoholic beverage to be handled in any manner upon the premises of the business in which such license is utilized or any alcoholic beverage to be located upon any table, counter, or other such customer service area upon such premises, either in the form of the original container therefor or otherwise, from one hour after the last time permitted to sell an alcoholic beverage as set forth in section 6-121 of this chapter until such time as alcoholic beverages may again be sold as set forth in section 6-121 of this chapter. 
(b)  All licensed premises for the sale of retail beer and/or wine by the drink or retail liquor by the drink, shall be closed to the public, and the premises shall be cleared of all persons (except employees of the licensed premises engaged in their employment duties) not to exceed 15 minutes beyond the time that the last alcoholic beverage can be lawfully located upon the table, counter or other customer service area of the licensed premises. Thereafter all licensees shall remove or cause to be removed all alcoholic beverages from the area of the premises utilized by customers, patrons, and invitees; all alcoholic beverages shall be stored in original containers or storage containers on a shelf or cabinet; no alcoholic beverages shall be furnished to, consumed by, or possessed by any person within the premises; and the premises shall remain closed for business until the beginning hours of operation (7:00 a.m.). Following such mandatory closing time, up to four employees of the business located upon the licensed premises may remain for up to an additional hour to handle all post-closing duties. If, because of special circumstances, additional time is needed by the employees for post-closing duties, the holder of the alcoholic beverage license at such licensed premises may contact the police for additional time for which permission shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this paragraph. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-123. - Sales on election day. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted and is authorized during polling hours of any local, state or federal election; provided that the foregoing shall not authorize the sale of any alcoholic beverage within 250 feet of any polling place during the period of time that polls are open for voting. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-124. - Advertising. 
No holder of any alcoholic beverage license shall allow or permit any advertising to be placed or run in any media or by any other means with respect to the availability of alcoholic beverages at the location licensed except to the extent permitted by state law and rules and regulations relative thereto. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-125. - Consumption prohibited upon premises of package licensee. 
No holder of a license only for the package sales of any alcoholic beverage nor any employee, agent or servant of any business in which only a license for package sales is utilized shall knowingly allow or permit the breaking of any package containing any alcoholic beverage upon the premises where sold, or intentionally allow or permit the consumption of any of the contents of any package containing any alcoholic beverage upon the premises where sold. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-126. - Sales prohibited beyond premises. 
No holder of any alcoholic beverage license or any employee, agent or servant of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized (herein collectively referred to as "licensee") shall sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage at any location other than within the interior of the building located upon premises so licensed in which such sales are authorized or upon the patio or deck (whether under roof or not) adjoining the licensed premises. The licensee shall not be authorized to sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage at any other location upon or within the licensed premises (hereinafter referred to as "open areas") including, but not limited to, the parking lot of such location unless any such open areas are set apart by a rope, fence or other similar access control mechanism that has been approved by the police department in the interest of public safety and the promotion of law enforcement; and, further provided that such licensee must continually supervise any and all such open areas to prevent non-customers from gaining access. 
Sec. 6-127. - Furnishing alcoholic beverages to intoxicated person. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall sell, give, provide, distribute, or furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person who is then in an obvious state of intoxication. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-128. - Assisting other in violations. 
No person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall promote, encourage, or assist any other person in conducting or engaging in any activity or action which is in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-129. - Misrepresentation of beverages. 
No person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city, nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall add to or otherwise adulterate the contents of a package or refill any empty package, or in any other manner misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-130. - Specific rules for consumption on premises. 
(a)  Rules applicable to all alcoholic beverages. No person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city or any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the premises under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Serve multiple servings for a single price or offer all a person can drink for a set price; 
(2)  Make a single price the basis for a required purchase of two or more servings; 
(3)  Selling or furnishing alcoholic beverages at reduced prices based upon redemption or surrender of coupons, receipts, or other devices authorizing the serving of alcoholic beverage drinks on a subsequent day; 
(4)  Require or encourage the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage is consumed; 
(5)  Allow or permit any unconsumed alcoholic beverage sold for consumption on the premises to be removed from the licensed premises; 
(6)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dispensing of malt beverages in pitchers or in jumbo sizes which are available at all times that the business in which the alcoholic beverage license is utilized is open for business at the usual, customary or established retail price therefor. 
(b)  Rules applicable to distilled spirits. In addition to the rules set forth in subsection (a) of this section, these rules shall likewise apply to the on premises consumption of distilled spirits: 
(1)  Sponsor, conduct, allow or permit contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of distilled spirits on the premises. 
(2)  Sell or furnish distilled spirits at any time that the restaurant or private club to which such license is attached is closed. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-131. - Operation only by licensee or designated manager. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city shall permit or allow any business in which such license is utilized to be managed or operated for any period of time longer than 15 days by any person except to the extent otherwise specifically provided in this chapter who is not listed upon the initial application for such license, upon the most recent application for renewal thereof, on an amended application relative thereto which has been approved by the city council, or upon a then pending and unacted upon amended application relative thereto. 
Sec. 6-132. - Display of license. 
The holder of every alcoholic beverage license issued by the city shall post and prominently display in a conspicuous place upon the premises licensed all alcoholic beverages licenses by the city and by the state department of revenue. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-133. - Posting of laws regulating sales. 
The holder of every alcoholic beverage license issued by the city shall post and prominently display in a conspicuous place upon the premises licensed all notices required by state law relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages as well as such other notice or notices relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to license issued by the city as shall from time to time be prescribed by the city manager of such form, size and content as shall be prescribed by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-134. - Signage restrictions. 
No holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter shall at any time allow or permit any sign, signage or other visual media of any type or nature whatsoever upon any portion of the premises licensed relative to alcoholic beverages, the price thereof, the availability thereof, or the name, logo, trademark, or symbol of any brand of alcoholic beverage except to the extent specifically authorized in this section or in violation of any of the restrictions set forth as follows: 
(1)  There may be located upon the exterior of the building located upon the licensed premises which is utilized in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages one sign on each of not more than two exterior walls with each of such signs not being in excess of five percent of the gross wall area of each such wall from grade level to actual roof line of a one story building or to the actual floor line of the second floor if more than one story; 
(2)  Signage authorized pursuant to subsection (1) of this section shall only be located below the roof line of a one-story building, or, below the actual floor line of the second floor if the building is more than one story, and shall be mounted flush against such exterior walls with no portion thereof extending more than eight inches from the wall surface; 
(3)  In addition to the signage authorized pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, there may also be located upon the licensed premise one freestanding sign not exceeding 20 square feet in area which shall be located at a height of not more than 20 feet above ground level; 
(4)  No signage authorized pursuant to subsection (1) or (3) of this section shall be illuminated in any manner nor shall any letter or lettering utilized therein exceed eight inches in height; 
(5)  No signage authorized pursuant to subsections (1) or (3) of this section shall make any reference to the price of any alcoholic beverage; 
(6)  No signage authorized pursuant to subsections (1) or (3) of this section shall make any reference in any manner to the availability of alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the licensed premises; 
(7)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (6) of this section, restaurants may utilize the word "lounge" in signage to the extent that a lounge as defined in this chapter is located upon the same premises as such restaurant; 
(8)  Signage authorized pursuant to subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall consist of the utilization of the words "beer," "wine," "ale," "champagne" only or any combination of such words together with the trade name of the business in which the alcoholic beverage license is utilized, if desired; 
(9)  Except to the extent specifically authorized in this section no sign, signage or other visual media or any type or nature whatsoever relative to alcoholic beverages shall be located upon the exterior of any building located upon the licensed premises or upon any unenclosed portion of the licensed premises; 
(10)  No sign, signage or other visual media or any type or nature whatsoever which is located upon the interior of any building located upon the licensed premises relative to (i) the price of any alcoholic beverage; or (ii) to the availability of alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the premises shall at any time be visible from the exterior of such building; 
(11)  Except to the extent prohibited in subsection (10) of this section signs, signage, and visual media relative to alcoholic beverages, the price thereof, the availability thereof for package sales and/or consumption upon the licensed premises, as licensed, and the name, logo, trademark and symbol of brands of alcoholic beverages are permitted within the interior of that portion of the building in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is conducted, subject however to such other provisions contained in this chapter; 
(12)  Nothing contained in any of the foregoing provisions of this section shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the parking upon the licensed premises of a wholesale dealer or upon the licensed premises of a retail dealer for a period of time not in excess of one hour of a delivery vehicle of a licensed wholesale dealer; 
(13)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no sign, signage or visual media of any type or nature whatsoever shall at any time be erected, located or maintained except in strict accordance with the City of Tifton Land Development Code; 
(14)  Except to the extent specifically permitted and authorized in this section, no holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage licensed is utilized shall at any time allow or permit upon the premises licensed any sign, signage, or other visual media of any type or nature whatsoever relative to any alcoholic beverage, the price thereof, the availability thereof, or the name, logo, trademark or symbol of any brand of alcoholic beverage. 
(15)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, holders of alcohol licenses may advertise special pricing and special events related to on premises consumption only upon the door and window entryways to the building located upon the licensed premises and within any sales service area beyond the roof of the building as allowed pursuant to the provisions of section 6-126 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-135. - Obstruction of view of interior of premises and lighting of premises. 
(a)  For the safety of law enforcement personnel and other public officials, every business in which an alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall provide a door, window or other opening through which the interior of the premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be visible from the exterior. Neither the holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall obstruct, block, or obscure the view through any door, window or other opening of the interior of the premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Both the exterior and interior of all premises licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be so arranged as to afford an unobstructed view from the outside thereof of the interior portion of the premises which is utilized for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  The exterior of all premises licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall at all times be illuminated with sufficient light intensity so as to allow a complete view of all portions of the exterior thereof. 
(d)  The exterior of all premises licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall at all times be illuminated with sufficient light intensity so as to allow a complete view of the interior of such premise which is utilized for the sale of alcoholic beverages by a person standing on the inside of the entrance of such premises. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-136. - Restrictions on compensation. 
No holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any such alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall permit or allow any agent, servant or employee of such business who is not the owner of an interest in such business to either directly or indirectly, receive or obtain in any manner any salary or other compensation of any nature whatsoever which is based solely upon the volume of alcoholic beverages sold upon such premises either by or as a result of the efforts of such agent, servant or employee individually or of such business generally or which is based solely upon the profit derived by such business from the sale of any alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-137. - Restrictions on premises rental fees. 
It shall be unlawful for an alcoholic beverage license holder to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for the licensed premises is based in whole or in part upon the volume of alcoholic beverages sold upon such premises or based in whole or in part upon the profit derived by such business utilizing the alcoholic beverage license. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-138. - Restrictions upon activities of employees. 
No holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall permit or allow any agent, servant or employee of such business or license holder upon the premise licensed during any period of time that such agent, servant or employee is acting for the benefit of or on behalf of such business or license or is otherwise in the employ of such business or licensee to: 
(1)  Dance with any customer or patron of such business; 
(2)  Dance upon any bar, counter or table; and 
(3)  Consume any alcoholic beverage purchased by a customer or patron of such business. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-139. - Access of police officers and public officials. 
No holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall at any time deny or prevent access to the licensed premises, or any portion thereof, to any police officer, to any state or federal or local law enforcement officer or to any local, state or federal building, zoning or fire inspector or official in connection with the conduct of such officer's, inspector's or official's duties or fail or obstruct any such officer, inspector or official in connection with the conduct of any investigation by any such officer, inspector or official with respect to the licensed premises or any activity or conduct upon the licensed premises involving alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-140. - No brown bagging allowed. 
Brown bagging is prohibited within the City of Tifton. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the prohibition against brown bagging includes the provision that alcohol cannot be brought, sold, furnished or otherwise distributed upon the business premises at any time by any person other than the holder of the alcoholic beverage license issued for that licensed premises (who must abide by all the provisions of this Code). So-called "private parties" or "private events" involving the consumption of alcohol are not authorized at any time upon the licensed premises unless the alcohol is distributed by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license issued for that licensed premises - again, pursuant to the provisions of this Code - at a time that the holder of the alcoholic beverage license is permitted to sell, furnish or otherwise distribute alcohol at or upon the licensed premises. Such authorized times are set forth in section 6-121 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-141. - Noise control. 
The holder of any alcoholic beverage license shall not allow or permit any customer, patron or other person upon the licensed premises to make, continue or cause to be made any noise that can be heard beyond the property boundary of the licensed premises that unreasonably or unnecessarily annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city. Moreover, the holder of any alcoholic beverage license shall comply with the noise control provisions of chapter 38 [environment] of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Secs. 6-142—6-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 6-161. - Excise tax imposed. 
There is hereby levied and imposed upon each holder of a wholesale alcoholic beverage license selling alcoholic beverages within the city a specific excise tax in addition to all other fees, taxes and charges relative thereto upon the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city as follows: 
(1)  Per case of 24 seven-ounce containers ..... $0.70 
(2)  Per case of 24 eight-ounce containers ..... 0.80 
(3)  Per case of 24 12-ounce containers ..... 1.20 
(4)  Per case of 24 14-ounce containers ..... 1.40 
(5)  Per case of 24 16-ounce containers ..... 1.60 
(6)  Per case of 36 8-ounce containers ..... 1.20 
(7)  Per case of 12 32-ounce containers ..... 1.60 
(8)  Per case of 48 seven-ounce containers ..... 1.40 
(9)  For each one-half barrel (15½ gallons) of tap or draft beer ..... 6.00 
(10)  A proportionate tax per one-half barrel (15½ gallons) of tap or draft beer on all fractional parts of half-barrels, at the rate of ..... 6.00 
(11)  A proportionate tax per 12 ounces for all malt beverages not sold in barrels or other bulk container on all fractional parts of 12-ounce sizes not specified above, at the rate of ..... 0.05 
(12)  With respect to wines: 
a.  Per one liter (33.8 ounce) containers ..... 0.22 
b.  Per three-quarter liter (25.4 ounce) containers ..... 0.16 
c.  Per one-half liter (16.4 ounce) containers ..... 0.11 
d.  Per three-eighth liter (12.7 ounce) containers ..... 0.08 
e.  Per .535 liter containers ..... 0.05 
f.  A proportionate tax per liter for all fractional parts of liters not specified above, at the rate of ..... 0.22 
(13)  With respect to distilled spirits: A per liter tax and proportionate tax for all fractional parts of liters at the maximum rate allowed by the State of Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-162. - Monthly reports and payment. 
Each holder of a wholesale alcoholic beverage license shall file a monthly report by the tenth day of each calendar month itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of all alcoholic beverages, by nature and by size and type of container, sold within the city and at such time shall remit to the city the amount of excise tax due to the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-163. - Examination of books and records. 
The books and records of all wholesalers selling or delivering these beverages and all retailers thereof in the city shall be subject to inspection and audit by the agents of the city to ensure compliance herewith. It shall be unlawful for any person to deny to any authorized agent of the city reasonable access to its books and records and shall be the duty of each person to keep accurate records of payments and collections of the case tax and remittances. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-164. - Penalties. 
(a)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance required shall render a wholesaler liable for a penalty equal to 25 percent of the total due during the first 30-day period following the date the report and remittance were due and a further penalty of 50 percent of the amount of this remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof during which the report and the remittance were not filed. 
(b)  The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making the report liable to a penalty equal to 100 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(c)  Any person, wholesaler or retailer that shall violate the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed by the municipal court and may in addition be subject to suspension or revocation of the license to sell such beverages. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-165. - Taxes collected upon delivery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any retailer of alcoholic beverages to receive and retain these beverages unless he shall have paid the tax thereon. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of alcoholic beverages to sell or deliver these beverages to any retailer thereof unless he shall concurrently with this delivery collect the tax imposed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of alcoholic beverages to fail to remit to the city, when promptly due, the taxes levied, and collected by the wholesaler. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged as a retailer of these beverages to receive these beverages from another retailer unless tax has been paid. 
(d)  It shall further be unlawful for any retailer of alcoholic beverages to receive and retail these beverages from another retail store, whether the other store shall be owned by the receiving retailer or not, or whether the other store is located within the corporate limits of the city or not, unless the tax shall have been paid and remitted to the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-166. - Tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this section and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Tifton and, variously, the incorporated areas of Tifton, wherein the City of Tifton is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
Due date means 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Finance director means the duly appointed finance director of the city or designee. 
Licensee means any person holding a license to serve distilled spirits by the drink from the city. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure (venture), association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States, the state and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Tax means the sales tax on distilled spirits by the drink imposed by this article. 
(b)  Imposition; rate of tax. There is hereby imposed, and there shall be paid, a tax of three percent on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the city. 
(c)  Collection by licensee. Every licensee shall collect a tax of three percent on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink at his pouring outlet. 
(d)  Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(1)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the finance director monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of tax when due and payable to the city. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(3)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed by every licensee with the finance director showing the gross sales of distilled spirits by the drink and the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the finance director. 
(4)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailer and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, as now and hereafter amended. 
(e)  Deficiency determinations. 
(1)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within her possession or that may come into her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or a fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(3)  Notice of determination; service of. The finance director shall give to the licensee written notice of her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee or postal certification that such mail was refused. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount in proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(f)  Determination of no return made. 
(1)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, or as the case may be, of the amount of total such receipts in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the finance director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection (e)(3). 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or a fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(g)  Collection of tax by city. 
(1)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the finance director may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(2)  Duty of successors or assignees of licensee to withhold tax from purchase money. If any licensee liable for any amount under this section sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the finance director either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(3)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(4)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the finance director. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the finance director, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the finance director, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(h)  Administration of ordinance; recordkeeping. 
(1)  Authority of finance director. The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax. 
(2)  Records required from licensees, etc.; form. Every licensee shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all records, receipts, invoices and such other documents as the finance director may prescribe, and in such form as she may require. 
(3)  Examination of records, audits. The finance director or any person authorized in writing by her may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, inventory, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(4)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this section, the finance director may require the filing of reports by person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. The reports shall be filed with the finance director when required by said official, and shall set forth the gross sales from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, the amount of tax collection thereon, or such other information as the finance director may prescribe. 
(i)  Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in City Charter section 4.13. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this section is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the finance director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-167. - Delinquency. 
If after 45 days any excise tax imposed by this division is not paid by any holder of a wholesale alcoholic beverage license, then the excise tax assessed against such license holder shall become delinquent and all of the provisions of this Code relative to the collection of delinquent taxes shall be applicable for the collection of such excise tax. Alcoholic beverages on which city taxes have not been paid are subject to seizure and may be destroyed or sold by public sale as provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Secs. 6-168—6-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CATERING 

Sec. 6-175. - Sale off premises for catering purposes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
(2)  Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer who has been licensed under Title 3, Article 2 of Chapter 4, Article 2 of Chapter 5, or Article 2 of Chapter 6 the Official Code of Georgia. 
(b)  Licensing. 
(1)  Any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer who additionally holds a valid license from a county or municipality which authorizes the licensee to sell malt beverages or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises may be issued from the same licensing authority an off-premise license which authorizes such licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to sell malt beverages or wine by the drink off premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
(2)  Any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer who additionally holds a valid license from a county or municipality which authorizes the licensee to sell malt beverages or wine by the package for consumption off the premises may be issued from the same licensing authority an off-premise license which authorizes such licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to sell malt beverages or wine by the drink off premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
(3)  Any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer who additionally holds a valid license from a county or municipality which authorizes the licensee to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises may be issued from the same licensing authority an off-premise license which authorizes such licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to sell distilled spirits by the drink off premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
(4)  Any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer who additionally holds a valid license from a county or municipality which authorizes the licensee to sell distilled spirits by the package for consumption off the premises may be issued from the same licensing authority an off-premise license which authorizes such licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to sell distilled spirits by the drink off premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
(c)  Annual license fee. Any alcoholic beverage caterer shall make application for an off-premises license as provided Article III of this chapter and shall pay an annual license fee in an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer who has not been issued an alcoholic caterer license by the City of Tifton, and the event is within the corporate city limits of Tifton, shall pay an event permit fee of $50.00 and shall pay local excise taxes on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the city. 
(e)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer is eligible to sell or furnish only those types of alcoholic beverages as he can sell or furnish pursuant to his underlying alcoholic beverage license. 
(f)  Event permit. 
(1)  An event permit, issued by the city manager or his designee, is required before an otherwise licensed alcoholic beverage caterer can sell or furnish alcoholic beverages off premises, i.e., at any location other than the licensed premises utilizing the underlying alcoholic beverage license. In order to obtain an event permit, the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall be required to submit a fully accurate and completed application on the form prescribed by the city which shall include the following information: 
a.  Name of caterer and caterer's license number; 
b.  Date of event; 
c.  Time (hours) of event; 
d.  Location (address) of event; 
e.  Host or sponsor of event; 
f.  Estimated number of persons to attend the event; and 
g.  Verify that the location complies with the distance requirements contained in Article III, Section 6-65 of this Chapter from churches, school buildings, educational buildings, school grounds, or college campus, an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state, county or municipal government or housing authority property. 
(2)  An event permit cannot be obtained unless the event permit application referenced in subsection (f) hereinabove is accurately completed in full and submitted to the city manager or his designee at least 14 calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the event or function. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an event permit may be issued within a shorter time frame by the city manager in his sole and sound discretion. 
(3)  An event permit may be refused by the city manager or his designee for any one of the following reasons: 
a.  Criminal record of caterer permit holder; 
b.  Previous complaints on location or of applicant; 
c.  Previous damage to facility by applicant or permit holder. 
(f)  Compliance. Any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall comply with all state statutes and rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue including: (1) providing satisfactory reports to the commissioner on forms provided by the department stating the quantity of any and all alcoholic beverages transported from the licensee's primary premises to the location of the authorized catered function and such other information as required by the commissioner; and (2) Maintaining original local event permits and documents required by the department in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered function at all times. 
(g)  The city reserves the right to define and/or restrict the service area for serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(h)  The city shall control the dispensing of alcohol in all of its facilities by requiring the use of a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer if alcohol is furnished at any such facility. Consistent with this article, alcohol may also be dispensed by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer who has been issued an event permit at facilities of any local, state or federal public entity. 
(i)  Violation. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any food caterer or person to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine off the premises of the food caterer's business without a license issued pursuant to this section. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer licensed under this section to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine off-premises except in connection with an authorized catered function for which an event permit has been obtained. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 2016-14, § I, 10-3-2016 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - HEARING OFFICERS 

Sec. 6-191. - Hearing by hearing officers. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, hearings provided for pursuant to section 6-85 may be held, at the discretion of the council, by a hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-192. - Appointment of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer shall be such person as shall be appointed by the city manager from time to time for such purpose. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-193. - Qualifications of hearing officer. 
Any hearing officer appointed by the city manager pursuant to this chapter shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing and a member of the Tifton Judicial Circuit Bar Association. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-194. - Notice of hearing. 
The city manager shall furnish, or cause to be furnished, to the licensee involved at least ten days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing a notice with respect to such hearing which shall include the time, date, place and purpose thereof as well as the name of the hearing officer before whom such hearing shall be conducted. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-195. - Purpose of hearing. 
The purpose of the hearing shall be to: 
(1)  Afford officials and employees of the city and others an opportunity to present grounds and/or reasons for the suspension and/or revocation of the license in issue; 
(2)  Afford officials and employees of the city and others an opportunity to present the nature of prior violations relative to the license and license in issue, if any, which are considered to be relevant to the issues involved; 
(3)  Afford the licensee an opportunity to respond to any and all prior alleged violations and to the circumstances surrounding any such prior alleged violations; to respond to any evidence with respect to any alleged violations; to present evidence, matters, and witnesses relative to compliance by licensee with the provisions of this chapter and any other matter relative to the purpose as is of the hearing and the issues to be resolved; to propose recommendations relative to proposed actions with respect to the license in issue; to otherwise generally respond to any and all recommendations, reasons and grounds submitted relative to the license in issue; and to otherwise generally present matters relative to possible action by the city in connection with such licensee and license. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-196. - Conduct of disciplinary hearing. 
In connection with the conduct of the disciplinary hearing; 
(1)  The hearing officer shall have the authority to: 
a.  Administer oaths and affirmations to witnesses who testify or offer evidence; 
b.  Issue subpoenas but only to the extent authorized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; 
c.  Generally regulate and manage the conduct of the hearing; 
d.  Set the time and place for any continuation or postponement of the hearing; 
e.  Determine whether or not to require or accept the filing of briefs and if so the time period therefor; 
f.  Rule upon the admissibility of evidence and offers of proof submitted; 
g.  Rule inappropriate and out of order any despairing, irrelevant or inappropriate matter; 
h.  Limit evidence, statements, arguments and presentations which may unduly lengthy, inappropriate, not germane, not relevant or otherwise inappropriate; 
i.  Reprimand and/or exclude from the hearing any person who fails to conduct themselves in an orderly and courteous manner during the hearing or fails to comply with the rulings of the hearing officer relative to the conduct of the hearing; and 
j.  Otherwise generally conduct the hearing in an orderly manner as in the nature of a hearing before a special master in the superior courts of the state. 
(2)  Continuances may be granted by the hearing officer upon motion of any party or upon the hearing officer's own motion provided that any such continuance shall be granted only to a specific date, time, and space and no such continuance shall be granted for more than 14 calendar days. 
(3)  Subpoenas may be issued by the hearing officer to any employee of the city or any elected or appointed officer or official of the city upon the timely request therefor by any party; provided, however, that the hearing officer does not have the authority or the power to issue any subpoena to any person other than employees, officers, or officials of the city. 
Sec. 6-197. - Rights of licensee at disciplinary hearing. 
(a)  At a disciplinary hearing the licensee involved shall be entitled to: 
(1)  Be represented by an attorney or by other representative; 
(2)  Present matters and witnesses relevant to the purpose of the hearing and the issues to be determined; 
(3)  Question those persons presenting matters which are adverse to the interest of the licensee but only to the extent of relevance, as determined by the hearing officer, to the purposes of the hearing and to the issues to be determined; and 
(4)  Offer suggestions or recommendations relative to the nature and/or extent of action, if any, taken with respect to the license and licensee in issue. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter a licensee subject to such hearing shall not be required to give any testimony or to answer any question with respect to such proceedings nor shall the licensee be required to attend such hearing or to present any evidence or matters in connections therewith. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-198. - Record of hearing. 
A record with respect to hearings shall be maintained by the city clerk which shall consist of and include the following: 
(1)  All written reports, recommendations, responses, objects and other written matters filed in connection with such hearing; 
(2)  All documents, instruments and other memorandum introduced into evidence at such hearing; 
(3)  A written statement to be prepared by the hearing officer with respect to all matters, if any, officially noticed by the hearing officer; 
(4)  All written orders and findings of the hearing officer; and 
(5)  A mechanical recording of the hearing or in lieu thereof a transcript thereof if determined by the hearing officer to be appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-199. - Recordation of hearing and transcript. 
(a)  The hearing shall be mechanically recorded with the product of such recording being a part of the record of such matter upon completion thereof. 
(b)  Any interested party shall be entitled to employ at their own expense and utilize a stenographic reporter in connection with the hearing. 
(c)  Should the hearing officer so direct, a stenographic reporter shall be utilized in connection with the hearing for the purposes of recording the hearing with the cost thereof to be paid by the city. Should the hearing officer so direct, the stenographic reporter shall prepare a transcript of the hearing with the cost thereof to be paid by the city. In the event the hearing officer so directs the preparation of a transcript by the stenographic reporter then the licensee, upon payment directly to the stenographic reporter of the cost thereof, shall be entitled to a copy of the transcript so prepared. In the event that the hearing officer does not direct the preparation of a transcript then either the city or the licensee shall be entitled to request preparation of a transcript of the hearing from such stenographic reporter upon payment to the stenographic reporter of the cost thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-200. - Representation of city at hearing. 
The city shall be represented at hearings by the city manager and upon his request by the office of the city attorney. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-201. - Informal disposition. 
An informal disposition of a hearing may be made at any stage by stipulation or consent finding, all subject to approval thereof by the hearing officer. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-202. - Procedure following hearing by hearing officers. 
Within 30 calendar days of the date of the conclusion of such hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare and file with the city clerk a written report which shall contain the following: 
(1)  Findings of fact with respect to incidents, actions and/or behavior of the licensee in issue and/or the agents, servants and/or employees thereof which are relevant to the matters and issues to be determined; 
(2)  Findings of fact with respect to prior matters involving the licensee which are relevant to the issues to be determined; 
(3)  Findings of fact with respect to provisions of this chapter, breached or violated by the licensee, if any, which were determined by the hearing officer to be relevant to the issues to be determined; 
(4)  Findings of fact with respect to recommendations of city officials, if any, and the reasons, if any are presented, for such recommendations; and 
(5)  The recommendation of the hearing officer, if any, with respect to what action should be taken relative to the licensee in issue and, if any, in the extent and nature thereof. Such written report of the hearing officer, together with the record in connection with such hearing, shall be promptly filed with the city clerk and a copy of such report of the hearing officer shall be furnished by the hearing officer to the licensee, to the city manager and to the city attorney. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-203. - Right to respond and object to report of hearing officer. 
(a)  Both the licensee and the city manager shall be entitled, within 15 calendar days after being furnished with such report, to file with the city clerk written objections to any finding of fact or recommendation of the hearing officer. 
(b)  Additionally, both the city manager and the licensee or the employee shall be entitled, within 15 calendar days after being furnished with such report of the hearing officer, to file a request with the city manager for a de novo hearing before the city council. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-204. - Right of city council to conduct de novo hearing. 
Upon the filing of a request within 15 calendar days of the furnishing of the report of the hearing officer, or upon the decision of the city council on its own motion, the city council shall be entitled to conduct a de novo hearing with respect to the issues involved in connection with such license and licensee, which hearing shall be conducted upon same basis and accordance with same procedures as the hearing before the hearing officer. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-205. - Determination by city council following hearing. 
(a)  Following the filing of the report of the hearing officer and the lapse of the 15-day period for the filing of objections to the report of the hearing officer, the city council shall proceed to make a determination with respect to the issues relative to the license and the licensee involved. 
(b)  Such determination shall be based upon the written report and recommendations, if any, of the hearing officer and the written objections to the report of the hearing officer except in the event of a de novo hearing. 
(c)  In the event of a de novo hearing the city council shall proceed to conduct a hearing upon the relevant issues and following such hearing make a determination based upon matters presented at such do novo hearing. 
(d)  Such determination shall be made by the city council in written form within 30 calendar days following lapse of the time for the filing of objections to the report of the hearing officer, or in the event of the determination by the city council to conduct a de novo hearing then within 30 calendar days following the conclusion thereof, with copies of such written determination to be promptly furnished by the city clerk to the city manager, to the city attorney and to the licensee. 
(e)  Such determination shall include what action with respect to the license and licensee, if any, shall be taken including the extent, duration and exact nature thereof as well as the effective date of the commencement of such action. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-206. - Reconsideration. 
(a)  Both the city manager and the licensee shall be entitled to file a request, within ten calendar days of the date of receipt of the written determination of the city council, for reconsideration of the decision of the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall have the right, in the sole discretion of the city council, to reconsider any decision of the city council based upon a request therefor which demonstrates either the existence of substantial new evidence not available to the party prior to the hearing or providential cause. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
ARTICLE VIII. - OTHER REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-12 , adopted Sept. 9, 2013, contained provisions intended for use as articles VIII and IX. To preserve the format and numbering of the Code, these provisions have been included herein as §§ 6-207 and 6-208. 

Sec. 6-207. - Removal of unfinished bottle of wine from restaurant; secure resealing. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other contrary provision of law, any restaurant which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. 
(2)  A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. 
(3)  If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-208. - Beer and/or wine amenity permit. 
Beauty salons, barbershops, nail salons and hotels/motels that offer beer and/or wine as an act of hospitality, shall be eligible to apply for a beer and/or wine amenity permit. Eating establishments shall not be eligible for a beer and/or wine amenity permit. 
(a)  An amenity permit shall allow the permit holder to offer beer and/or wine as an act of hospitality and shall not be part of the core operations of such establishments. 
(b)  The amenity permit need only be applied for once and shall be renewed annually when the occupational tax certificate is renewed, provided, however that the city may revoke or suspend such amenity permit and/or impose such conditions on its operation at the city's discretion for violations of this chapter or in furtherance of the health, safety, and welfare of the city's inhabitants. 
(c)  The initial amenity permit application shall include a background check. An annual fifty-dollar administrative fee shall be charged to cover this administrative process. 
( Ord. No. 2013-12 , 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 2016-14, 10-3-2016 ) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses and business regulations, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— State licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-13 , adopted Nov. 4, 2013, repealed § 10-1, which pertained to operating bingo game on Sabbath (Sunday) prohibited; penalty and derived from Code 1974, § 16-28.1. 
Secs. 10-2—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, adopted July 2, 2012, deleted the former Art. II, Div. 1, §§ 10-31—10-43, Div. 2, §§ 10-61—10-72, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to adult entertainment establishments and derived from the Code of 1974, §§ 21.5-900—21.5-919. 

Sec. 10-31. - Findings; public purpose. 
The governing body of the City of Tifton is aware of the following evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the mayor and city council for the City of Tifton, Georgia (hereinafter the "governing body"): 
(a)  Findings incorporated in the cases of: 
City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. , 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres , 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. , 501 U.S. 560 (1991), Daytona Grand v. City of Daytona Beach , 490 F.3d 862 (2007) and Club Southern Burlesque, Inc. v. City of Carrollton , 265 Ga. 528 (1995). 
(b)  Studies including, but not limited to: 
• Do "off-site" Adult Businesses Have Secondary Effects? Legal doctrine, Social Theory and Empirical Evidence by Richard McCleary, Alan C. Weinstein, 2009. 
• Rural Hotspots: the Case of Adult Businesses by Richard McCleary, 2008. 
• Alternative Avenues of Communication in the City of Hallendale Beach, FL. by Richard McCleary, 2010. 
• Illicit Sex in Public Places , by Kelly Dedel Johnson. Prepared for the United States Department of Justice, 2005. 
• Testimony on Illinois Senate Bill 3348 prepared for the State Senate Public Health Committee , by Richard McCleary and Laura Sexton, March 2, 2012. 
• Street Prostitution , by Michael Scott prepared for the United States Department of Justice, June 15, 2002. 
• Executive summary, Report to the Palm Beach County Attorney , by V. Jenness, R. McCleary, J.W. Meeker, 2007. 
• The Association of Adult Businesses With Secondary Effects: Legal Doctrine, Social Theory And Empirical Evidence , Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal, Benjamin Cardozo School of Law. 
(c)  The following special reports relating to the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments on real property values: 
(1)  May 2008, Survey of Florida Appraisers: Effects of Land Use on Market Values, Palm Beach County, Florida ; 
and numerous other studies, articles, and court decisions referenced within the above studies, articles and court decisions and are hereby incorporated by reference along with the studies, articles and court decisions listed above which have been presented to the mayor and city council in bound form and/or in electronic format and are incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the governing body of the City of Tifton. 
Based upon all of this evidence, the City of Tifton Governing Body finds: 
• Sexually oriented businesses, also known as adult entertainment establishments, lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled or inadequately controlled by the operators of the establishments. The commercial exploitation of human sexuality, in all forms in which such exploitation may be manifested has a deleterious effect on the community where it takes place as heretofore mentioned. Sexually oriented businesses cause an increase in criminal behavior in nearby areas, including but not limited to disorderly conduct, prostitution, solicitation, drug trafficking, drug use, assaults and batteries, and corruption of public officials. 
• Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses. Offering or providing private or semi-private space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
• Adult entertainment establishments escalate and exacerbate undesirable community conditions, including but not limited to blight, diminished property values, increased need for law enforcement and emergency medical response resources, and increased burden on the judicial system as a result of the criminal behavior which the governing body finds such business establishments bring to a community. The secondary negative effects that are caused by such businesses are not limited to such facilities that offer live or recorded performances with human nudity or the depiction of sexual acts but other forms of sexually oriented businesses that also have a deleterious effect on nearby neighborhoods, commercial districts and on urban life in general. These other types of such businesses include but are not limited to adult bookstores, peep shows, massage parlors, bath houses, adult gift and novelty shops and lingerie or nude modeling studios. 
• Persons frequent certain adult theatres, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
• Communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses. 
• AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components. 
• According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
• Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
• Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in some areas of some sexually oriented businesses. 
These findings noted above raise substantial governmental concerns and, therefore, the City of Tifton Governing Body further finds: 
• Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
• Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult entertainment establishments as defined herein. 
• Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
• The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and other secondary negative effects as described herein. 
• It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
• The fact that an applicant for an adult entertainment license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter. 
• The barring of such individuals from the management of adult entertainment establishments for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
• The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. 
Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities as described above, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the City of Tifton, Georgia; and based on the documentary evidence presented to the mayor and city council (hereinafter "the governing body") held prior to the adoption of this chapter; and, the governing body for the City of Tifton, Georgia takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
It is the finding of the governing body that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances in establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment," begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same or similar deleterious effects on the community. 
Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with commercial nudity and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment, are criminal activity, depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove referenced. The governing body finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the City of Tifton, Georgia, as well unless these regulations are adopted. 
Furthermore, it is the finding of the governing body that live nude or semi-nude entertainment and other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited to, adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in the city and surrounding communities. 
The governing body further finds that each separate adverse secondary effect of adult entertainment businesses and sexually oriented businesses constitutes a substantial government interest, that each substantial government interest includes, but is not limited to, preventing future adverse secondary effects of both pre-existing sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment businesses in the city and those that may open in the future, and the viability of each separate substantial government interest of the city addressed herein does not depend upon any comparative analysis between adult entertainment businesses and non-adult entertainment businesses. 
The governing body therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the city, the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the governing body of the city finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment, and finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions. The governing body further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To all of these ends, this chapter is hereby adopted. 
Also based upon all of the information, studies, reports, statements, findings in court decisions, and testimony referenced above, as well as the well known and self evident conditions and secondary effects caused by the commercial exploitation of commercial total nudity combined with the sale, dispensing and consumption of alcoholic beverages, the governing body also finds and concludes that the sale, dispensing, or consumption of alcoholic beverages of any kind in an adult entertainment establishment as defined herein tends to independently create, aggravate, exacerbate, and add to all of those negative secondary effects set forth in this section. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to address and forestall those negative secondary effects in the City of Tifton, Georgia within the permissible limits and parameters of the Georgia and United States constitutions. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the foregoing book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which either: 
(1)  More than 50 square feet of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale or rental of any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and/or 
(2)  Twenty-five percent or more of its display area is used for the display or offer for sale or rental of those media or materials. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. For purposes of this chapter, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors, and "adult entertainer" also includes any person who exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas" in any adult entertainment establishment, even if such person is not compensated or paid. Adult entertainers also include persons who perform in a manner, within an adult entertainment establishment, so as to feature, depict, display, or emphasize their genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts, even if their specified anatomical areas are opaquely covered as provided herein. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas." Adult entertainment includes performances by persons that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" as defined herein, and/or performances that feature, depict, display, or emphasize their genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts, even if their specified anatomical areas are opaquely covered as provided herein. 
Adult entertainment establishment shall be defined to include the following types of businesses: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein; 
(2)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" as defined herein; 
(3)  Any commercial establishment in which persons perform live in a manner so as to feature, depict, display, or emphasize their genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts, even if their specified anatomical areas are opaquely covered as provided herein. 
(4)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1), (2), and/or (3) herein; 
(5)  Any commercial establishment having a substantial portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" as defined herein or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or having a segment or section comprising more than 50 square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or which utilizes 25 percent or more of its display area for the display or offer for sale or rental such media or materials, or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; 
(6)  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
(7)  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined herein; 
(8)  The definition of "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or mainstream theater, which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution, or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. For purposes of this subsection, such performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise at least 80 percent of all annual performances or showings. 
(9)  Any commercial establishment having a substantial portion of its stock in instruments, devices, paraphernalia, products, article or articles which are designed, sold or viewed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" as defined herein, or which are sold or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or having a segment or section comprising more than 50 square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such items, or which utilizes 25 percent or more of its display area for the display or offer for sale or rental such items, or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel which: 
(1)  Makes available to patrons any material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and has a sign visible from any public right-of-way advertising that such material is available; or 
(2)  Regularly offers a room or rooms for rent for any period of time that is less than 12 consecutive hours; or 
(3)  Regularly allows a tenant or occupant of a room or rooms to sub-rent the room or rooms for a period of time that is less than 12 consecutive hours. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for fewer than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising more than ten square feet of its total floor space or wall space, or floor and wall space combined, devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
Application fee shall be the fee required to accompany an application for an adult entertainment establishment license under this chapter, and shall not include the annual regulatory fee for such establishments as established by the city's governing body. The application fee shall be a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by the city's governing body. 
Chief of police shall mean and include the duly appointed and serving chief of police for the City of Tifton, Georgia, or his designee, i.e., that person designated by the chief of police to act on his behalf and under his supervision in connection with this chapter. 
Children's day care facility shall be defined as a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this chapter the term "children's day care facility" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre- kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," or "pre-school." 
City shall mean the City of Tifton, Georgia. 
City manager shall mean and include the duly appointed and serving city manager for the City of Tifton, Georgia, or his designee, i.e., that person designated by the city manager to act on his behalf and under his supervision in connection with this chapter. 
Convicted shall mean and include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or an Alford Plea or a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime or an ordinance violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Employee or adult entertainment establishment employee shall mean any person who performs any service on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is an employee, an independent contractor, or any other kind of agent, and whether or not said person performs such services only for tips or is paid a salary, wage, or any other type of compensation by the adult entertainment establishment. The term "employee" or "adult entertainment establishment employee" shall include, but is not limited to, entertainers, wait staff, parking attendants, security personnel, cooks and dishwashers. The term "employee" or "adult entertainment establishment employee" shall not include a person who is temporarily on the premises for the sole purpose of repair or maintenance of the premises, any building or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of any goods or merchandise to the premises. 
Governing body shall mean the mayor and city council for the City of Tifton, Georgia. 
License shall mean a license issued by the city under this chapter to a licensee which authorizes the licensee to operate, engage in, or carry on the business of an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter. 
Licensee shall mean the holder of an adult entertainment establishment license issued under this chapter. 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 20 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
Permit shall mean a temporary or annual permit issued by the city which authorizes a person to work or perform services as an employee of an adult entertainment establishment as those terms are defined in this chapter. 
Premises or licensed premises shall mean the property or premises where an adult entertainment establishment licensed under this chapter operates, conducts, or carries on its business, and shall include the entire tract or parcel of land where such business is conducted. 
Regulatory fee shall be the annual regulatory fee to be paid by each adult entertainment establishment when it is issued an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal of an adult entertainment establishment license by the city. 
Specified sexual activities shall be defined to mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 2016-11, § I, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 10-33. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the corporate city limits of the City of Tifton, Georgia any adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter without first procuring an annual license to do so except as provided in subsection 10-41(b) of this article when the governing body fails to approve or deny an application for an adult entertainment license within the 30-day period provided for therein. In no event shall any license issued to an adult entertainment establishment under this chapter be in force or effect after midnight of December 31 of the year in which it is issued. The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(b)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within the city in an amount established by the city's governing body. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the city within ten days after the governing body approves the application for an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal thereof. No adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. All licenses granted hereunder shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which they are issued. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the city clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any applicant filing a renewal application which is received by the city after November 30 shall pay, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of 20 percent, and shall cease conducting business on the premises effective midnight December 31 until a renewal license is duly issued under this chapter. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held, and the applicant shall cease conducting business on the premises until a renewal license is duly issued under this chapter. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs as set forth in this chapter will be assessed. All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(c)  The regulatory fee provided for in subsection (b) of this section shall be fixed by the governing body in an amount that will defray, in part, the costs incurred by the city through the enforcement of this chapter. The regulatory fee shall be exclusive of, and shall not include any costs of, licensing adult entertainment establishments under this chapter. 
(d)  Licenses and permits issued under this chapter shall not be transferable, except for a license or ownership interest under the following circumstances: in case of the death of an owner or a licensee as defined herein, the license pertaining to the owner's or licensee's adult entertainment establishment shall remain in force and effect for a period of up to 30 days in order to allow the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) who will inherit the ownership interest or license an opportunity to apply for and qualify to hold the interest or license under this chapter. In order to qualify to hold said interest or license, the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) shall make application to the city within the 30-day period as if he or she were applying for a new ownership interest or license under this chapter. If a completed application is filed within the 30-day period, then the existing license shall remain in effect for an additional period of up to 30 days following the date of filing in order to allow the governing body to grant or deny the application under this chapter. If the governing body grants the application, or if the application is deemed granted because of a failure to approve or deny the same within the 30-day period provided for in this chapter, then the beneficiary applicant(s) shall become the new owner(s) of the interest or license, which shall be considered transferred without any interruption of ownership interest which may have existed from the original approval of same, said interest or license being thereafter subject to all of the terms and conditions of this chapter. If the beneficiary fails to file a completed application under this subsection within the 30-day period, or if the application is denied (and if appealed, the denial is upheld on appeal), then the ownership interest or license shall terminate at midnight on the 30th day or at midnight on the day that a final judgment upholding the appeal is entered, and the adult entertainment establishment shall close its business on that day; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to allow or permit any license to remain in force and effect beyond midnight on December 31 of the year in which the death occurs, unless necessary to allow for one or both of the two 30-day periods provided for in this subsection. If an appeal of a denial might remain pending on December 31 of the year in which it is filed, then in such an event, the beneficiary applicant shall file a new application for a license or approval of an ownership interest for the next succeeding calendar year under the terms of this chapter. 
(e)  All other changes in an ownership interest in an adult entertainment establishment or a license issued under this chapter must be reported in writing to the city manager prior to such transfer, and the person who is intended to receive such ownership interest shall be required to make an application for a license as if he or she were applying for a new license hereunder. No licensee may change the location of the licensee's operation; any change in location shall require application for a new license under this chapter, so that such application process is completed before the relocation takes place. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-34. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. If an adult entertainment establishment is found open for business without the presence of an on-premises operator, the licensee shall be cited for a violation of this chapter, and the business shall be ordered to close until an on-premises operator is present and remains present during all operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-35. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)  Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the city shall make application for a license under this chapter to the city manager. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the city, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name(s) of the operator(s) as defined herein and of the owner(s) as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be the president or chief executive officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable application fee payable in cash or by certified check in an amount established by the city's governing body shall be paid to the city to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The city manager shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The application for a license does not authorize the operation of, engaging in, conducting or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s) are at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s); 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s) at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; (and in addition, the applicant and the operator(s) must agree to be photographed by the city police department prior to issuance of the license applied for); 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension; 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply to each such corporation; 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner and if applicable, the lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement, if any; 
(11)  With respect to the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), all convictions, (excluding misdemeanor traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past ten years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendere or an Alford Plea), jurisdiction and any disposition including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the city police department. 
(12)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operator(s); 
(13)  If the person or business entity on whose behalf application for a license is made is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in the state should be provided, including articles of incorporation, and a trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(14)  The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(15)  A plat prepared by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any residential area, church, school, public park or children's day care facility, any other adult entertainment establishment, and any establishment licensed by the city to sell alcoholic beverages, beer or wine for consumption on the premises; the survey should depict the location and distance of the property use closest to the proposed premises that would disqualify the property if it were within the prohibited distance; 
(16)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual; 
b.  If application is made on behalf of a partnership, by a general partner; 
c.  If application is made on behalf of a corporation, by the president or chief executive officer of the corporation; 
d.  If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(17)  Appearance by applicant. The applicant or their attorney shall personally appear before the city manager with payment of the nonrefundable application fee in the amount established by the governing body of the city, and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(c)  Investigation; standards for granting of license. The city shall have 30 days from the date of actual receipt of a fully completed application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s). The city manager shall stamp the date of receipt of each application on the first page thereof and shall provide the applicant a photocopy of the stamped first page signifying the date of receipt of the application. The governing body shall approve or deny the completed application for an adult entertainment establishment license within 30 days of actual receipt of a fully completed application. If any application is received that is not fully complete for any reason, then in such event, the incomplete application shall be returned to the applicant as soon as possible following the discovery of the incompleteness, and the applicant shall be required to submit a newly completed application along with payment of an additional application fee in an amount established by the governing body of the city, and the 30-day time period specified above shall begin over again upon the actual receipt of the fully completed application. 
The application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be granted if the governing body finds: 
(1)  The required license application fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application contains all of the information provided for in section 10-35(b), subsections (1) through (16) above, and the applicant has made no material misrepresentation of fact in the application; 
(3)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has been convicted or pled guilty or entered an Alford Plea or a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving assault, battery, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of a "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 within a period of ten years next preceding the date of the application. If there has been any such conviction or plea, then the application shall be denied. For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere or an Alford Plea shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant was or is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his first offender treatment; 
(4)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has had an adult entertainment establishment license or permit revoked for cause by this city or any other municipal corporation or county located in or out of the State of Georgia within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(5)  The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant is in compliance with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards based on information provided by or through other city departments or Tift County; 
(6)  The applicant, operator(s) and owners(s) are all at least 18 years of age; 
(7)  The proposed premises will be located at least the minimum distances set forth in this chapter and as designated within the City of Tifton Development Code from any residential use, church, school, public park or children's day care facility, any other adult entertainment establishment, and any other establishment licensed by the city to sell alcoholic beverages, beer or wine for consumption on the premises; 
(8)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of any law of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
The governing body shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment license if the application fails to meet any requirement contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-36. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Location. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land that is zoned residential under the city's then current zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land on which a church, school, college campus, public park or children's day care facility is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land containing another adult entertainment establishment; 
(4)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment licensed by the city to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises is located; 
(5)  In any area of the city that lies outside the areas established for the permissible location of adult entertainment establishments under the city's Land Development Code § 4.03.21 (Appendix A of this Code). 
For purposes of this section, all distances referenced above shall be measured as defined within the city's Land Development Code § 4.03.21 (Appendix A of this Code). 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(1)  Qualifications. All employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No employee employed in an adult entertainment establishment shall have been convicted of an offense described in section 10-35(c) of this chapter within the five years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment. Any adult entertainment establishment employee who is convicted of any such crimes while so employed shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises in the city for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The terms "licensed premises" and "convicted" are defined in section 10-32 of this chapter. 
(2)  Permit for employment. Before any person may work as an employee on a licensed premises, he or she shall file a notice with the city manager of his or her intended employment on forms supplied by the city and shall thereupon receive a temporary permit for such employment from the city manager, which shall expire when the annual permit provided for herein is issued or when the decision of the city manager to deny the permit is finally upheld or overturned. The prospective employee shall supply a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the city manager. The prospective employee shall also provide a list of all of his or her convictions of offenses described in subsection 10-35(c) herein (including pleas of nolo contendere and Alford Pleas) within the past five years. The city manager shall approve or deny the permit within 15 days of the application. If the prospective employee is found to meet the requirements of this subsection (b), and upon payment of the permit fee, the city shall issue a permit approving such employment within 48 hours following such approval. 
Upon receipt of a temporary or annual permit under this chapter, the employee may begin or continue working on the licensed premises. If approval of an annual permit is denied, the city manager shall provide the prospective adult entertainment employee the reasons for the denial and the applicant may, within ten (days of said denial, appeal to the governing body who shall uphold or reverse the decision within 30 days of such appeal. The applicant may continue to work under the temporary permit during the pendency of the appeal. If the city manager does not approve or deny an application for an annual permit within 15 days of the date such application was received, then on the expiration of the 15th day: (1) the application shall be approved and the city shall immediately issue the permit for which application was made, and (2) the applicant shall have the right to begin or continue their employment in the manner allowed by the permit for which application was made. 
(3)  Categories of permits. There shall be three employee permit classifications: an operator permit, an adult establishment entertainer permit, and a permit for all other employees of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(4)  Permit fees. The governing body of the city shall establish a separate fee for each classification of permit. Each annual employee permit fee shall be in an amount which is reasonably tied to the costs of investigating the employee's record and background. 
(5)  Permits to be worn by employees. All permits issued under this chapter to employees shall be worn so as to be readily visible at all times during which the employee or permit holder is in or upon the licensed premises, except that when an adult entertainer is actually performing, he or she may place the permit in a place where it is readily obtainable if asked for by any city police officer or other law enforcement officer. 
(6)  Suspension or revocation, of permit; procedure. Violation by an adult entertainment employee of the provisions of this chapter and/or conviction of an offense described in subsection 10-35(c) of this chapter shall subject such adult entertainment employee to suspension or revocation of the permit for employment in the manner provided for herein. Permits for employment shall not be revoked for any other reason. Whenever the city manager finds that reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a permit for employment issued hereunder, the city manager shall schedule a hearing before the governing body to consider such action and shall notify the employee at least 15 days prior to the hearing of the time and place of the hearing and the proposed action and grounds therefore. The employee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses with or without legal counsel. The employee may continue working for the adult entertainment establishment during the pendency of any appeal under this section, either before the governing body or a reviewing court. The governing body shall make their decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the employee promptly in writing of its decision. In the event that a permit for employment is suspended or revoked by the governing body, and if the governing body's decision is upheld by a court of competent jurisdiction in the event of an appeal, then in either such event, an appeal cost in an amount established by the governing body of the city shall be assessed against the appellant, which must be paid before the appellant is allowed to work or perform any services on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment in the city. 
(7)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, independent contractors working for an adult entertainment establishment shall be considered as employees and shall be required to satisfy the provisions of this chapter relating to employees of adult entertainment establishments. As used in this chapter, the terms "employee" and "adult entertainment establishment employee" shall include any person who performs any service on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is an employee, an independent contractor, or any other kind of agent, and whether or not said person performs such services only for tips or is paid a salary, wage, or any other type of compensation by the adult entertainment establishment. The term "employee" or "adult entertainment establishment employee" shall not include a person on the premises for the sole purpose of repair or maintenance of the premises, or any building or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of any goods or merchandise to the premises. 
(c)  Amateurs. Any person who wishes to perform as an adult entertainer in any adult entertainment establishment without being compensated or paid, shall first comply with this section by filing the notice and submitting the information provided for therein, and if necessary or applicable, by continuing the application process required to obtain an adult entertainment establishment employee permit. A temporary or annual permit issued to any such amateur performer shall be governed by and subject to this section as if the performer were an employee of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(d)  Hours and days of operation. An adult entertainment establishment may only be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., and shall only be open on those days and hours when businesses selling alcoholic beverages are permitted to be open under the city's ordinances or Georgia state law. 
(e)  Display of licenses. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this chapter. 
(f)  Consent to jurisdiction and service. Any licensee issued a license under this chapter and any employee issued an employee permit under this chapter shall be deemed to have consented to the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court of the City of Tifton, Georgia, the State Court of Tift County, Georgia, and the Superior Court of Tift County, Georgia, for purposes of the enforcement of this chapter, and shall also be deemed to have consented to service of any citation or summons issued under this chapter via the United States mail with sufficient first class postage affixed and properly addressed to the licensee or employee at the address set forth on the application for such license or permit, as the case may be. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to preclude a police officer or deputy sheriff from personally serving a licensee or employee. 
(g)  Performance area. All dancing by adult entertainers at adult entertainment establishments shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(h)  Lighting. All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
(i)  Covering of windows and doors. All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this chapter shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(j)  Retention of records. All adult entertainment establishments shall be required to retain all records pertaining to its employees for a period of ten years, and such records shall be open to inspection by any city police officer for official police business during normal operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-37. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  Advertising without license. No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 18 years or any person who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Contact between patrons, employees. No patron, customer or guest shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of, or any part of, the body of any adult entertainer while on the premises of the adult entertainment establishment. No adult entertainment licensee, adult entertainment operator or adult entertainment employee shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of, or any part of, the body of any patron, customer or guest while on the premises of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(d)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation, or licensee under this chapter, to sell, trade, exchange, dispense, give away, consume, or allow the consumption of, any alcoholic beverage of any kind (including but not limited to spirituous liquors, malt beverages and wine) in or upon the premises of any adult entertainment establishment licensed under this chapter. In case of any conflict between this subsection and any other provision in this Code, this subsection shall prevail. 
(f)  In addition to the crime of "public indecency" provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8, which is applicable throughout the city and the State of Georgia, and in order to provide for more specific and clearer regulations pertaining to nudity in adult entertainment establishments in the city as expressly permitted in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8(e), it shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any portion of an adult entertainment establishment or any other business open to the public in a state of nudity. The term "nudity" as used herein, shall mean and include the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or the anus, with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple or the areola thereof, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. Examples of attire that would comply with this section include but are not limited to those items commonly known as pasties, G-strings, T-backs, dental floss, and thongs. In case of any conflict between this subsection and any other provision in this section, this subsection shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-37.1. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It is unlawful for an applicant to admit or permit the admission of minors within a regulated premises. 
( Ord. No. 2016-11, § I, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 10-37.2 - Sales or displays in presence of minors unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, no commercial establishment which does not come within the definition of an adult entertainment establishment shall advertise the sale or display any books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, instruments, devices, paraphernalia, products, article or articles which are designed, sold or viewed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" as defined herein, or which are sold or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs, in a location wherein persons under the age of 18 may be present. 
( Ord. No. 2016-11, § I, 6-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2017-11 , § I, 4-17-2017) 
Sec. 10-38. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided for in the city Charter and section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-39. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-40. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  Cleaning of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city, Tift County, and the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Inspection of licensed premises. The fire marshal and the city building code inspector shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments, to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes of the city and Tift County. 
(c)  Inspection for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The city police department shall have the authority to inspect any adult entertainment establishment at any time such establishment is occupied by one or more persons, in order to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-41. - Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment establishment license, and these constitute the sole permissible reasons for suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment establishment license: 
(1)  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
(2)  A violation of any of the following regulations or prohibitions of this chapter by the licensee (individually or through the operation of the licensed premises): sections 10-33, 10-34, 10-36, 10- 37, 10-40, 10-41, or 10-44 of this article, or alternatively a total of at least three or more violations committed by employees of the licensee within any six-month period; 
(3)  With respect to the applicant, operator(s) and owner(s), conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or an Alford Plea to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license under subsection 10-35(c) above. 
(b)  Denial; procedure. Within 30 days of actual receipt of a fully completed application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the governing body shall either approve or deny the application. In no event shall the decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be withheld for more than 30 days after actual receipt of a fully completed application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than 30 days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately thereafter notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The city shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the city, through the city manager, of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than 30 days following actual receipt of the fully completed application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by this sentence shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations contemplated by the application, the city shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the governing body denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, then within five business days following such denial, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or deposited in the United States mail, with sufficient first class postage affixed, properly addressed to the applicant at the address provided for such notices on the application. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation; procedure. Whenever the city manager finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the governing body shall schedule a hearing to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 15 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefor. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The governing body shall make his or her decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five business days of the decision. 
(d)  Any applicant for an adult license or employee permit, license holder, or permit holder aggrieved by any decision of the governing body, or any decision of the city, or any of its officials, employees or agents pursuant to this chapter, may seek an immediate review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the Superior Court of Tifton County, Georgia initiating a certiorari proceeding within 30 days pursuant to the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-42. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-43. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of 90 consecutive calendar days after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said 90 calendar day period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-44. - Physical layout of establishment. 
(a)  Layout of adult entertainment establishments providing live entertainment. No adult entertainment establishment as defined in subsections (1), (2), (3), or (4) of the definition of an "adult entertainment establishment" contained in section 10-32 above shall provide any booth, room, cubicle or enclosed space for customers or patrons to go where entertainers or other employees are also permitted to go, excepting only restrooms, and no entertainment shall be conducted or viewed inside any booth, room, cubicle or enclosed space or restroom. All entertainment or other interaction between employees and patrons in such establishments shall only take place in open areas, which are open to view from all other areas of the premises (as defined in section 10-32 above) of such adult entertainment establishments. 
(b)  Layout of other adult entertainment establishments. All adult entertainment establishments other than those defined in subsections (1), (2), (3), and (4) of the definition of "adult entertainment establishment" contained in section 10-32 above, which are permitted to have booths, rooms, cubicles or enclosed spaces shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type device or any view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the adult entertainment establishment is located. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten foot candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, or cause any bodily discharge while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-45. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of Tifton, Georgia that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are and were, upon their enactment, believed by the mayor and city council of Tifton, Georgia to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of Tifton, Georgia that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, that each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase therein. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of Tifton, Georgia to the greatest extent allowed by law, that no section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is mutually dependent upon any other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter. In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the mayor and city council of Tifton that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this chapter, and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this chapter shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 7-2-2012) 
ARTICLE III. - BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-12, § I, adopted July 2, 2012, deleted the former Art. III, §§ 10-100—10-109, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to tattoo parlors or studios and derived from Ord. No. 2003-021, § I, adopted 10-9-2003. 

Sec. 10-46. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Body art. The practice of physical body adornment by permitted establishments and operators utilizing, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. This definition does not include implants under the skin, tattoo removal, or any other practices that are considered medical procedures by a state medical board. 
Body art establishment. Any place or premise, whether public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices of body art, whether or not for profit are performed. 
Body piercing. Any method of piercing the skin or mucosa, except the entire ear, in order to place any object including, but not limited to, rings, studs, bars, or other forms of jewelry through the skin or mucosa. 
Body piercing establishment. Any place or premise, whether public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices of body piercing, whether or not for profit, are performed.. 
Operator. Any person who controls, operates, manages, conducts, or practices body art activities at a body art establishment and who is responsible for compliance with these regulations, regardless whether actually performing body art procedures or not. The term includes technicians who work under the operator and perform body art procedures. 
Permit. The authorization granted by the county board of health or its duly authorized representative to operate a body art establishment. 
Tattooing. Any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instruments used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo the body of any person within any area within one inch of the nearest part of the eye socket of such person. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-47. - Prohibited practices. 
(a)  No person shall operate a body art establishment or engage in the practice or business of tattooing human skin as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist unless the person has first secured a permit to do so from the county board of health and has complied with all ordinances of the city, including but not limited to its zoning ordinance, and has paid the business occupation tax. 
(b)  No person shall operate a body art establishment or engage in the practice or business of tattooing as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist without following an approved exposure control plans and the rules and regulations promulgated by the department of community health and the county board of health. 
(c)  No tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall tattoo any person while such tattoo operator or tattoo artist is under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other stimulants or depressants, nor shall such tattoo operator or tattoo artist tattoo any person who is a minor (under the age of 18), or who is under the influence of either alcohol, drugs or other stimulants or depressants, or any person of unsound mind. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-48. - Permit from county board of health required; inspection fee; exposure control plan. 
(a)  A condition precedent prior to applying for an occupation tax permit in the city the operator/applicant shall show satisfactory proof that the body art establishment has secured from the county board of health a permit to operate the establishment. 
(b)  The operator/applicant shall be required to submit with his application an annual inspection fee of $75.00, or such fee as shall be set from time to time by the county board of health. Thereafter, such inspection fee shall be due and payable on an annual basis. 
(c)  The operator shall submit and the county board of health shall approve an exposure control plan conforming to the rules and regulations promulgated by the department of community health and the county board of health. 
(d)  The permit shall be valid until suspended or revoked and shall not be transferable with respect to person or location. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-49. - Enforcement; right of entry. 
The county board of health or its designated representative, as well as the city code enforcement officer or his designee, in order to enforce compliance with this article and the rules and regulations adopted hereof (pursuant to this article), may conduct periodic unannounced inspections and shall be able to enter upon and inspect the premises of a body art establishment at any reasonable time and in a reasonable manner. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-50. - Authority of board of health to suspend, revoke or deny permit. 
The county board of health or its designated representative may suspend or revoke permits where the health and safety of the public requires such action. When, in the judgment of such board or its duly authorized agents, it is necessary and proper that such application for a permit be denied or that a permit previously granted be suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder of the permit shall be so notified in writing and shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-5-2. In the event that such application is finally denied or such permit finally suspended or revoked, the applicant for or holder of such permit shall be given notice in writing, which notice shall specifically state the reasons why the application or permit has been suspended, revoked or denied. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-51. - Appeal of suspension or revocation of permit. 
Any person substantially affected by any final order of the county board of health denying, suspending, revoking or refusing to renew any permit provided under this article may secure review thereof by appeal to the state department of human resources as provided by O.C.G.A. § 31-5-3. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-52. - Permit issued by the board of health not in lieu of occupation tax permit. 
The permits issued hereunder by the county board of health shall be cumulative and are not in lieu of any license or permit issued by the city to do business in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-53. - Application for occupation tax permit. 
Any person desiring to operate a body art establishment or desiring to operate as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall make application for an occupation tax permit at the tax office of the city. The applicant, in addition to the payment of the business occupation tax as required by this city Code, shall also be charged a background investigation fee of $25.00, or such fee as shall be set from time to time by the city, to defray the cost of application processing. The minimum age of each applicant shall be 18 years of age. Applicants shall furnish two photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size two inches by two inches. The applicant shall also submit an approved permit as issued by the county board of health pursuant to the provisions of section 10-48 of this article and shall comply with all other requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-54. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in the Charter and the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 10-55. - Incorporation of state law. 
The provisions of this article are adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-40-9. All provisions of O.C.G.A., title 31, chapter 40 not inconsistent with the provisions of this article are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Secs. 10-56—10-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BILLIARDS AND GAME ROOMS 

Sec. 10-150. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billiards means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by a ledge of cushions, with balls which are impelled by a cue, and shall include all forms of the game known as carom billiards, pocket billiards, pool, English billiards, and like games. 
Game rooms means commercial establishments offering video games, arcade games, pool, billiards and similar games for pleasure, only, which involve some skill and experience rather than pure chance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § I, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 10-151. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard or game room between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., or to permit any person to remain in such billiard or game room between such prohibited hours, except regular employees performing necessary labor on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § I, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 10-152. - Admission of persons under 18 years of age. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of a billiard or game room or any establishment in which billiard tables are located in which beer, wine or alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises to permit any person under the age of 18 years to play billiards in, or for any purpose to enter or remain in such room or establishment past 8:00 p.m. unless the person under 18 is accompanied by a parent or guardian, unless the billiard room or the establishment in which the billiard tables are located derives at least 50 percent of its total gross food and beverage sales from the sale of full course meals prepared, served and consumed upon the premises thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § I, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 10-153. - Condition of premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any billiard or game room to erect or permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions or other obstructions to be used to prevent a clear view of the interior at all time from the street adjacent to which it is situated. No partitions forming rooms, stalls or other enclosures shall be permitted. This provision, however, shall not be construed to prohibit the maintenance of washrooms and toilet rooms for proper purposes, or the maintenance of closets for storage purposes exclusively. 
(b)  The premises shall be kept safe, clean, sanitary and well ventilated at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § I, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 10-154. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, or for the owner, manager or their agents to suffer or permit any person to engage in any illegal or improper diversion or activity or any use of insulting, profane, indecent, immoral, lewd or obscene language, or any indecent, insulting, tumultuous, lewd or lascivious conduct or behavior, or any gaming or betting or any contest of strength or skill, or any disturbance or breach of the peace, or any fighting or challenging or threatening to fight. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every person owning or managing a billiard or game room in the city, to report to the police of the city each and every person guilty of disorderly conduct in the pool or billiard room immediately after the same comes to the knowledge of such owner or manager. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § I, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 10-155. - Gambling. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager or their agent to engage in or permit any person to engage in gambling of any form upon the premises of any billiard or game room. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § I, 5-4-09) 
Secs. 10-156—10-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-08 , adopted April 16, 2018, repealed the former art. V., §§ 10-200—10-213, and enacted a new art. V as set out herein. The former art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2012-14, August 6, 2012. 

Sec. 10-200. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "The City of Tifton Coin Operated Amusement Machine Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bona fide coin operated amusement machine shall have the same definition as found in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70. 
Business location means the entire office or area of the business in any one location owned or leased by the same proprietor or proprietors where the lessor or lessors allow the space to be used for business purposes. 
Location owner or location operator means an owner or operator of a business where one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, or shall have the same definition as found in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, should that definition differ. 
Class B machine shall have the same definition as found in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70. 
Operator means any person, individual, firm, company, association, corporation, or other business entity who exhibits, displays, or permits to be exhibited or displayed, in a place of business other than his own, any bona fide coin operated amusement machine in this state, or shall have the same definition as found in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, should that definition differ. 
Owner means any person, individual, firm, company, association, corporation, or other business entity owning any bona fide coin operated amusement machine in this state or shall have the same definition as found in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, should that definition differ. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-202. - Prohibition on class B devices. 
Location owners and location operators are prohibited from offering more than nine class B machines at one business location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-203. - Application for occupation tax permit. 
Any person desiring to operate a business which offers to the public any bona fide coin operated amusement machine that rewards the player exclusively as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d) shall report in the application for an occupation tax permit that there will be located on the business premises one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines at the business location and shall provide such further information as required under this article. The minimum age of each applicant shall be 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-204. - License required for operation. 
No person shall be issued a business license from the city until adequate proof has been submitted that the person applying for the occupation business license has obtained from the state revenue commissioner a master license and annual permit fee as required pursuant to the O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2 and O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-205. - Designation of agent. 
Each owner or operator of a business location which offers to the public any bona fide coin operated amusement machine that rewards the player exclusively as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d) shall name in the application one or more persons as the agent and representative for the corporation or partnership to receive all communications, notices, service of process or other papers or documents on behalf of the corporation or partnership in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any such license. The application shall give the mailing address of such person, or persons, with the mailing of any notice to any such person at the address so furnished being sufficient notice to the corporation or partnership. If any such person shall cease to be the agent and representative of such corporation or partnership, another person shall immediately be appointed by the license holder and written notice shall be given the city stating the name and address of such new agent and representative. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-206. - Location owner and location operator notice. 
The owner and/or possessor of each bona fide coin operated amusement machine that rewards the player exclusively as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d) with a machine located within the jurisdiction of the city is required to inform the location owner and/or location operator of each business location in which one of the machine owner's machines is located of the prohibitions and penalties set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), and (g). 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-207. - Employee notice. 
The location owner and/or location operator of each business location which offers to the public the use of a bona fide coin operated amusement machines which rewards the player exclusively as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d) with a machine located within the jurisdiction of the city is required to inform all employees of that business in which one of the machine is located of the prohibitions and penalties set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), and (g). 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-208. - License suspension and revocation; penalties. 
(a)  The city may suspend or revoke the license of any location owner or location operator to manufacture, distribute, or sell alcoholic beverages in the city, or any other license granted by the city, as a penalty for the conviction of the location owner or location operator of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g) or for violation of one or more provisions of this article. In addition, any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may also be punished in accordance with the general penalty section 1-11 of this Code. 
(b)  The city may suspend or revoke the license of any location owner or location operator of any other license granted by the city as a penalty for the conviction of the location owner or location operator of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g). 
(c)  The suspension or revocation of licenses under this section, or other penalties imposed, shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: 
(1)  Upon a preliminary determination by the city manager that a ground or grounds exist for the suspension or revocation of a license pursuant to the provisions of this article, then the city manager shall cause a written citation to be issued to the holder of such license requiring such holder to show cause, if any such holder can, at a hearing before the city council at a time and place specified therein which shall not be less than five days nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the citation, by mail or otherwise, upon such holder as well as written notice of the reasons believed by the city manager to authorize possible suspension or revocation of such license. 
(2)  The hearing provided for in subsection (a) of this section, which need not be a regular meeting of the council, may be continued by announcement at such time and place due to the lack of a quorum of the city council or at the request of the license holder or for good cause shown for a period of not longer than ten days. At such hearing the holder of the license shall have the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked and shall be entitled to the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence in favor of suspension or revocation, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceeding transcribed or recorded at the license holder's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time by the city council relative thereto. 
(3)  Following the conclusion of such hearing the city council shall, at a regular or called meeting thereof within 30 days of the date of such hearing, render its decision regarding whether the license in issue should be suspended or revoked and, if suspended, then the duration of such suspension and the amount of license reinstatement fee which amount shall not be in excess of $250.00, if any, as the city council shall in its sole discretion determine to be appropriate under the circumstances, which license reinstatement fee shall be paid as a condition to reinstatement of the license following suspension. 
(4)  Upon the suspension or revocation of such license then the city manager shall cause the license holder to be notified in writing within ten days of such decision of the nature of such decision and the grounds therefor and thereupon the license shall immediately become suspended or terminated in accordance with such decision and the license holder shall immediately upon receipt of such notice cease and desist from all activity authorized under such license in accordance with such decision and physically surrender such license to the city manager. 
(5)  If the city council determines that grounds do not exist to suspend or terminate such license or decides to not suspend or terminate such license notwithstanding the existence of grounds therefor then the city manager shall promptly notify the license holder thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-209. - Grounds for suspension or revocation of license. 
The city council shall be entitled, in its sole discretion, to either suspend or revoke any license upon a finding by the city council, following the hearing prescribed in connection therewith, of the existence of any of the following: 
(1)  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any felony, any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics, or tax laws. 
(2)  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any sex offense when the licensed business is for on-premises consumption. 
(3)  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as a condition for the possession, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  Material falsification of any fact given in an application for a license issued under this chapter or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor. Any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented. 
(5)  Failure to meet or maintain any standard prescribed by this article as a condition or qualification for holding a license. 
(6)  Any other factor known to or discovered by the city whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in a license, has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, local ordinance or administrative regulations involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics for all alcohol licensed businesses and including any sex offense under state law or local ordinances with respect to businesses licensed for on-premises consumption. With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the violative act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence that such licensee could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-210. - Posting of signs. 
Any location owner or location operator with a business location within the city which offers to the public one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines is hereby required to post prominently a notice, in the vicinity of such coin operated amusement machines, including the following or substantially similar language: 
GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY ON THIS MACHINE. 
Any such notice shall be at least 11.5 inches by 17.5 inches in size. Words and letters shall be in bold print and shall be at least one centimeter in size. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-211. - Minimum distance requirements. 
Any business location which offers to the public one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines may not be located within 100 yards of any church building, within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus, within 100 yards of any alcoholic treatment center, or within 100 yards of any housing authority property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-212. - Disclosure of machine owner. 
Any location owner or location operator seeking to locate a business within the jurisdiction of the city and offer to the public one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines must first submit in writing the name, physical address and mailing address of the owner of the bona fide coin operated amusement machine to the city clerk before any occupational tax certificate or license granted by the city is issued or renewed. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-213. - Location of machines. 
Any location owner or location operator who offers to the public one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines is required as a condition of doing business in the jurisdiction of the city to locate each and every bona fide coin operated amusement machine in plain view and accessible to any person who is at the business location. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 10-214. - Posting of privilege license or occupation tax certificate. 
Any location owner or location operator who offers to the public one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines is required as a condition of doing business in the jurisdiction of the city to post its occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place in the location owner or location operator's place of business at which such machine(s) is offered and leave it there at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Secs. 10-215—10-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FESTIVALS 

Sec. 10-300. - Title of article. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Festival Ordinance of the City of Tifton." 
(Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I, 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 10-301. - Definitions. 
Words and terms used in this article are defined as follows: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage : Any beverage containing alcohol. (Code of Ordinances chapter 6, article I, section 6-1(a)) 
(2)  Approved container and an approved wristband shall be a uniformly colored and designated plastic cup/mug and wristband, respectively, each approved by the sponsoring organization and obtained from a participating business on the day of the event. 
(3)  Control zone : A zone within the festival area in which special regulations may apply as recommended in each case by the city manager and authorized by the mayor and council, including but not limited to controlled access by signage, fencing and gating, wristband identification of persons admitted to a controlled zone, wristband identification of persons authorized to purchase and hold in possession alcoholic beverages, loudspeaker limits and controls, enhanced security measures, and entertainment controls. 
(4)  Festival : A program of cultural and/or entertainment events open to the general public and taking place either fully or in part on public streets, thoroughfares, parks, squares, or other public property in connection with a community festival. To be regulated by this article, each such festival must be designated as a festival by the mayor and council. 
(5)  Festival area : The area specifically designated and defined by the mayor and council as the location of festival events and activities. 
(6)  Participating businesses shall be those businesses located within the control zone, choosing to participate in the designated event or other specified events, that are licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises and licensed alcoholic beverage caterers dispensing alcohol within the control zone that comply with the guidelines of the sponsoring civic organization. 
(7)  Sponsoring organization shall mean a non-profit tax-exempt organization or similar organization formed for the purpose of promoting tourism and organizing, managing and conducting promotional events in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I, 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 10-302. - Designation of a community festival. 
On the recommendation of the city manager, the mayor and council may designate and name certain community festival days and during such festival days authorize cultural and entertainment events and initiate the regulatory provisions of this article within the festival area. 
Sec. 10-303. - Designation and management of festival zone. 
(a)  Designation of festival sponsoring organization . The mayor and city council shall designate a sponsoring organization for each festival which organization will have the responsibility to organize, manage and conduct festival activities. Festival activities shall be financed in whole, or in part, by the sponsoring organization. The city shall be responsible to provide police protection and sanitation services for festival activities and participants and obtain all necessary permits for the closure of streets and highways. 
(b)  Control zones . Upon recommendation of the city manager and the sponsoring organization, the mayor and city council may designate one or more control zones within the festival area, and may authorize the city manager, in conjunction with the sponsoring organization, to implement regulations and controls that will be specific for each designated control zone. Such regulations and controls may include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Fencing and gating . Fencing designated control zone(s) and establishing entrance gates for controlling and limiting access to each control zone. 
(2)  Signage . The festival manager may require signage to indicate control zone boundaries and restrictions within the zone. 
(3)  Identification, entrance criteria . Require wristbands or other means of identifying persons who have met entrance criteria. Entrance criteria may include, but are not limited to, prohibiting persons from entering with beverage coolers, pets (excluding pets of residents who live within the control zone), exotic animals, skates, bicycles, fireworks, sparklers, bang snaps and other items which may be dangerous, disruptive, or inconvenient in crowded conditions, and prohibiting entry by persons appearing to be intoxicated. 
(4)  Identification, consumption of alcoholic beverages . Require wristbands or other means of identifying persons who have displayed proof of attaining the age of 21 years, and who are authorized to purchase or hold in possession alcoholic beverages within the control zone, outside of licensed alcoholic beverage establishments. Displaying such a wristband does not relieve alcoholic beverage establishments or licensed caterers of responsibility for determining if a person has attained the age of 21 years before dispensing alcohol to that person. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I, 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 10-304 - Vendors. 
(a)  Sales permitted . The sale of food, alcohol or merchandise of any type by a vendor shall be allowed as a component of a festival provided such vendor is approved and authorized in writing by the sponsoring organization and shall be conducted in accordance with such conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the sponsoring organization. 
(b)  Authorization of vendors . The sponsoring organization shall have sole responsibility and authority to allow or disallow sidewalk or street vending, including the sale and dispensing of alcohol, as a component of an event and to designate the location and activities of such vendors. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to engage in such business at any location or in any manner not authorized by the sponsoring organization. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I, 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 10-305. - Possession and sale of alcoholic beverages within the control zone. 
During festival hours, as designated by the mayor and city council, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Except as may otherwise be provided herein, chapter 6, article I, section 6-6 of the City Code related to possession of open containers shall not apply within the designated control zones during festival hours but no earlier than 11:00 a.m. and no later than 1:00 p.m. or one hour after the dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited pursuant to the event permit issued to a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer; 
(2)  Any business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises within the control zone may sell one alcoholic beverage in an approved container for removal from the premises; provided, however, that the individual must be 21 years of age and have an approved wristband. The licensee may dispense no more than one alcoholic beverage per person, and no person shall remove more than one alcoholic beverage from the premises; 
(3)  Any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer designated by the sponsoring organization to be an alcohol caterer during a festival event may sell and dispense alcohol within the control zone in an approved container to individuals 21 years of age and have an approved wristband; 
(4)  Any alcoholic beverage dispensed pursuant to this section shall not exceed 16 fluid ounces in size and no person shall possess an open container containing an alcoholic beverage in excess of 16 fluid ounces on the streets, sidewalks, parks, squares or other public places within the control zone. 
(5)  Any participating business that allows patrons to exit their premises with an alcoholic beverage purchased from their establishment not contained in an approved container and not wearing an approved wristband shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I, 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 10-306. - Restricting hours of alcohol sales. 
Within the festival area outdoor dispensing of alcoholic beverages under any permit or license will be permitted from 11:00 a.m. to 12 midnight only. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I, 5-15-2017) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-029, adopted October 12, 2004, by Res. No. 2004-066A, amended chapter 14, §§ 14-1—14-168, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly chapter 14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1974, §§ 4-106—4-113, 4-200—4-205, 4-300—4-316, 4-400—4-412, 4-414, 4-600—4-612, 4-702, 4-703, 4-705—4-714, 4-716. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; noise control of animals and birds, § 38-38; kennels, app. A, § 2-24. 
State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the care, treatment and maintenance of animals and birds; to limit the number and types of animals which may be kept and maintained [with the exemption of the Agrirama] to prohibit certain animals and birds; to provide for duties and responsibilities of owners and custodians of animals; to provide for control of animals; to prohibit fighting dogs, cocks, and other animals; to provide for control of rabies and zoonoses (animal diseases transmissible to humans); to provide for an animal control board; to provide for the seizure, confinement, reclamation, forfeiture, abandonment, surrender, adoption and disposal of animals; to provide for the administration and enforcement of the control of diseases, and to provide generally for the public health and welfare. 
Sec. 14-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means an animal that is unattended and uncared for and is: 
(1)  Placed or ventures onto public property or within a public building; or 
(2)  Placed or ventures onto private property or within a private building without the consent of the private property's owner, custodian, or tenant; or 
(3)  On or within the property of the animal's owner or custodian and has remained unattended or uncared for in excess of 36 hours. 
Adequate food and water means food and water which is sufficient in amount and appropriate by nature for a particular type of animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from a lack of food or water consistent with the size, health and age of each particular animal in issue. 
Animal means any mammal, other than man, or any reptile or amphibian or bird. 
Animal dealer means any person engaged in the business of buying live animals, other than livestock, of any kind for resale or in selling live animals, other than livestock, of any kind bought for the purpose of resale and includes those businesses commonly referred to as "pet shops." Every agent acting for or on behalf of any dealer shall be considered a dealer under this chapter, provided that any farmer acquiring an animal solely for the purpose of grazing or feeding such animal as a part of his farm operation or selling an animal maintained as a part of his farm operation shall not be an animal dealer. 
Animal exhibitor means a person who, pursuant to valid licenses and permits therefore, either exhibits animals for compensation or for improvement of the breed or utilizes animals in connection with activities for which compensation is received. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by or under contract with the county/city for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, diseased, nuisance, dangerous, neglected, deprived, abused, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals or birds; any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian which operates for such purpose, in addition to its customary purposes; and any facility operated, owned, or maintained by other nonprofit organizations for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals or birds. 
At large and run at large means any animal which is not under the control of a person and which is upon any street, upon or within any public property, or upon or in any property not belonging to the owner or custodian of the animal, unless by permission of the owner or custodian of such property. 
Bird means poultry as well as all other avian species. 
Bite means to be seized with the teeth or jaws so that a person or animal has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced and saliva of the biting animal has or may have contacted the resulting break or abrasion of the skin. 
Board of health means the Tift County Board of Health and includes officers, officials and employees of such Board of Health acting within the scope of their authority. 
Breeder-hobbyist means a person who maintains no more than four animals of the same species and breeds the species of animal as a hobby, but produces not more than two litters of any species of animal in any 12-month period. 
Breeder-professional means a person who breeds animals for purposes of sale and maintains a current business license or who produces more than two litters of any species of animals in any 12-month period and who maintains affiliation in a nationally recognized society for the betterment, control and/or competitive display of the animal species. 
Carcasses of domestic animals means all or any part or portion of any dead domestic animal not slaughtered for human consumption. 
Cat means any member of the animal species Felis Catus six months or more in age and includes kittens less than six months of age. 
City means the incorporated cities of Tifton, Omega and/or TyTy. 
Control of an animal means that the animal is: 
(1)  On a leash which is being held by a person of sufficient size, age, and maturity to restrain the animal; 
(2)  Under voice control in the presence of a competent person; 
(3)  On or within a vehicle which is being driven or is parked and restrained in such manner as to prevent the animal's freedom to egress from the vehicle; or 
(4)  Within the property limits of its owner or custodian or upon the premises of another person with the consent of such other person. 
County means Tift County, Georgia. 
Custodian means any person who within the County/City has responsibility for, or exercises custody, charge, or control over an animal or bird or harbors, maintains or keeps an animal or bird. 
Dangerous animal or vicious animal (Also see potentially dangerous animal.) means any animal that: 
(1)  Has inflicted injury on a human being or another animal without provocation on public or private property, or 
(2)  Has attacked or endangered the safety of human beings or another animal without provocation on public or private property, or 
(3)  Has bitten any person, or another animal without provocation on public or private property. 
Dead animal means the carcass, parts of the carcass, effluent, and blood of deceased animals, birds and fish. 
Deprived animal means an animal which has not been provided by the owner or custodian thereof with adequate food and water, humane care, adequate sanitary shelter, adequate shelter from inclement weather or adequate ventilation or has been subject to cruel and inhumane treatment. 
Diseased animal means any animal, bird or fish which is suffering from any disease or condition for which the animal is subject to quarantine or which is both contagious to humans or any other animal and is deadly to humans or any other animal. 
Dog means any member of the animal species Canis Familiaris six months or more in age and includes puppies less than six months of age. 
Domestic animal means dogs, cats, livestock, poultry, confined domesticated hares and rabbits, and all other animals and birds raised or maintained in confinement as pets or for work, food or recreational purposes. 
Equine means any member of the equidae species, including horses, mules, and asses. 
Euthanasia means a death brought about by any method which produces rapid loss of consciousness to painless death. 
Exposed to rabies means that a person or an animal has been bitten by, or exposed to, any warm-blooded animal known or suspected to have been infected with rabies. 
Fighting or attack dog or animal means any dog or animal which has been trained to attack other dogs, animals or humans with the intent to injure or kill, independently or upon oral command. 
Free running line means a line which is attached or is secured by a swivel or other device which will prevent the line from being wrapped around some object. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command or any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which located. 
Hopelessly disabled animal means any animal, bird or fish which is the subject of any disease, injury or condition which is a cause of suffering by the animal and from which there is no reasonable probability of recovery. 
Humane care means, but is not limited to, the provision of adequate heat, adequate ventilation, adequate sanitary shelter and adequate food and water for an animal consistent with normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal based upon size, age, species, and breed. 
Kennel means any licensed facility, other than an animal shelter, where animals not owned by the proprietor thereof are sheltered, boarded, fed, held, trained, exercised or similarly maintained in return for a fee or other compensation. 
Livestock means all animals of the equine (horses & mules), bovine (cows), avian (poultry), or porcine (pigs & pot belly pigs) species, including; caprina (goats), ovine (sheep) and all other grazing animals. 
Livestock dealer means any person engaged in the business of buying livestock of any kind for resale or in selling livestock of any kind bought for the purpose of resale or in buying livestock of any kind for slaughter, provided that any farmer or rancher acquiring livestock solely for the purpose of grazing or feeding as a part of his farm or ranch operation or selling an animal maintained as a part of his farm or ranch operation shall not be a livestock dealer. 
Livestock market operator means any person engaged in the business of operating public auctions or sales of livestock or of operating barns and yards for the containment of livestock held for the purpose of auction or sale. 
Meat or meat products means the carcass or part of any carcass of any animal, bird or fish or any by product thereof in any form. 
Meat processing plant means any abattoir, slaughterhouse, poultry killing or processing plant, or any other establishment for the killing, storage, dressing, manufacture, preparation, or processing of any animal, bird, fish or dairy product or any byproduct thereof for human consumption which has been licensed by the state for such activities. 
Municipal court or magistrate court means the official court that hears violations of county or city ordinances, which may be the Magistrate Court of Tift County or the municipal court of the city, as appropriate to hear such cases. 
Neutered means any and all male and female animals which have been operated upon to prevent conception as evidenced by certification of a licensed veterinarian. 
Nuisance animal means an animal which: 
(1)  Runs at large or is at large or, is a dangerous animal and is not kept securely confined; 
(2)  Repeatedly molests or disturbs persons or vehicles by chasing or barking or attacks passersby, whether they are pedestrians, on a bicycle, or in a motor vehicle; 
(3)  Damages property other than that of the owner thereof; 
(4)  Creates noise by barking, whining, howling, honking, crowing, braying, or crying which is detectable outside the property of the owner or custodian thereof; 
(5)  Is prohibited, such as bees and/or bee hives, within the incorporated city limits; 
(6)  Creates noxious or offensive odors which are detectable outside the property of the owner or custodian thereof, with the exception of animals owned as part of farm or ranch operations at locations where such activities are permitted pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the county; 
(7)  Defecates upon or in any street or public place or upon or on premises not owned or controlled by the owner or custodian thereof in the absence of the express permission therefore by the owner or custodian of the premises except where such defecation is promptly removed by the owner or custodian of the animal, provided this shall not apply to the guide dog of a blind or disabled person; 
(8)  Creates an accumulation of excreta which has the potential of becoming an insect breeding site; 
(9)  Is in estrus (heat or season) and is located upon and in any street or public property, outside property owned or controlled by the owner or custodian of the animal or outside property owned or controlled by a person who has granted express permission therefore; 
(10)  Has no owner or custodian, provided this condition shall not apply to wild animals; or 
(11)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare, or safety according to rules and regulations promulgated by the Tift County Board of Health. 
Owner means any person who or which, with respect to an animal, bird or reptile located within the county/city, has, possesses, asserts or claims any ownership or possessory rights to an animal, bird or reptile; harbors, maintains or keeps an animal, bird or reptile; or exercises custody, charge or control over an animal, bird or reptile. 
Person means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust, estate, or other legal entity or any combination of the foregoing. 
Potentially dangerous means any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten persons without provocation; or any dog that, when unprovoked: 
(1)  Chases or approaches a human being or another domestic animal on any public or private property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack; or 
(2)  Attempts to attack a human or another domestic animal. 
Poultry means any domestic fowl including, but not limited to, chickens and water fowl such as geese and ducks; birds which are bred for meat and egg production, exhibition, or competition; and game birds such as pheasants, partridge, quail, and grouse, as well as guinea fowl, pigeons, doves, and peafowl to include: ratite, rhea, emus, ostrich. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a particular animal which provides protection from the elements and securely confines the animal consistent with the size, age, species and breed of such animal within the dwelling of the owner or custodian thereof, or within a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitably constructed so as to prevent the entry of young children or other animals or the animal from escaping therefrom. 
Rabies vaccination means the (Inoculation) administration of antirabic vaccine by a licensed veterinarian at such intervals as required by state law and rules and regulations applicable thereto. 
Rendering plant means a place of business or location or plant where the carcasses of domestic animals or packinghouse refuse or other refuse is purchased, received, or unloaded and where such carcasses or refuse is processed for the purpose of obtaining the hide, skin, grease, residue, or any other byproduct from such animals or refuse in any way whatsoever and which is licensed for such activities by the state. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
Small animal pet means any dog, any cat or any other mammal species which is a potential carrier of rabies, as determined from time to time by or on behalf of any agency of the state, and is kept or maintained as a pet. 
Spayed female means any and all female animals, which have been operated upon to prevent conception as evidenced by the certification of a licensed veterinarian. 
Stray means an animal running at large in the county or the city. 
Street means any public street, road, highway, alley or other way located within the County/City, including the full width of the right-of-way of such street and any sidewalks adjacent thereto, which is open to the use of the public for vehicular or pedestrian use. 
Vaccination means the administration of antirabic vaccine by a licensed veterinarian at such intervals as required by Georgia law and rules and regulations applicable thereto. 
Vicious animal. See dangerous animal. 
Voice control means that an animal: 
(1)  Is physically capable of hearing normal commands and is, at the time under consideration, within reasonable proximity to the controller so that shouting or excessively loud commands are not necessary; 
(2)  Has been adequately trained in obedience so as to be capable of understanding control commands; and 
(3)  Either continually demonstrates, or is able to demonstrate on demand, response to a command that will cause the animal to immediately come into close proximity to the controller and cease any kind of aggressive behavior or action that would be offensive or threatening to other persons or animals. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-3. - Maintenance of animals conditional upon compliance. 
The ownership and maintenance of animals, reptiles, and birds within the County/City is conditional upon strict compliance by the custodian of such animal, bird, reptile and with all of the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-4. - Supplemental nature of chapter. 
The requirements, limitations, conditions, restrictions, and provisions of this chapter are in addition to and are supplementary of all other requirements, limitations, conditions, restrictions and provisions of the state, federal and local ordinances, rules and regulations relative to animals and birds or to the conduct of any activity, business, enterprise, trade, profession or occupation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-5. - Compliance with other regulations. 
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not excuse or relieve any person from complying with the requirements and provisions of all other laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations applicable to animals and birds or to the conduct of any activity, business, trade, profession or occupation. Those additional laws, ordinances, rules and regulations include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  All applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations; 
(2)  The business, occupational and professional license and permit requirements of the county/city; 
(3)  The obtaining of and compliance with business, occupational, trade and professional licenses and permits from the county/city as well as, to the extent applicable, the state and the United States; 
(4)  Compliance with the zoning ordinance of the county/city; and 
(5)  Compliance with all other applicable ordinances and resolutions of the county/city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-6. - Criminal conviction not required; administrative nature of proceedings. 
Any proceeding or action which may be taken with respect to any animal or bird pursuant to this chapter shall be administrative in nature with respect to the privilege of the owner of the animal or bird to keep and maintain the animal or bird within the county/city. No conviction, dismissal, acquittal, other plea or other disposition with respect to any criminal violation involving any alleged criminal conduct shall be necessary for any action pursuant to the provisions of this chapter relative to any animal or bird, or otherwise to affect any action taken pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-7. - Knowledge of chapter's provisions presumed. 
The owner and the custodian of any animal maintained within the County/City, as well as all employees, agents and servants of such owner or custodian, shall be conclusively presumed, for purposes of this chapter, to have at all times complete and full knowledge of all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-8. - Violation of chapter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly violate any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-9. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
The appropriate official designated pursuant to article 3 of this chapter may prosecute violations of any provision of this chapter by the issuance of a citation or other appropriate proceeding returnable to the magistrate or municipal court, as applicable. The penalty for a violation of this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense within a 12-month period, up to $100.00 per day for each day that such condition or violation shall exist; and 
(2)  Second or subsequent offenses within a 12-month period, up to $250.00 per day for each day that such condition or violation shall exist. 
Each day shall constitute a separate violation, a separate offense and a separate obligation with respect to the prohibition and offenses herein described. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-10 - Unavailable defenses. 
In any prosecution for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, it shall not be a defense that any person charged was mistaken as to the species, breed, age, size, or nature of any animal or that the person lacked criminal intent, it being one of the purposes of this chapter to penalize recklessness and indifference resulting in the violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
DIVISION 2. - OFFENSES AND VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 14-11. - Treatment of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of section 14-31 relative to the treatment of animals. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-12. - Care of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of section 14-32 relative to the care of animals or birds. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-13. - Female dogs in estrus (heat or season). 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any unspayed female dog, while such dog is in season, to allow the dog to be or remain other than upon the premises of the owner or custodian of such dog confined at all times in a proper and adequate enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-14. - Leash law. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, or person having an animal in custody, to fail to maintain control of an animal or to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the streets, highways, and rights-of-way of the county or city, or on the property of another person without permission of the owner of that property or of the person in possession of that property. 
It shall be unlawful for any animal to be confined upon the premises of the owner or custodian of such animal by a leash or chain of less than ten feet in length and equipped with swivels at both ends, except by a leash which is a free running line. Any animal confined by leash or chain shall be restrained at least six feet from all entrance and exit locations to the property or building within which the animal is located. Animals shall not be restrained by leash or chain in a manner and location that precludes unrestricted and safe ingress and egress by animal control or law enforcement personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-14.1. - Tethering law. 
A chain shall not be used to tether any animal unless the size and weight is approved in writing by the animal control director or her designee. Leashes made of cable, rope or leather with the appropriate swivels may be used. No animal on a tether shall be fitted with a choke collar or any other collar made of rope or chain unless such chain weighs less than two pounds. 
(Ord. No. 2008-21, § I, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 14-15. - Dangerous animals and guard dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to fail to post prominent signage with the words "DANGEROUS DOG", easily read at a distance of 25 feet, at all entrance and exit locations to the property or building within which the dog is located. "Dangerous or vicious" animals shall be confined on a concrete surface, at least six inches thick, and confined by a fence of at least six feet in height, the sides of which are embedded into the ground, and the gate of which is secured by a child-proof lock. Any such dangerous animal, while off the real property of its owner or custodian, must be muzzled and secured by a leash or chain, and under control of the owner or custodian. Dangerous and potentially dangerous animals must be registered in accordance with section 14-82. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any guard dog to fail to post prominent signage with the words "WARNING GUARD DOG", easily read at a distance of 25 feet, at all entrance and exit locations to the property or building within which a guard dog is located. Guard dogs shall be confined by a fence of at least six feet in height with a minimum of three strands of barbed wire attached to the top or by a fence of at least eight feet in height, or within an enclosed building or structure. Any such guard dog, while off the real property of its owner or custodian, must be muzzled and secured by a leash or chain, and under control of the owner or custodian. Guard dogs must be registered in accordance with section 14-82. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-16. - Interference with persons authorized to enforce chapter. 
No person shall resist, interfere with, hinder, delay or molest any person authorized to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter in the performance of the duties imposed upon such person by this chapter, or seek to release any animal from the custody or control of any such person, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-17. - Interference with animal control shelter. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to interfere with the operation of any animal shelter or other facility maintained for the confinement of animals under supervision of the county/city; to remove from any such animal shelter or facility without the consent of the operator of the animal shelter or facility any animal kept therein; or to resist, hinder, delay, interfere with or molest any person, agent, employee or member of any organization or entity operating such animal shelter or facility in the performance of his duties or responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-18. - Inoculation (vaccination) of dogs and cats. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or maintain within the county/city any dog or cat over the age of three months unless the animal has been inoculated (vaccinated) against rabies and documentation maintained, as required by provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-19. - Rabies tag——Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or maintain any dog over three months of age within the county/city unless the dog at all times and at all places, is wearing a tag indicating that the dog has been inoculated (vaccinated) against rabies. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-20. - Rabies tag——Unlawful use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use for any dog a rabies tag which was not issued for such dog. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-21. - Driving animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or ride any animal through, upon or within any street or public place within the county/city without having the animal securely haltered, roped or otherwise restrained, except as a permitted special event. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-22. - Protected animals. 
(a)  Except to the extent otherwise provided in this chapter, no person, within the incorporated city limits, shall knowingly: 
(1)  Trap, shoot, hunt, disturb, or molest any non-domesticated bird or any domesticated bird; 
(2)  Disturb, molest, remove, or destroy any active nest of any non-domesticated bird or any domesticated bird; or 
(3)  Disturb, molest, remove, or destroy any egg of any non-domesticated bird. 
(b)  Possession by any person of any egg of any normally non-domesticated bird shall constitute prima-facie evidence of violation by said person of the provisions of subsection (a)(3) above. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b), above shall not apply to any employee of any federal, state, or local governmental entity, agency, or instrumentality while acting within the scope of his or her employment or to any employee of any institution of education of research while acting within the scope of his or her employment. 
(d)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b), above shall not apply to the owner or custodian of any domesticated bird. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-23. - Keeping of prohibited animals. 
(a)  Except to the extent otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall own, have, keep or maintain within the county or city any of the following: 
(1)  Any poisonous or venomous biting or injecting species of amphibian or reptile, including snakes. 
(2)  Any animal listed as inherently dangerous to humans pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 or determined by regulation of the state board of natural resources pursuant to the provisions of the section as being considered as inherently dangerous to humans. 
(3)  Any animal, bird, fish, or insect which is subject to quarantine, expulsion, exclusion, prohibited, or denial of entry by the state or the United States or any agency, department, division, bureau or other instrumentality thereof. 
(4)  Any animal, bird, fish or insect, either dead or alive, and including any body or part thereof, which then appears on the endangered species list designated by the United States Secretary of the Interior and published in the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of 1973 or which is protected under any federal or state law or regulation which has as its purpose the protection of endangered or threatened species. 
(5)  Any animal which is afflicted with any disease which is contagious to humans or other animals and is not under treatment for that disease; 
(6)  Any animal pet at the age of three months and older which has not been currently inoculated for rabies. 
(7)  Any animal pet which has been inoculated for rabies without identifiable proof of inoculation for rabies. 
(8)  Any carnivorous animal which has not been domesticated or which has dangerous propensity toward any person, any other animal or any property of anyone other than the owner or custodian thereof. 
(9)  Any wild or non-domesticated animal as prohibited by state law pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 27-5-4 and 27-5-5. 
The following subparagraphs 10 through 16 shall apply to all incorporated cities and unincorporated subdivisions (residential areas with six (6) or more lots), and residences on three acres or less in the County: 
(10)  Any livestock (See definition of livestock which includes poultry.) of any type, breed or number upon any premises with the exemption of the Georgia Agrirama. 
(11)  Any birds except domesticated birds in excess of six of any breed or species or in excess of ten in the aggregate of all breeds and species of birds plus offspring thereof until 30 days of age, provided that any birds so permitted shall be maintained, except as otherwise permitted under the provisions of this chapter, at all times within a proper enclosure which shall be located no closer than ten feet from the nearest point of any property line. This provision shall not apply to the Georgia Agrirama. 
(12)  Any dogs upon any premises in excess of four of any breed or in excess of six in the aggregate of all breeds of dogs (plus any offspring thereof until six months of age); provided that any dogs so permitted shall be maintained, except as otherwise permitted under the provisions of this chapter, at all times within a proper enclosure which shall be located no closer than ten feet from the nearest point of any property line. 
(13)  Any cats upon any premises in excess of four of any breed or in excess of six, in the aggregate of all breeds of cats (plus any offspring thereof until six months of age); provided that any cats so permitted shall be maintained, except as otherwise permitted under the provisions of this chapter, at all times within a proper enclosure which shall be located no closer than ten feet from the nearest point of any property line. 
(14)  Any rabbits or domesticated hares upon any premises in excess of four of any breed or species or in excess of ten in the aggregate of all breeds and species of rabbits and domesticated hares (plus any offspring thereof until four months of age); provided that any rabbits and domesticated hares so permitted shall be maintained, except as otherwise permitted under the provisions of this chapter, all times within a proper enclosure which shall be located no closer than ten feet from the nearest point of any property line. 
(15)  Any other animals not specified above upon any premises in excess of ten in the aggregate of all such other animals, plus any offspring thereof until weaned or until three months of age in the event the animal is not weaned; provided that all such other animals so permitted shall be maintained, except as otherwise permitted under the provisions of this chapter, at all times within a proper enclosure which shall be located no closer than ten feet from the nearest point of any property line. 
(16)  Any animals upon any premises in excess of 20 in the aggregate of all such animals. See subsections (b) through (e) of this section for exceptions. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to those activities of the following, as well as the employees, agents and servants thereof while acting within the scope of their employment: 
(1)  Licensed veterinarians; 
(2)  Animal shelters; 
(3)  Any legitimate institution or agency of education, health or research; or 
(4)  Any federal, state or local governmental entity, agency or instrumentality which includes the Georgia Agrirama. 
The provisions of subsections (1), (2), (3), (9), (10), (11), (12), (13), (14), (15), and (16) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to those activities of animal exhibitors, as well as the employees, agents and servants thereof while acting within the scope of their employment, which are permitted or allowed pursuant to licenses and/or permits issued by the county or city and by any other federal or state governmental entity, agency or instrumentality having jurisdiction relative thereto, provided all such activities are conducted in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (10), (11), (12), (13), (14), (15), and (16) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to those activities of the following, as well as the employees, agents and servants thereof while acting within the scope of their employment, which are permitted or allowed pursuant to licenses and/or permits issued by the county or city and by any federal or state governmental entity, agency or instrumentality having jurisdiction relative thereto, provided all such activities are conducted in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations: 
(1)  Animal dealers; 
(2)  Livestock dealers; 
(3)  Livestock market operators; 
(4)  Meat processing plants; 
(5)  Kennels; and 
(6)  Professional breeders. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (10), (11), (12), (13), (14), (15), and (16) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the grazing or feeding by legitimate farmers and ranchers of their own animals as a part of their own farm or ranch operations at locations where such activities are permitted pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the county and city or to the transportation or sale of such animals by a legitimate farmer or rancher. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Secs. 14-24—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREATMENT AND CARE OF ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-31. - Treatment of animals. 
(a)  Except to the extent otherwise provided in this chapter, no person except the owner of an animal, a person authorized by the owner of an animal, a licensed veterinarian or an employee, agent or servant thereof, or a person acting pursuant to any privilege or authority granted pursuant to federal, state or local law, ordinance, rule or regulation shall kill any domestic animal within the county/city; provided, however, that an animal may be killed by a person in order to defend his person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage by the animal; and further provided that no person shall kill any animal in any manner or by any method or means which causes the animal unnecessary pain or suffering under the circumstances. 
(b)  No person shall maim any animal without justification and necessity or cause any animal to suffer any cruel treatment, to be subjected to any unnecessary pain or suffering, to be subjected to fighting with or the attacking or killing of another animal, to suffer any unnecessary fright or to otherwise be subjected to any inhumane treatment. No person shall release or abandon any animal, either alive or dead, upon any public property or upon the property of any other person. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly by neglect, omission or act allow any domestic animal to endure unnecessary pain or suffering or aid or assist in the causation of any unnecessary pain, suffering or injury by any animal. 
(d)  No person shall by neglect, omission or act leave exposed any poisonous or toxic liquid or substance in any manner that any domestic or wild animal may come in contact therewith. 
(e)  No person who while operating any vehicle which has stricken or otherwise injured any domestic animal shall, following such incident, either fail to stop and render assistance to such injured animal or promptly contact appropriate authorities relative thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-32. - Care of animals and birds. 
No owner or custodian of any animal or bird shall fail to provide the animal or bird: 
(1)  With humane care; 
(2)  With adequate food and water; 
(3)  With adequate sanitary shelter which has adequate ventilation; or 
(4)  With adequate shelter from inclement weather 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-33. - Diseased animals. 
Promptly upon discovery, the owner and the custodian of any diseased animal shall report the condition to appropriate authorities and shall promptly deliver the diseased animal to a licensed veterinarian, the animal control officer of the county, such other person or institution as the county manager shall designate, or appropriate state or federal officials for treatment, observation and, if required, disposal as provided by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-34. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  All dead animals shall be disposed of within 12 hours of their death by the owner or custodian of such animal in accordance with requirements of state law and rules and regulations of the commissioner of agriculture relative thereto by: 
(1)  Delivery of the deceased animal to a livestock dealer, livestock market operator, meat processing plant, or rendering plant with the consent of the recipient of such animal; 
(2)  Burial of the dead animal in a sanitary manner upon premises of the owner or custodian or a third party with the prior expressed consent therefore to a sufficient depth and degree so as to prevent the exposure of body by scavengers, with such burial to be to a level of at least three feet below ground level and with not less than three feet of compacted earth over the animal; or 
(3)  Delivery to the facility of the county/city maintained for such purposes with payment of all required fees therefore. 
(b)  No person in possession of a dead animal or responsible for a dead animal shall abandon any dead animal upon any public street, any public property or any private property. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-35. - Hopelessly disabled animals. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter licensed veterinarians, state and local law enforcement officers, the animal control officer of the county/city, those authorized by the county manager to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, and all federal, state and local governmental employees, while acting within the scope of their authority, are authorized to induce the death of hopelessly disabled animal by appropriate humane methods, preferably by means of euthanasia. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-36. - Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  The eradication or control of rats, mice, gophers, moles, other rodent pests, coyotes, beaver, poisonous snakes and insects and other animals and birds which have been determined by appropriate governmental officials to constitute nuisances. 
(2)  The medical, research and educational activities of legitimate medical, research and educational institutions and agencies, and the employees, agents and servants thereof while acting within the scope of their employment. 
(3)  Legal activities of the holder of a valid hunting or fishing license in compliance with the federal and state game and fish laws. 
(4)  Employees of federal, state and local governmental entities, agencies and instrumentalities while acting within the scope of their employment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Secs. 14-37—-14-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RABIES 

Sec. 14-51. - Inoculation (vaccination)—Time and proof. 
The owner of each dog or cat shall cause: 
(1)  The dog or cat to be inoculated (vaccinated) against rabies by a licensed veterinarian prior to the dog or cat reaching three months of age and thereafter shall cause appropriate booster vaccinations for such dog or cat to be obtained as each rabies vaccination current period expires according to the rabies certificate issued by the licensed veterinarian at the time of each inoculation (vaccination); and 
(2)  A current rabies tag (proof of rabies vaccination) should be available for each dog at all times, subsequent to the dog reaching three months of age. 
(3)  A current receipt or statement from a licensed veterinarian or other documentation (proof of rabies vaccination) should be available for each cat at all times, subsequent to the cat reaching three (3) months of age. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-52. - Inoculation—Exemptions. 
The vaccination requirement of section 14-51 relative to inoculation (vaccination) of dogs/cats shall not apply to any dog/cats belonging to a nonresident of the county/city kept within the county/city for not longer than 30 days, providing that the dog/cats shall, at all times while within the county/city, be kept confined within a building, enclosure, or vehicle or be under the restraint of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-53. - Inoculation—Replacement tags. 
The owner of each dog shall promptly cause to be obtained from a veterinarian replacement rabies tag for any tag which is lost. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-54. - Report of bites. 
Every physician and other medical practitioner shall promptly report to the board of health the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as may be required by the board of health for the purpose of rabies control. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-55. - Reports by veterinarians. 
Every licensed veterinarian shall promptly report to the Board of Health the diagnosis of any animal as a rabies suspect. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-56. - Quarantine—Generally. 
Every animal which bites a human or is suspected of having been exposed to rabies shall be promptly reported to the board of health, shall be seized and thereafter be securely quarantined at the direction of the board of health and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the board of health. In the discretion of the board of health quarantine may be had upon the premises of the owner or at the county/city animal shelter or, at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of the owner's choice. Animals whose ownership is not known shall be quarantined at the county/city animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-57. - Quarantine—Surrender and redemption. 
The owner and custodian of any animal which has bitten a human or which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, promptly surrender the animal to the animal control officer for quarantine with the expense of such quarantine to be borne by the owner. The animal may be reclaimed by the owner or custodian if such animal is determined to be free of rabies upon payment of all seizure fees and maintenance fees attributable thereto and upon compliance with all other applicable provisions of the article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-58. - Quarantine—County/city wide. 
(a)  Upon determination of the advisability based upon positive diagnosis of rabies, the board of health may in its discretion recommend to the county manager the imposition of a county/city wide quarantine for such period of time as it shall deem proper which shall be then imposed by the county manager. During such quarantine period no animal shall be taken or allowed upon the streets or off the property of the owner or custodian, nor shall any animal be removed from the county/city without written permission of the board of health. 
(b)  If there shall occur additional positive cases of rabies during the period of quarantine, the period of quarantine may be extended upon the recommendation of the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-59. - Disposition of rabid animals generally. 
The board of health shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-60. - Killing and removal of rabid animals, suspect animals. 
Except as otherwise permitted pursuant to other provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal which has bitten a human, nor shall any person remove any such animal from the County/City without the written permission of the Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-61. - Shooting of suspect animals authorized. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any citizen, law enforcement officer, any employee of the board of health, any public health official and any other government official or employee acting within the scope of his authority is authorized to shoot any animal which has bitten a human, which is suspected of being rabid or which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies, when justified based upon surrounding circumstances in which the shooting can be accomplished without endangering persons or other animals. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-62. - Destruction or quarantine of animals bitten by rabid animals. 
(a)  Unvaccinated small animals that are bitten by an established rabid animal shall be destroyed immediately. If the owner or custodian of the animal object to the immediate destruction of such an animal, then the animal must be strictly confined and quarantined from all human and other animals for six months either by the owner or at an appropriate facility at the expense of the owner. One month prior to release, the animal shall be vaccinated against rabies. If the animal was vaccinated at least one month before such exposure, it shall be re vaccinated immediately and placed in strict confinement and quarantined for at least 30 days either by the owner or appropriate facility at the expense of the owner. 
(b)  Any livestock that are bitten by an established rabid animal shall be destroyed immediately. If the owner or custodian of any livestock objects to the immediate destruction of such an animal, the animal shall be vaccinated and placed in strict confinement quarantined from all humans and other animals for six months either by the owner or an appropriate facility at the expense of the owner. 
(c)  Where quarantine or confinement is carried out pursuant to subsectionS (a) and (b) of this section the quarantine or confinement shall confirm to the requirement of section 14-51 and all other requirements, condition, limitations and restrictions of the Board of Health and other public health officials. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-63. - Dead rabid animals. 
When an animal which has been diagnosed as being rabid, or is suspected by a licensed veterinarian of being rabid, dies, the board of health is authorized to take whatever steps are necessary in order to dispose of the animal and to otherwise comply with applicable law including, without limitation, causing the carcass of the animal, or parts thereof, to be subjected to pathological examination. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-64. - Dead animals exposed to rabies. 
The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Secs. 14-65—14-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-71. - Designation of responsibility. 
The county manager is authorized to designate by administrative order from time to time those persons or officials who shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-72. - Animal control officer. 
The county manager is authorized to designate by administrative order from time to time those persons or officials who shall be responsible for carrying out the duties of the animal control officer provided for under the provisions of the State Dangerous Dog Control Law, (O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-20—4-8-29), and those persons, organizations, entities and/or officials who shall be responsible for the seizure, care, custody, confinement, adoption and disposition of animals seized pursuant to any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-73. - Assignment of duties of animal control officer to others authorized. 
As an alternative to the designation of an animal control officer of the county/city, the county manager is authorized by administrative order to assign from time to time the duties of the animal control officer to a specific official, officer or designated position of a private or public entity or organization or any other governmental entity, organization or unit pursuant to the provision of a contract with such private, public or governmental entity, organization or unit which provides for the rendering of services as animal control officer by such official, officer or designated position, subject to approval of any and all such contracts by the board of commissioners by resolution of such board. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-74. - Existing violations. 
(a)  The adoption of this chapter and the sections contained in this chapter shall not affect or abate the status of any violation of any existing ordinance of the county/city which occurred prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, nor shall the prosecution, proceeding, penalty, fine or consequences, with respect to any violation of any existing ordinance of the county which supercedes any other ordinance prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, be altered, effected, released, discharged or abated by the adoption of this chapter or the sections contained in this chapter. 
(b)  All violations of existing ordinances of the county/city which occur prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall be determined and punished according to ordinances of the county/city existing as of the time of such violation in the same manner as if this chapter had not been adopted; provided, however, that the procedures established in this chapter with respect to the administration of this chapter shall be utilized, effective as of the date hereof, with respect to any violation which occurs prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-75. - Existing activities. 
The adoption of this chapter and the sections contained in this chapter shall not affect or alter the status of any then valid activity or then permissible condition which commenced or existed prior to the effective date of this chapter for so long as such activity or condition shall continue uninterrupted and unabated. 
Sec. 14-76. - Enforcement; generally. 
Upon determination by the county manager or those designated by the county manager to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of any provision of this chapter exists, then the county manager or such designee shall be entitled to take such of the following actions, or to cause such actions to be taken, as the county manager or such designee, in his sole discretion, shall determine to be appropriate: 
(1)  Give notice to the persons responsible for the existence of such violations, such notice to state the nature and extent of the violations, the actions necessary to correct the violations, and the time limit within which remedial actions must be taken. 
(2)  Suspend or revoke any or all business licenses, other licenses, permits and/or other authorizations of those responsible for such violations which license, permit or otherwise authorize any business, work or activity within the county/city. 
(3)  Institute civil proceedings to effectuate remedy of the circumstances giving rise to the violations. 
(4)  Cause criminal proceedings as appropriate to be brought in connection therewith. 
(5)  Investigate and inspect the animal, its condition and health, its environment and premises where it is maintained including authorization to enter upon the premises of the owner or custodian thereof for the purposes of such investigation and inspection. 
(6)  Cause the animal subject to such violations to be seized and helped pursuant to the provisions of this chapter including entry upon property of the owner or custodian of an animal for the purpose of seizure thereof. 
(7)  Take such other actions as are appropriate under the circumstances in order to obtain compliance with the provisions of this chapter consistence with applicable law and applicable resources of the county/city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-77. - Rules and regulations adopted for implementation of chapter. 
The county manager is authorized to adopt and implement rules and regulations for the administration, implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter which are not inconsistent with the provisions or the purposes of this chapter, subject to the right of the board of commissioners to vacate any such rule or regulation within 60 days following submission of such rule to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-78. - Nuisances. 
Conditions and circumstances existing or arising from the failure of those responsible therefore to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance which shall authorize both the abatement of such nuisance by the county/city pursuant to the provisions of this code and, in connection therewith, the assessment of a lien against such persons, the animal in issue, and any premises in issue for the cost of the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-79. - Policies and procedures. 
The county manager shall from time to time adopt and implement policies, procedures, rules and regulations relative to the initiation of citizens' complaints. Determination by appropriate county/city officials of the existence of probable cause to believe that an offense under any section of this chapter has occurred can result in the issuance of a citation from the appropriate magistrate or municipal court of the county/city. Persons accused shall show cause before the court at a time, date and place specified therein why those so charged should not be determined to have committed such offense and be punished as provided in this chapter, subject to the right of the board of commissioners to vacate any such policy, procedure, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-80. - Fees—Generally. 
(a)  Any animal seized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be released to the owner or custodian thereof only upon the payment of a release fee as set forth in the schedule of fees, plus a daily maintenance fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per day for small animals, pets and birds, and a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees charged per day for all other animals for each day, or part thereof, that the animal is confined, plus a vaccination fee, to the extent applicable, for all the unvaccinated dogs and cats set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the maintenance fee for all animals subject to rabies quarantine, all animals being held as evidence in a criminal proceeding and all potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per day. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-81. - Fees—Confiscation of dangerous animals. 
In addition to all other fees and charges imposed from time to time relative to the seizure, storage and maintenance of animals, owners of said animal or animals will be responsible for fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges that are imposed for the confiscation of dangerous dogs/animals and the confiscation of potentially dangerous dogs/animals under the provisions of the state dangerous dog control law, (O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-20—4-8-29), as now existing and hereafter amended. 
(1)  Confiscation fee for dangerous dogs/animals ..... $250.00 
(2)  Confiscation fee for potentially dangerous dogs/animals ..... 200.00 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-82. - Fees—Registration for certain dogs. 
In addition to all other fees and charges imposed from time to time in connection with animals, fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges are imposed in connection with the registration of dangerous dogs/animals and the registration for potentially dangerous dogs/animals pursuant to the requirements of the state dangerous dog control law (O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-20—4-8-29), as now existing and hereafter amended. 
(3)  Registration of dangerous dogs/animals ..... $100.00 each 
(4)  Registration of potentially dangerous dogs/animals ..... 100.00 each 
(5)  Registration of guard dogs ..... 25.00 each 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Secs. 14-83—14-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ANIMAL CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-91. - Seizure—Confinement. 
Upon determination (a) by those persons or officials charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter or (b) a court of competent jurisdiction of the existence of reasonable grounds to believe that an animal located within the county/city is: 
(1)  An animal at large; 
(2)  A nuisance animal; 
(3)  A dangerous or vicious animal; 
(4)  A fighting or attack animal; 
(5)  A prohibited animal; 
(6)  A deprived animal; 
(7)  An unvaccinated small animal pet; or 
(8)  A diseased animal; 
The animal shall be seized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and confined in an animal shelter in a humane manner until the disposition thereof in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-92. - Seizure—Tranquilization or destruction in lieu of. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if any animal subject to seizure pursuant to the provisions of this chapter cannot be seized without serious danger to those attempting seizure of such animal, then any law enforcement or animal control officer, any employee of the board of health, any public health official and any other government official or employee acting within the scope of their authority is authorized to use tranquilization or tazer to facilitate seizure; or if necessary, to neutralize the animal when the destruction can be accomplished without endangering persons or other animals. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-93. - Seizure—Notice. 
Promptly upon the seizure of any animal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the owner, if known, shall be given notice of such seizure, as well as the conditions upon which the animal may be reclaimed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-94. - Seizure—Limitations. 
(a)  Any animal seized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as a nuisance animal may be reclaimed by its owner within 30 days from the date of seizure by paying fees established by animal control for the seizure, maintenance, and care of such animal. Should any animal be seized as a nuisance animal more than two times in any 12-month period, reclamation of such animal must be handled under the provisions of subparagraph (b) below. 
(b)  No animal seized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as a nuisance animal [seized more than two times in any 12-month period], potentially dangerous, or dangerous/vicious animal, prior to determination by the court of such status of the animal, may be reclaimed, except to the extent otherwise specifically directed by the court, prior to determination by the court of whether or not the animal in issue is a nuisance animal or dangerous/vicious animal. 
(c)  Additionally, no animal which has been determined by then court to be a nuisance animal [seized at least three times in any 12-month period] or dangerous/vicious animal may be reclaimed, except to the extent otherwise specifically directed by the court, prior to: 
(1)  Detention of the animal for such period of time, not exceeding 30 days in duration from the date of seizure, as may be directed by the court. 
(2)  Execution of a statement by the owner or custodian responsible therefore accepting and agreeing to comply with such conditions, limitations, prohibitions and/or restrictions, as may be imposed by the court relative to the animal including, but not limited to, temporary or permanent banishment of the animal from the county/city; and 
(3)  Satisfaction of all conditions for reclamation set forth in section 14-97. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-95. - Seizure—Prohibited animals. 
No animal which is a prohibited animal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and which has been seized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to reclamation by the owner or custodian thereof, such animal shall be conclusively deemed to be contraband and to have been abandoned and forfeited, and shall be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-96. - Seizure—Restricted. 
No animal seized pursuant to this chapter and with respect to which proceedings involving any alleged violation of O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-4, 4-11-10, sections 14-31 and 14-32, or any other statute, law or ordinance prohibiting the inhumane care or treatment of animals or requiring the humane care or treatment of animals are then pending may be reclaimed by the owner or any custodian thereof prior to the final disposition of such proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-97. - Seizure—Conditions of release. 
Conditions for the release to the owner or custodian of any animal seized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall include: 
(1)  Payment of all fees, charges, and costs attributed to the seizure, care and confinement of the animal; 
(2)  Payment of all costs and fines assessed by the court of the county/city relative to the animal; 
(3)  Satisfaction of all conditions, limitations, prohibitions and restrictions relative to the animal as may be imposed by court of the county/city; 
(4)  Execution of a statement by the owner or custodian responsible therefore that the conditions giving rise to the seizure of the animal have been remedied and/or will not be repeated; and 
(5)  Obtaining of any required rabies vaccination and required rabies tags and be neutered. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-98. - Forfeiture—Failure to reclaim. 
An animal seized pursuant to this chapter which is not reclaimed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by the owner or custodian within five days of the date of the giving of notice of seizure of the animal, or within five days following the date the animal is eligible for reclamation if the animal cannot be immediately reclaimed, shall be conclusively deemed to have been abandoned and forfeited by the owner and shall thereafter be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-99. - Forfeiture—Repeated violations. 
An animal seized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for the same reason or the same violation of this chapter on more than two occasions during any 12-month period of time shall be conclusively deemed to have been abandoned and forfeited by the owner and, following seizure for the third such violation within any 12-month period, shall be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-100. - Forfeiture—Inhumane treatment. 
The owner of an animal seized pursuant to this chapter and which is the subject of an alleged violation of O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-4, 4-11-10, sections 14-31, section 14-32, or any other statute, law or ordinance requiring humane treatment of animals, who shall plead guilty or nolo contendere to any such offense or who shall be found guilty thereof shall be conclusively deemed thereby to have abandoned and forfeited the animal with the animal thereafter being disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-101. - Forfeiture—Violation of conditions. 
(a)  The failure of the owner or custodian of any animal which has been seized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to have strictly and promptly complied with any condition, limitation, prohibition or restriction imposed with respect to the animal by the court, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be conclusively deemed to constitute abandonment and forfeiture of the animal with the animal thereafter being disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The failure of the owner/custodian of any animal which has been seized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to strictly comply with any condition, limitation, prohibition or restriction imposed with respect to the animal by the court or pursuant to the provisions of sections 14-94 or 14-97, shall be conclusively deemed to effectuate the abandonment and forfeiture of the animal by the owner and any custodian thereof with the animal thereafter being disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-102. - Surrender of unwanted animals. 
(a)  Any owner or custodian of any animal which is not wanted or who desires to dispose of any animal may do so by surrender of the same to the animal control officer of the county/city, his designees, or to the animal shelter designated therefore, subject to such limitations, rules, regulations and charges relative thereto as shall be adopted from time to time by the county. Limitations, rules, regulations and charges shall be subject to rejection or modification thereof by the board of commissioners within 30 days following submission by the county manager. 
(b)  All animals so surrendered shall be conclusively deemed abandoned and forfeited by the owner and shall be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-103. - Adoption. 
(a)  Except to the extent otherwise provided in this section, prior to any other disposition, all seized animals and all animals surrendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall first be offered for adoption pursuant to such policies, procedures, rules and regulations relative thereto as shall be adopted from time to time by the county manager. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any animal which, by virtue of its disposition, nature, breed or species, is deemed to be an inappropriate candidate for adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-104. - Neutering. 
All dogs and cats that are adopted pursuant to the provisions of section 14-103 shall first be neutered with all charges and fees therefore to be paid by the adopting owner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-105. - Disposal of abandoned and forfeited animals. 
All seized animals which have been abandoned and forfeited, have been surrendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be disposed of by adoption or other humane manner, preferably by euthanasia, pursuant to such policies, procedures, rules and regulations as shall be adopted from time to time by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Secs. 14-106—14-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARD OF ANIMAL CONTROL 

Sec. 14-201. - Creation. 
There is established by the Tift County Board of Commissioners, the Tifton City Council, the Omega City Council and the Ty Ty City Council an Animal Control Board of the County/City, [hereafter the "board"]. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-202. - Purpose of board. 
The purpose of the board shall be to hear and determine matters submitted to the board pursuant to the state dangerous dog control law (O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-20—4-8-29), and to determine such other matters as shall be provided from time to time by ordinance of the county/city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-203. - Membership. 
The board shall consist of three members and one alternate board member to serve when any board member cannot serve. The Board of Commissioners of Tift County shall appoint members of the board who shall be residents of the county and the city. The term of office of each member position of the board shall be on a calendar year basis for a three-year period with members subject to removal with or without cause by a majority vote of the Board of Commissioners of Tift County prior to the end of their term of office. The initial appointments of the board shall be accomplished in such manner as to provide for three-year staggered terms. Initial appointment for one member and alternate shall be for one year. Initial appointment for one board member shall be two years. The initial term for one board member shall be three years. Thereafter, all terms shall be for three years. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-204. - Compensation. 
Members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their services. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-205. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the board shall be held from time to time as necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and shall be held in accordance with the requirements of state law relative to open public meetings. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-206. - Disqualification of members. 
(a)  No member of the board shall participate in connection with any hearing or any decision involving classification or nonclassification pursuant to the provisions of the state dangerous dog control law with respect to any dog of which the member has a personal knowledge, other than as a member of the board, with such member being disqualified from participating with such matter. 
(b)  Should any member of the board have any personal or financial interest or relationship with respect to any animal, owner, matter or issue pending before the board or otherwise be closely associated with any animal, owner, matter or issue pending before the board, then such member should declare a conflict of interest in connection with such matter or issue. 
(c)  Any member of the board shall be entitled to raise a question of a potential disqualification of any other member who has not disqualified himself whereupon, following such consideration as the board shall deem appropriate, the board shall determine by the majority vote of those members (three members and one alternate) who are not subject to potential disqualification in connection with such matter or issue whether each such member is or is not disqualified. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-207. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The board shall hear and determine such issues and matters as it shall be authorized from time to time by law or by ordinance of the county/city, including specifically determination of matters provided in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24 and other provisions of the state dangerous dog control law as now enacted and subsequently amended from time to time. 
(b)  The board shall have such additional duties, responsibilities and powers as shall be specifically provided from time to time by ordinance adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-208. - Rules and regulations. 
The board shall recommend such rules, policies, procedures and regulations for the transaction of its business and for consideration and determination of issues and matters before the board as it deems necessary, subject to prior approval by the county manager. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-209. - Selection of chairman and vice-chairman. 
The board shall select from among its members a chairman who shall preside at meetings and hearing of the board and vice-chairman who shall preside at meetings and hearings of the board in the absence or disqualification of the chairman. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-210. - Secretary of board—Designation. 
The secretary of the board shall be such person or official as shall from time to time be designated by the board chairman to perform the functions of secretary of the board. 
Sec. 14-211. - Same—Duties. 
The secretary of the board or his designee shall: 
(1)  Prepare and conduct all correspondence of the board; 
(2)  Receive and file all correspondence to the board; 
(3)  Receive and file all requests for hearings before the board and other applications; 
(4)  Receive and file all transmittals to the board from the animal control officer and other public officials; 
(5)  Review and evaluate all requests, applications and filings to and with the board for compliance with the rules and regulations of the board and notify those filing the same of any noncompliance therewith; 
(6)  Following consultation with the chairman and to the extent necessary the other members of the board, schedule hearings and meetings of the board in accordance with applicable laws and ordinances and the rules and regulations of the board; 
(7)  Prepare and maintain a calendar and docket of proceedings before the board; 
(8)  Prepare and submit to members of the board at least 24 hours prior to a scheduled hearing an agenda therefore, as well as copies of all requests and other filings made in connection with each such proceedings; 
(9)  Determine all notices to be given in connection with proceedings before the board and cause such notices to be given to those entitled thereto; 
(10)  Attend all meetings and hearings of the board; 
(11)  Retain and maintain all evidence presented in connection with matters before the board; 
(12)  Prepare and maintain minutes of proceedings of the board indicating therein all significant information, matters and facts pertaining thereto. Including specifically all motions, votes and decisions of the board, together with the vote of each member upon each such motion, vote and decision including those absent, disqualified or failing to vote thereon with such other matters as shall be pertinent to the activities of the board; 
(13)  Retain and maintain all minutes, records, files and notices of the board; 
(14)  Maintain a minutes book of the board in which shall be recorded by date, owner and animal and record of the decision of the board; 
(15)  At hearings before the board attempt to obtain the name and address of all persons, who shall present any evidence, testimony or opinions, make any statement to the board or present any argument in connection with matters before the board; 
(16)  Obtain transcriptions of hearings before the board upon the direction of the chairman of the board and the approval of the county manager. 
(17)  Notify those persons entitled thereto of decisions of the board; and 
(18)  Perform such other duties with respect to the activities of the board as shall be directed from time to time by the board an approved by the county manager. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-212. - Authority. 
The board shall have no authority or power other than as specifically provided from time to time by law or by ordinance and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, shall have no authority, right or power to expend any funds, to direct the activities of any employee or official of the county/city, except solely the secretary of the board, if applicable, and then only to the extent specifically provided in this division, or to contract for or on behalf of either itself or the county/city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-213. - Legal assistance. 
The county/city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the board and shall render such legal assistance to the board as shall be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-214. - Transmittal of record. 
Promptly upon the filing of any request for a hearing pursuant to the provisions of the state dangerous dog control law, and in no event later than seven days thereafter, the animal control officer shall transmit to the secretary of the board all documents and records (or complete copies thereof certified by the animal control officer) of the animal control officer relative to the dog in issue and the owner of the dog in issue. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 14-215. - Repealer. 
The adoption of this ordinance shall serve to repeal all animal control ordinances in place at the time of adoption as well as any terms or provisions of other ordinances of the county and cities inconsistent with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-029, 10-12-04) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; noise control of construction or repairing of buildings, § 38-39; unsanitary, unsafe, and unfit buildings, dwellings and structures, § 38-216 et seq.; floods, ch. 42; planning and zoning, ch. 54; historic preservation, § 54-131 et seq.; sewers, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 66; construction sites and demolition sites, § 66-20; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, app. A; building, app. A, § 2-6; subdivisions, app. B. 
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Self-inspection by plumbers, utility contractors. 
The city is exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d) relating to the self-inspection of certain water and sewer lines, and such provisions shall not be applicable in the city. 
Sec. 18-2. - Fire limits. 
The fire limits of the city shall be as shown and represented on the official fire limits map on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 18-3—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

Sec. 18-31. - Adopted. 
(a)  Enumeration. The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall be enforced by the city: 
(1)  Standard Building Code; 
(2)  Standard Mechanical Code; 
(3)  Standard Gas Code; 
(4)  Standard Plumbing Code; 
(5)  National Electrical Code; 
(6)  Standard Fire Prevention Code; 
(7)  CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code; and 
(8)  Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings. 
(b)  Appendices. The following appendixes of the codes adopted in subsection (a) of this section are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this subsection: 
(1)  Standard Building Code: Appendix; 
(2)  Standard Mechanical Code: Appendix; 
(3)  Standard Gas Code: Appendix; 
(4)  Standard Plumbing Code: Appendix; 
(5)  Standard Fire Prevention Code: Appendix; 
(6)  National Electrical Code: Appendix; and 
(7)  CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code: Appendix. 
(c)  Additional codes. The latest edition of the following codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  Standard Housing Code, including Chapter 1, Administration and Appendix; 
(2)  Standard Swimming Pool Code, including Chapter 1, Administration; 
(3)  Standard Excavation and Grading Code, including Chapter 1, Administration; 
(4)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, including Chapter 1, Administration; 
(5)  Standard Existing Building Code, including Chapter 1, Administrative and Appendix; 
(6)  Standard Amusement Device Code, including Chapter 1, Administrative and Appendix; 
(7)  NFPA 101 Life Safety Code. 
(d)  The latest edition of the State of Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner's Minimum Fire Safety Standards with amendments are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this subsection. 
(e)  The provisions of Article 3, Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia entitled "The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings" are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this subsection. 
(Code 1974, §§ 5-1, 5-80, 5-100, 5-136, 5-141, 5-151, 5-161, 5-171, 5-181, 8-2, 9-16, 11-5, 13-1, 19-1; Ord. No. 2011-12, § I, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 2016-21, § I, 12-15-2016 ) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the amendments to the state safety fire commissioner's minimum fire safety standards are not set out at length herein but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25. 
Sec. 18-32. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the construction or erection of any building, whether commercial, business or residential unless such construction is accomplished in strict compliance with the various construction codes adopted by this article. 
Sec. 18-33. - Enforcement. 
When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in the various construction codes adopted by this article, the designated city official shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the enforcement of such codes. 
(Code 1974, § 5-1) 
Sec. 18-34. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 5-8; Ord. No. 2015-05 , 3-2-2015) 
Sec. 18-35. - Permit and inspection fees. 
Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1974, § 5-16) 
Sec. 18-36. - Public utilities. 
(a)  No public utility may furnish temporary electrical, water or gas connection, for construction purposes, unless the contractor has been issued a construction permit by the chief building official. 
(b)  No public utility may furnish permanent electrical, water or gas connections until the contractor has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the chief building official. 
(c)  No public utility may furnish power to a mobile home site until the owner has been issued either a building permit or a certificate of occupancy by the chief building official. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82. 
Sec. 18-37. - Water supply and sewage disposal facilities. 
(a)  Building permits will not be issued until plans for water supply and sewage disposal have been approved by the county board of health. 
(b)  Certificates of occupancy will not be issued until the completed water supply and sewage disposal facilities have been approved by the board of health. 
Cross reference— Sewers, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas, conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1. 
Secs. 18-38—18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

Sec. 18-61. - Purpose of article. 
It is the purpose of this article to: 
(1)  Require the use of ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings; 
(2)  Require the certification of plumbing fixtures regarding flow rates and serviceability standards; 
(3)  Promote compliance with state laws for the purpose of conserving water; 
(4)  Maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies; and 
(5)  Reduce wastewater flows. 
(Code 1974, § 26-200) 
Sec. 18-62. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial building means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Plumbing fixtures means any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators. 
Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
(Code 1974, § 26-201) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-63. - Standards for fixtures. 
No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 18-65. The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be April 1, 1992, and for commercial buildings the effective date shall be July 1, 1992. 
(1)  All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to in this section shall not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 
a.  Toilets: 1.6 gallons per flush. 
b.  Urinals: 1.0 gallon per flush. 
c.  Showerheads: 2.5 gallons per minute, at 60 psi gauge pressure. 
d.  Kitchen faucets: 2.5 gallons per minute. 
e.  Bathroom and lavatory faucets: 2.0 gallons per minute. 
(2)  The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)  The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.1M-1989 Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in subsection (1) of this section. 
(5)  All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for low consumption water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME A112.19.6-1990 Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended. 
(Code 1974, § 26-202) 
Sec. 18-64. - Product certification. 
The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards in section 18-63 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described in this section and providing, upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the city building official. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in section 8 of such standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
Sec. 18-65. - Exceptions. 
Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the building official. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building may be exempt from the standards of section 18-63 for the following: 
(1)  Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc. 
(2)  Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for the physically handicapped. 
(3)  Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in a correctional institution which may require more water for proper operation. 
(4)  Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes that cannot be accommodated by existing technology. 
(Code 1974, § 26-203) 
Sec. 18-66. - Enforcement; penalty for violation of article. 
Citations for violations of this article may be issued by the building official or his authorized representative. Any person violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, such person found guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1974, § 26-204) 
Secs. 18-67—18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOVING BUILDINGS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; public safety, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-91. - Danger declared. 
The moving of buildings, including houses, on and along the streets, alleys and lanes of the city is hereby declared to be a menace to the safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Sec. 18-92. - Jurisdiction. 
The moving of buildings, including houses and mobile homes, on and along the streets, alleys and lanes of the city is hereby placed under the jurisdiction and control of the city building inspector, the city code enforcement officer and/or such other city official as the city manager may designate from time to time, all collectively referred to in this article as the "appropriate city official." 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Sec. 18-93. - Permit required; application. 
(a)  Prior to the moving of any building, including houses, on or along the streets, alleys or lanes of the city, a written permit shall first be obtained from the appropriate city official. A written application shall be made by the mover, on forms provided by the city. 
(b)  At the time the written application is presented, all information called for and all signatures required by the application shall be filled in and executed. 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Sec. 18-94. - Denial of permit for large buildings. 
Following the presentation of the written application to the appropriate city official as set out in section 18-93, if, in the discretion of such city official, the building or house is too large to be moved, no permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Sec. 18-95. - Permit fee. 
A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall be charged for each permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Sec. 18-96. - Time limit for removal. 
Permits issued pursuant to section 18-93 shall be for a period of 60 calendar days from the date of the issuance thereof or for such longer period of time as shall be justified in the opinion of the appropriate city official under prevailing circumstances based upon evidence presented in connection with the application for such permit; provided that in no event shall the period of such permit exceed 120 calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Sec. 18-97. - Prohibition of moving without permit. 
(a)  No person or entity shall move any building of any nature across, on or along the streets, alleys or other public ways of the city: 
(1)  Except pursuant to permit issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of section 18-93; 
(2)  Except in accordance with the provisions of such permit; 
(3)  Except within the time limits of such permit. 
(b)  Each person or entity violating this section being subject to criminal prosecution and punishment therefor as with other violations of ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Sec. 18-98. - Conditions for moving permits. 
(a)  Each person and entity engaged in the removal of any building, the owner of such building and the owner of the premises upon which such building was located shall all be, both jointly and severally, liable and responsible for the performance of the following requirements and responsibilities in connection therewith: 
(1)  To cause all utilities to such building to be cutoff and capped prior to the removal of such building; 
(2)  Within the time limit of the removal permit, to cause to be removed from the premises all refuse, debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and other accumulations created or remaining following such removal as well as all foundations exposed above ground level following such removal; and 
(3)  Within the time limit of the removal permit, to cause all holes, excavations and other irregular grade levels exposed or resulting from such removal to be filled and graded level so as to provide effective surface drainage. 
(b)  Any person or entity who shall violate this section or any portion thereof shall be subject to criminal prosecution and punishment therefor as with other violations of ordinances of the city. 
(c)  Failure of any person or entity to comply with any of the provisions of this section within the time limit of the permit shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Sec. 18-99. - Conditions constituting nuisances. 
Conditions and circumstances existing or arising from the failure of those responsible therefor to comply with the provisions of section 18-98 shall constitute a nuisance which shall both authorize the abatement of such nuisance by the city as a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this Code with respect thereto and, in connection therewith, to the assessment of a lien against the premises from which such building is, or was to be, removed for the cost of the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Sec. 18-100. - Compliance with other ordinances. 
No removal permit issued pursuant to section 18-93 shall be issued nor any building moved except in compliance with the requirements of the historic preservation ordinance, the zoning ordinance, the building codes, and other ordinances of the city to the extent that such requirements are applicable thereto. 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Secs. 18-101—18-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RELOCATING BUILDING TO NEW SITE WITHIN CITY 

Sec. 18-116. - Permit. 
(a)  All buildings for which a moving permit has been obtained pursuant to section 18-93 shall require a separate relocation permit if that building is to be relocated upon any property located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The issuance of a relocation permit is hereby placed under the jurisdiction and control of the city building inspector, city code enforcement officer and/or such other city official as the city manager may designate from time to time, all collectively referred to in this article as the "appropriate city official." 
(c)  Prior to obtaining a relocation permit, such permit applicant shall obtain a moving permit pursuant to section 18-93 and shall submit to the appropriate city official a site plan, an improvement plan, and a copy of the recorded deed and plat showing the legal description of the real property upon which the building is to be relocated and the name of the owner of such real property. 
(d)  Such relocation permit shall provide therein reference to the penalties set forth in subsection 18-118(b). 
(e)  Both the owner of the building and the owner of the real property shall sign the permit evidencing that each has received a copy thereof and has had all questions concerning procedures and penalties related to such permit answered to his satisfaction. 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Sec. 18-117. - Compliance with building codes; notices. 
(a)  When a relocation permit is issued, the appropriate city official shall provide written notice to the owner of the building and to the owner of the real property to which the building is to be relocated that the building: 
(1)  Must meet requirements of the Standard Building Code; and 
(2)  In its current condition (because of moving, no utilities attached, etc.) the building is subject to the requirements of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(b)  Relocation permits issued pursuant to section 18-116 shall be for a period of 90 calendar days from the date of issuance thereof or for such longer period of time as shall be justified based upon the evidence submitted by the permit holder to the appropriate city official; provided that in no event shall the period of such permit exceed 180 calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Sec. 18-118. - Fees and penalties. 
(a)  The holder of the relocation permit, the owner of the building, or the owner of the real property upon which the building is being relocated shall pay to the city all inspection fees for the rebuilding of the building at the new location, plus one-half of the regular building permit fee of the city had the building been a new building of the same size, construction and type as the building relocated. 
(b)  Failure to bring a building subject to a relocation permit issued pursuant to section 18-116 within the requirements of the Standard Building Code and the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code by the date the permit expires shall result in the requirement that such building be returned to its original location prior to the issuance of such permit, with the same moving permit issued pursuant to section 18-93 being employed. If such substandard building has not been removed within ten calendar days following the expiration of the relocation permit, the city shall be authorized to remove the structure or destroy the structure and assess the total cost thereof, including the cleanup and repair provisions of section 18-98, against the building owner and the real property owner to include, without limitation thereto, placing a lien upon such building and real property for the reimbursement of such costs to the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 5-5-1997) 
Secs. 18-119—18-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEMOLITION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38. 

Sec. 18-141. - Permit required. 
No person or entity shall engage in the demolition of any building located within the city without obtaining a permit therefor from the building inspector pursuant to and in accordance with the requirements of the Southern Standard Code Congress International, Inc., Standard Building Code which is then in effect within the city and the payment of the fee for such permit. 
(Ord. No. 90-02, § 1, 1-8-1990) 
Sec. 18-142. - Definition of demolition. 
As used in this article the term "demolition" shall mean the act of demolishing or raising of any building or any portion thereof to ground level. 
(Ord. No. 90-02, § 1, 1-8-1990) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-143. - Standards. 
Demolition of buildings pursuant to permits required under section 18-141 shall be accomplished in accordance with the standards for demolition pursuant to the provisions of the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., Standard Building Code then in effect in the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-02, § 1, 1-8-1990) 
Sec. 18-144. - Time limit. 
Permits issued pursuant to section 18-141 shall be for a specific period of time as set forth in such permit as determined by the building inspector considering prevailing circumstances based upon evidence presented in connection with the application for such permit; provided that in no event shall the period of such permit exceed 180 calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 90-02, § 1, 1-8-1990) 
Sec. 18-145. - Work without permit prohibited. 
No person or entity shall engage in the demolition of any building or any portion thereof: 
(1)  Except pursuant to a permit issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of section 18-141; 
(2)  Except in accordance with the provisions of such demolition permit; and 
(3)  Except within the time limits of such demolition permit; with each person and entity violating this section or any portion hereof being subject to criminal prosecution and punishment therefor as with other violations of ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-02, § 1, 1-8-1990) 
Sec. 18-146. - Permit conditions. 
(a)  Each person and entity performing any demolition of any building or portion thereof, the owner of such building and the owner of the premises upon which such building is located shall all be, both jointly and severally, liable and responsible for the performance of the following requirements and responsibilities in connection with such demolition: 
(1)  To cause all utilities to that portion of the building which is to be the subject of demolition to be cut off and capped prior to the commencement of demolition; 
(2)  Within the time limit of the demolition permit to remove from the premises all refuse, debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and other accumulations created or remaining following such demolition as well as all foundations exposed above ground level following such demolition; and 
(3)  Within the time limit of the demolition permit to cause all holes, excavations and other irregular grade levels exposed or resulting from such demolition to be filled and graded level so as to provide effective surface drainage. 
(b)  Any person or entity who shall violate this section or any portion hereof shall be subject to criminal prosecution and punishment therefor as with other violations of ordinances of the city. 
(c)  Failure of any person or entity to comply with any of the provisions of this section within the time limit of the demolition permit therefor shall subject all and each such person and entity to a penalty in the amount of $50.00 per day per person and per entity for each day that such condition shall exist with each such day and each such condition constituting a separate violation and a separate obligation with respect to the requirements and responsibilities contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-02, § 1, 1-8-1990) 
Sec. 18-147. - Conditions constituting nuisances. 
Conditions and circumstances existing or arising from the failure of those responsible therefor to comply with the provisions of section 18-146 shall constitute a nuisance which shall both authorize the abatement of such nuisance by the city as a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this Code with respect thereto and, in connection therewith, to the assessment of a lien against the premises from which such building or portion thereof is, or was to be, demolished for the cost of the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 90-02, § 1, 1-8-90) 
Sec. 18-148. - Compliance with other ordinances. 
No demolition permit shall be issued nor any building demolished except in compliance with the requirements of the historic preservation ordinance, the zoning ordinance, the building codes, and other ordinances of the city to the extent that such requirements are applicable thereto. 
(Ord. No. 90-02, § 1, 1-8-90) 
Secs. 18-149—18-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Sewers, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 82. 

Sec. 18-171. - When required. 
Stormwater management plans shall be required for any project involving single-family attached units, unit developments, churches, multifamily developments, commercial developments, industrial developments, and planned developments. 
(Ord. No. 98-21, § 5-47, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 18-172. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Stormwater management plans shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval. These plans shall comply with all applicable ordinances of the city as well as all other laws and regulations. 
(b)  The city engineer and/or zoning enforcement officer may require that the plans be certified by a state-registered civil engineer to ensure compliance with all regulations. 
(Ord. No. 98-21, § 5-47(1), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 18-173. - Permit. 
A stormwater management plan approved by the city engineer shall constitute a permit that will satisfy the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-21, § 5-47(3), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 18-174. - Standards. 
(a)  A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required when the proposed development shall increase the peak rate of runoff by more than one percent for a 25-year frequency storm. 
(b)  Should the peak rate of stormwater runoff from the site exceed the permitted peak release rate, then on-site retention or detention shall be required. All retention or detention facilities shall be designed for all intensities up to and including the 25-year frequency for all durations of rainfall. The peak runoff rate from the site after development shall not be greater than the permitted peak release rate. 
(c)  The live retention or detention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the 25-year frequency rainfall, as published by the National Weather Service for the affected site. The retention or detention volume required shall be that necessary to handle the runoff of the 25-year rainfall for any and all durations from the proposed development, less than that volume discharged during the same duration at the approved release rate as specified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-21, § 5-47(2), 6-1-1998) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements, ch. 10; emergency services, ch. 34; taxation, ch. 74; insurance businesses, § 74-101 et seq.; hotel occupancy tax, § 74-161 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; home occupation, app. A, § 2-21; licensed day care center, app. A, § 2-24A; nightclub (lounge), app. A, § 2-29C; radio and television stations, app. A, § 2-35A; radio and television studios, app. A, § 2-35B. 
State Law reference— Limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(5); evidence of state license as prerequisite to local business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; exemption from taxation of agricultural products and livestock raised in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAWNSHOPS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-31. - Purposes. 
In the interest of public safety and general welfare, there is determined to be a need for an ordinance to reasonably regulate the pawnshop business in an effort to timely recover stolen property and to minimize the wrongful transfer and sale of stolen property. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(a), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 22-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this Code. 
Pledged goods means tangible personal property other than chooses in action, securities or printed evidences of indebtedness, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his business. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(b), 6-1-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-33. - Duration of pawn transactions. 
All pawn transactions shall be for 30-day periods but may be extended or continued for additional 30-day periods. In no event shall a pawn transaction be for less than 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(c), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 22-34. - Duration of purchase transactions. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to resell any item purchased in the pawn business until ten business days have elapsed following the date of purchase. The reason for this mandatory waiting period is to allow the police department opportunity to inspect and recover items presented by sellers as owned but which are in fact stolen. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(c), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 22-35. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker and/or any clerk, agent, or employee of such pawnbroker to receive in pawn, trade, or to buy from minors any pledged or purchased goods. The term "minor," for the purpose of this section, means any individual who has not yet reached the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(c), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 22-36. - Inspection of inventory. 
In addition to the right of duly authorized law enforcement officers to inspect the permanent record book at times and places as set forth in this article, duly authorized law enforcement officers shall also have the right to inspect the inventory of the pawnbroker's business during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(c), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 22-37. - Daily reports to police department. 
In addition to the right of inspection of the permanent record book by authorized law enforcement officers as set forth in this article, each pawnbroker shall also be required to turn in to the police department a legible report typed or written in ink (or in the alternative, a computer disc compatible with the police department's computer system) once per day following every day that the pawnbroker is open for business. Failure to timely report or failure to report legibly will subject the offending pawnbroker to the following range of disciplinary actions: written warning for the first and second offenses; prosecution in the municipal court with a fine not to exceed $500.00 for the third and fourth offenses; recommendation to city council that license to operate business be suspended or revoked for fifth and successive offenses. Each such offense will be removed from the pawnbroker's record of offenses maintained at the police department on the second anniversary of such offense; therefore, disciplinary action will be taken based upon the number of offenses that have occurred within the past two years. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(c), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 22-38. - Operation with other businesses. 
The business license issued for a specific location where the business of pawnbrokering occurs shall be limited solely to such pawnbroker business. There shall not be issued for the same location a separate and independent business license to conduct any other type of buying, selling or swapping of merchandise. This is made necessary in the best interest of the safety and welfare of the public so as to minimize the possibility of commingling or transferring of stolen property in and through a separate business operation at the same location. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(c), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 22-39. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker and any clerk, agent or employee of such pawnbroker to: 
(1)  Fail to make an entry of any material matter in his permanent record book. 
(2)  Make any false entry in his permanent record book. 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from his place of business such permanent record book. 
(4)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect his permanent record book or any goods in his possession during the ordinary hours of business or any reasonable time. 
(5)  Fail to maintain a record of each pawn or purchase transaction for at least four years. 
(6)  Fail to report to the police department on the daily report any item that is or later proves to be stolen will be charged with theft by receiving stolen property. The license to operate the pawn business of such pawnbroker will be reviewed by city council for possible suspension or revocation. 
(7)  Fail to report to the police department on the daily report any item that is not stolen. The license to operate the pawn business will be reviewed by city council for possible suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(c), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 22-40. - Exception for motor vehicle titles. 
This section shall likewise apply to transactions involving pawning of motor vehicle titles except for the requirement of daily reporting to the police department. The reason for this exception, in line with the purpose of this section, is that the state issues a certificate of title on each motor vehicle which dramatically reduces the ability to transfer title to stolen vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(c), 6-1-1998) 
Secs. 22-41—22-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMANENT RECORDS 

Sec. 22-56. - Required, content. 
Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each loan, purchase, or sale: 
(1)  The date of the transaction; 
(2)  The name of the person conducting the transaction; 
(3)  The name, age, and address of the customer; a description of the general appearance of the customer; and, the distinctive number from the customer's driver's license or other similar identification card; 
(4)  An identification and description of the pledged or purchased goods, including, if reasonably available, the serial, model, or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon (without limiting the generality of the provisions of this subsection, with regard to jewelry it shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to identify each jewelry item by brand, type, length, size, or any other identifying phrase appropriate to that item and shall not use in such report the phrase "scrap jewelry"); 
(5)  The number of the receipt or pawn ticket; 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned; 
(7)  If payment is made by check, the number of the check issued for the purchase price or loan; 
(8)  The maturity date of the transaction; and 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(c), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 22-57. - Format. 
The permanent records required to be kept by each pawnbroker can be typed or handwritten if such is legible or, in the alternative, can be entered on a computer disc compatible with the computer system used by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(c), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 22-58. - Manner of recording entry; correction; inspection. 
The permanent records required by this division shall be maintained in a permanent record book or in a permanent set of computer discs so long as there is a backup system. Entries shall appear in ink and shall be in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alternations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The permanent record book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the city during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(c), 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 22-59. - Maintenance. 
The record of each pawn or purchase transaction provided for in this section shall be maintained for a period of not less than four years. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 16-34(c), 6-1-1998) 
Secs. 22-60—22-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USED MERCHANDISE 

Sec. 22-81. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all stores, swap shops, pawn shops, and businesses dealing, buying, selling, swapping, and any form of pawning of used merchandise, furniture, machinery, appliances, utensils or firearms, whether such sales, trades, purchases and swaps are retail, wholesale, or by any pawning. Specifically excluded are businesses dealing in buying or selling new merchandise. Isolated transactions between persons not engaged in business are not covered by the terms of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 16-34(a), (c)) 
Sec. 22-82. - Activity declared in public interest. 
Engaging in the business of buying, selling, swapping, or pawning used merchandise, furniture, machinery, appliances, utensils or firearms within the corporate limits of the city is hereby declared to be affected with the public interest due to the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. 
(Code 1974, § 16-34(b)) 
Sec. 22-83. - Dealing with minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any business to receive in pawn, trade or to buy from minors used merchandise, furniture, machinery, appliances, utensils or firearms. A minor for the purpose of this section is any individual who has not reached the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1974, § 16-34(d)) 
Sec. 22-84. - Reports of purchases. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any business covered by this section to buy, receive in pawn or receive in a swap any used merchandise, furniture, machinery, appliances, utensils or firearms without complying with the following regulations: 
(1)  At the time of the sale, pawn or swap there shall be obtained from the seller, on a written form which the seller must sign, the following information: seller's name, residence address, date of birth, place of employment and identification of the item sold which will include the kind, serial number and manufacturer of the item. 
(2)  The information set out in subsection (1) of this section shall be placed upon a written form which the seller shall sign, and this shall be made in duplicate. On this form and below the signature of the seller the name of the business and the location shall be shown along with the date and hour of the transaction and following this, the manager or person in charge of the business shall sign his name. 
(3)  The forms set forth in subsection (2) of this section shall be provided by the police department of the city to the business. The original signed form showing the information called for shall be delivered by the business to the police department on the following day after the transaction is completed, such delivery to be made by hand or by placing the original in the United States mail addressed to the police department with adequate postage thereon. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person, business, association, partnership or corporation, pawn shop or firm required by subsection (1) of this section to fail to obtain the information required in subsection (1) or fail to provide such information to the police department as required by subsection (3) of this section. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person selling, pawning or swapping as set forth in subsection (1) of this section to give false information to the seller or to answer falsely any of the information required in subsection (1). 
(Code 1974, § 16-34(e)) 
Sec. 22-85. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this section shall be construed as an offense against the city and shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. Any business who shall be convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to having its business license suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1974, § 16-34(f)) 
Secs. 22-86—22-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUYERS OF PRECIOUS METALS 

Sec. 22-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gold or silver buyer means any person engaged in the business of purchasing or otherwise dealing in gold or silver or other precious metals of any kind or description, from members of the general public within the corporate limits of the city. Included in this definition are buyers of secondhand jewelry and gems. Isolated transactions between persons not engaged in the business are not covered by the terms of this article. 
Fixed place of business means an office or other fixed facility, that is, a place, site, structure, or other similar facility, used exclusively for business, including, but not limited to administrative or management activities, on a regular and continuing basis through which an individual or business entity engages in a trade or business for which an occupational license is currently issued. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-142. - Legislative findings. 
Engaging in the business of buying gold, silver, other precious metals; precious gems; or jewelry within the corporate limits of the city is hereby declared to be affected with the public interest because of the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-143. - Compliance with article required. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful, and an offense punishable as provided in section 1-11 of this Code, to engage in the business of buying precious metals, precious gems or jewelry from members of the general public within the corporate limits of the city without first complying with the registration and other provisions of this article and obtaining a license as herein provided. Each day such offense occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-144. - Advertising. 
No person, partnership, corporation or other entity covered by this article shall advertise, either in the news media, or portable signs, or in any other manner, the buying, selling or trading of, or otherwise dealing in, precious metals, precious gems or jewelry until they have complied with the provisions of this article. The violation of this section shall be unlawful and an offense punishable as provided in section 1-11 of this Code, and each day such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-145. - Registration. 
(a)  Required. All persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities engaging in the business of buying precious metals, precious gems or jewelry shall register with the chief of police on a form to be provided by the chief of police. 
(b)  Information. All applicants for registration under the provisions of this article shall furnish, in addition to such other information as the chief of police shall require, the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant. 
(2)  Permanent address and local address of the applicant. 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each member of the partnership. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of each stockholder, each officer and each director of the corporation. 
(5)  The name and address of each employee of the applicant who is actively engaged in the performance of such services. 
(6)  If a resident, the length of time the applicant has been a resident of the state and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-146. - Effect of criminal conviction. 
No person shall engage in the business or activity for which the license is required under this article, or shall be a member of a partnership, or an officer, stockholder or director in a corporation engaged in such business who shall have been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-147. - Bond required. 
Every person, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in the business of buying precious metals, precious gems or jewelry shall file with the chief of police for the city a surety bond executed by such applicant secured by a corporate surety company, authorized to do business in the state, in an amount not less than $10,000.00 conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this article, and upon the prompt report of all suspicious persons dealing with the obligor, and of stolen property or property suspected of being stolen, and for the returning to the chief of police or to the true and lawful owner of any such property or making payment therefor. The bond shall be taken in the name of the city, and the city or any person injured by the breach of said bond may bring an action on said bond in its or his own name to recover damages therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-148. - Investigation of applicant. 
Within five days after receipt of an application as provided for herein, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and his proposed operation. If upon investigation the chief of police shall find that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, and has met all of the requirements of this article, he shall approve the issuance of a license to the applicant. The license shall be issued by the city, and the occupation tax provided by the occupation tax ordinance shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-149. - Notice to law enforcement officials. 
If the license required by the provisions of this article is approved, the applicant shall file a notice with all law enforcement agencies of the county and city within 15 days after approval. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-150. - Register. 
Every licensee under this article shall keep a register upon which the licensee shall record the name, address, Social Security number or drivers license number, a brief description of the person, and other identification, of every person from whom the licensee purchases any precious metals, precious gems or jewelry, together with the date and time of day of said purchase; a description of each article purchased, including the name, make and serial or other identifying number or mark; and the amount paid therefor. Such entry shall be made at the time the transaction occurs. Before buying any precious metals, precious gems or jewelry, the licensee shall require positive identification from the seller, either from a driver's license or other document. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-151. - Reports to police. 
Each licensee under this article shall file daily written reports with the chief of police, showing the name and description of the persons from whom precious metals, precious gems or jewelry were purchased by the licensee during the preceding 24 hours, and a description in detail of the nature, type and quantity of the precious metals, precious gems or jewelry. It is hereby made the duty of the chief of police to obtain such reports promptly each day. It shall be unlawful and an offense punishable as provided in section 1-11 of this Code of the city for any licensee to fail or refuse to make such daily report in the manner described by this section, and such failure shall be a ground for the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-152. - Elapsed time before disposal. 
No articles of personal property made of gold, silver or other precious metals or precious gems or jewelry shall be sold, melted, altered or otherwise disposed of by any secondhand dealer until ten days have elapsed from the time the chief of police has been given a copy or transcript of the register in which such articles of personal property made of gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals or gems or jewelry are entered, and said articles shall not be transferred from within the city limits during said ten-day period of time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-153. - Licenses nontransferable. 
Licenses issued under this article shall not be transferred. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-154. - Disposition of stolen items. 
In the event it is determined that any item covered by this article is the subject of any theft, embezzlement or other crime, the licensee shall surrender same upon demand to the owner or the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-155. - Purchasing from minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 1-11 of this Code for any person, partnership, corporation or other entity engaged in the business of buying precious metals, precious gems or jewelry to purchase any of said items from a person less than 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-156. - Revocation of license. 
Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the city manager upon recommendation of the chief of police for the violation of or the failure to comply with any provision of this article or for the violation of any provision of law, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard has been given the licensee. The city manager shall immediately notify any licensee of such suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-157. - Location restrictions. 
Every gold or silver buyer shall have at least one fixed place of business within the corporate limits of the city and all items stored pursuant to section 22-152 shall be stored at said fixed place of business. A gold or silver buyer may temporarily operate at a location other than their fixed place of business so long as the temporary location is properly zoned and the owner, occupier, or other person or entity entitled to the use of the location and the gold or silver buyer are licensed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-158. - Accurate weight scales. 
Every gold or silver buyer that purchases by weight shall utilize for such purchases a weight scale certified as accurate by the weights and measures section of the office of the commissioner of the state department of agriculture or other appropriate governmental entity. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, 7-12-2010) 
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 

Sec. 22-160. - Findings and intent. 
The intent of the city council in enacting this article is to regulate the sale of goods and services by soliciting at residences in the city, to the end that criminal activity in the city and abusive techniques utilized by any such solicitors which adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare in the city will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of door-to-door solicitation, nor is it an attempt to adversely affect interstate commerce. Instead, this article is intended to balance competing interest, reduce criminal activity and protect city residents from abusive sales techniques versus the conduct of proper commercial sales activity. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Canvasser, peddler, or solicitor means any person who sells or solicits for sale in the city any new or used goods, wares, merchandise, services or other things of value and goes about from place to place within the city selling or offering for sale any of such things to either merchants or customers shall be deemed a peddler or solicitor. Excluded from this definition are persons who sell or solicit for sale goods, wares or merchandise, or other things of value from house to house for charitable organizations or purposes or on behalf of religious organizations, political organizations and political candidates. 
Charitable organization means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary (of, relating to, or supported by charity or alms) corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint-stock company, trust, governmental agency or entity, unincorporated organization or individual who solicits or obtains contributions solicited from, or conducts the sale of merchandise to, the general public, which contributions are used for charitable purposes or governmental purposes. 
Charitable purpose means any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose for religion, health, education, social welfare, arts and humanities, environment, civic or public interest. 
Door-to-door salesperson means any person who shall solicit orders on behalf of a firm, corporation, company, association, partnership or individual of any goods, wares or merchandise, or other things of value from house to house shall be deemed a door-to-door salesperson. Any person who obtains orders for merchandise or other things of value shall be deemed a door-to-door salesperson. Excluded from this definition are persons who solicit orders for goods, wares or merchandise, or other things of value from house to house for charitable organizations or purposes or on behalf of religious organizations, political organizations and political candidates. 
Transient merchant means any person, firm, or corporation, as principal or agent, or both, which is not a regular retail or wholesale merchant with a permanent place of business in Tift County, Georgia, but rather one who displays samples, model goods, wares, or merchandise in any lot, building, room, or structure of any kind, whether fixed or mobile, for the purpose of securing orders for the retail sale of such items or items of like kind or quality for immediate or future delivery. The term "transient merchant" shall not include any person, firm, or corporation which: 
(1)  Sells agriculture or forestry products; 
(2)  Makes house-to-house or personal calls for the purpose of displaying samples or taking orders for shipment directly from a manufacturer; 
(3)  Conducts business at any industry or association trade show; or 
(4)  Sells items at a rummage, garage, antique, or similar sale when such person, firm, or corporation is a resident of this state or has a permanent place of business within this state and such sale is not part of the regular business activity of such person, firm, or corporation or when the net proceeds of such sale are to be used for charitable purposes. 
Vehicle means motorized conveyance fully functioning and moving under its own power. A vehicle shall include a trailer or anything pulled by the vehicle. Vehicles shall not be in excess of 20 feet in length, ten feet in width, and eight feet in height. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-162. - License required; application. 
(a)  All persons, firms, companies, corporations or other entities engaging or offering to engage in business as a canvasser, solicitor, peddler or transient merchant shall file an application in the required form, and obtain a solicitor's license for such activity from the city clerk. 
(b)  The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Social Security number; 
(4)  Copy of photo identification; 
(5)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer; 
(6)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's supervisor; 
(7)  Brief description of products or services to be sold; 
(8)  Location(s) where the goods, merchandise or other property will be offered for sale; 
(9)  Description of motor vehicles to be used by the applicant in conducting the solicitation; and 
(10)  Criminal history. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-163. - Investigation. 
(a)  A review of criminal history records is required prior to the issuance of a solicitor's license. In addition to a review of criminal history, the applicant must provide the following items: 
(1)  Two forms of positive identification (only official United States Government issued pictured identification accepted; e.g., a valid driver's license, military ID card or valid state ID car). 
(2)  Fingerprints may be required on occasion for positive identification. 
(b)  The city shall make an investigation, including, but not limited to, an investigation of the police record and moral character of the applicant. The city clerk shall furnish the application to the police chief. The police chief shall furnish a report to the city clerk of the criminal history record, if any, of the applicant. 
(c)  The criminal history record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of criminal history records, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-164. - Disqualification. 
(a)  No solicitor's license shall be issued to any applicant who provides any false or misleading information in connection with the application for the license required by this article. 
(b)  No solicitor's license shall be granted to any person under the age of 18 or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession or sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, or attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such license and has been released from parole or probation. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-165. - Denial. 
(a)  If, as a result of the investigation authorized by this article, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the police chief shall endorse on such application his disapproval and the reasons for such disapproval, and return the application to the city clerk who will notify the applicant that the application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(b)  No application for a solicitor's license shall be received or acted upon if the applicant has submitted the same or similar application for a solicitor's license within the preceding 12 months which was denied. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-166. - Approval; issuance. 
If, as a result of the investigation authorized by this article, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found to be satisfactory, the police chief shall endorse on such application his approval and reasons for such approval, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of regulatory fees as established by resolution of the city council, issue a solicitor's license. A solicitor's license shall contain the name, address, physical description and organizational affiliation of the licensee; a description of the solicitation activity to be engaged in; an expiration date; and the signature and seal of the city clerk. The city clerk shall keep a record of all solicitors' licenses issued. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-167. - Duration; required fees prescribed. 
A solicitor's license shall be issued for up to one month in duration upon payment of the following fees: each registrant shall pay to the city clerk an administration fee of $75.00 together with a registration fee as follows: 
(1)  One-day license ..... $11.00 
(2)  One-week license ..... $22.00 
(3)  One-month license ..... $55.00 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-168. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The license issued to any solicitor charged with any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sex crime, theft or violence against person or property, criminal solicitation to commit any of these offenses, or violation of this or any other city ordinance shall be deemed suspended and subject to seizure from the time of lawful arrest by the police department. Such suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is convicted or acquitted, or until the charge is dismissed, "dead-docketed," "nolle prossed," or "no-billed." It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to present the city clerk with proof that the arrest which lead to the suspension was dismissed, "dead-docketed," "nolle prossed," or "no-billed." Upon representation of proof of such dispositions, the solicitor's license will be reinstated and will be valid until the date of the original expiration. 
(b)  The license of any solicitor who is convicted, has entered a plea of guilty, or has received a nolo contendere to a felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sex crime, theft or violence against person or property, or criminal solicitation to commit any of these offenses, shall be deemed revoked and subject to seizure by the chief of police or his designee from the time of such conviction, guilty or nolo contendere sentencing. 
(c)  The license of any solicitor who is convicted, has entered a plea of guilty or received a nolo contendere sentencing for any violation of this article shall be deemed revoked and subject to seizure by the chief of police or his designee from the time of such conviction, guilty or nolo contendere sentencing. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-169. - Applicability of provisions; exceptions. 
Except for the regulations set forth in section 22-171, nothing in this article shall apply to the following: 
(1)  Officers or employees in the city, county, state or federal governments or the school system, or any subdivisions thereof, when on official business; 
(2)  Any local non-profit organization such as boy scouts, civic clubs, religious, charitable, political, or educational organizations and the like, when the membership of such club or organization does the soliciting itself; but it shall apply when the soliciting is done by a paid solicitor or by a solicitor on contract with an individual with only a percentage or portion of any sales or collections to go to the benefit of such non-profit club or organization. 
(3)  Any person selling only agricultural or forestry products or selling food for immediate consumption; 
(4)  Any person who conducts business at any industry or association trade show; 
(5)  Any person selling items at a rummage, garage, antique or similar sale when such person, firm, corporation or other legal entity is a resident of this state or has a permanent place of business within this state and such sale is not part of the regular business activity of such person, firm, corporation or legal entity or when the net proceeds of such sale are to be used for charitable purposes; 
(6)  Any person selling such items at a city-sponsored festival or event, provided that such person has obtained the necessary approvals from the city and other regulatory agencies to operate at said festival or event. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-170. - Regulations for solicitors and peddlers; operating on public lands or from vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall stand on or adjacent to a street, road, or highway or on rights-of-way within the city limits for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall locate and/or conduct a business from a mobile vehicle or upon the public sidewalks, streets, alleys, walkways, parks, parking lots, rights-of-way, or other public lands of the city or upon state rights-of-way within the city limits. 
(c)  The provisions of the city's land development code, pertaining to outside displays, shall be applicable to any solicitor, or peddler. 
(d)  No solicitor, peddler, or door-to-door salesperson shall: 
(1)  Call at residences, offices or businesses clearly displaying a sign stating "No Solicitors Or Peddlers Invited," "No Solicitation," or using similar language; 
(2)  Engage in door-to-door soliciting at residences on Sundays or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.; 
(3)  Enter any private dwelling without the consent of the owner or occupant, or to remain there after being requested or directed to leave; 
(4)  Fail to register and carry or produce for inspection a permit when required under this chapter; 
(5)  Make any false or deceptive statement on any registration hereunder. 
(e)  A person who is soliciting or selling on behalf of a non-profit organization shall be required to verify the nonprofit status of such organization. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-171. - Exemption of disabled or indigent veterans of armed forces. 
(a)  Scope of exemption. It shall be lawful for any disabled or indigent veteran of the armed forces, such veteran is defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, to peddle without obtaining a permit for the privilege of so doing, and a certificate from the probate court of the county stating the fact of his being such disabled or indigent veteran shall be sufficient proof thereof; provided, that this section shall not authorize peddling ardent spirits. The privileges hereby granted shall not be transferred to or used by any other person. 
(b)  Effect of exemption. All such persons are authorized to peddle in the city without first obtaining a license therefore from the city and without being subject to any tax therefore. 
(c)  Affidavit required. Before any such person shall avail himself of the privilege conferred by this section, he shall go before the judge of the probate court of the county and make oath in writing that he served as a soldier and that the business which he proposes to carry on (stating what he proposes to peddle) is his own, and that he will not sell or offer to sell any article for another, directly or indirectly. 
(d)  Issuance of certificate. Upon making and filing the affidavit provided for in subsection (a), the judge of the probate court shall issue a certificate stating that such person has taken the oath prescribed, which certificate shall authorize such person making such affidavit and holding such certificate to peddle in the city without procuring a license or being subject to any tax therefore. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-172. - Obstruction of street, highway or sidewalk prohibited. 
No canvasser, solicitor, peddler or transient merchant authorized to engage in any business in the city shall, in carrying on such business, obstruct the whole or any part of any sidewalk, street or highway of the city, and any such person peddling in the city or using the streets or sidewalks in the city for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, medicines or merchandise of any kind, shall continually move from place to place in the city, and shall not in the conduct or carrying on of such business obstruct the whole or any part of any sidewalk, street, or highway in the city. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-173. - Unlawful or prohibited activities. 
The following are prohibited practices for solicitors and any violation shall constitute grounds for suspension, revocation or denial of renewal of license, and/or arrest: 
(1)  Solicit on Sunday, or between the hours 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(2)  Solicit at any location where a sign is posted at or near the main entrance or driveway to the residence or business prohibiting such activity. 
(3)  Using any entrance, or part of the building, other than the main entrance to the residence or business. 
(4)  Entering a residence except at the express invitation of the occupant. 
(5)  Failure of the solicitor to inform the occupant in plain terms of the solicitor's identity and the purpose of the call. 
(6)  Making more than one solicitation call at the same location within any consecutive 14-day period, unless invited back by the occupant. 
(7)  The solicitor to represent that they are participating in any contest, game or other competitive endeavor, or that they are offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game or endeavor. 
(8)  The solicitor to use vulgar, insulting or threatening language in the course of any solicitation. 
(9)  The solicitor to remain upon the property of the residence or business after the occupant has verbally indicated that they do not wish to make a purchase. For the purpose of this article, a solicitation shall be deemed to continue until the solicitor has left the property of the residence or business. 
(10)  Soliciting anyone under the age of 18 years. 
(11)  Failure of solicitor to have a valid license or refuse any person's request to examine same. 
(12)  For more than two solicitors to engage in solicitation upon any residence or business at the same time for the same goods or services. 
(13)  Solicitor to violate any of the provisions of this article, or to violate any other city ordinance while engaging in any solicitation activity. 
(14)  Solicitor to lend, rent or sell their license to another, or to solicit using the license of another. 
(15)  Solicitor to alter or deface their license or the license of another. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 22-174. - Violations; enforcement. 
Any violations of the provisions in this chapter shall subject the license or permit to revocation. In addition, any person violating this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the city police department or the city code enforcement staff. 
( Ord. No. 2014-20, § I , 9-8-2014) 
Secs. 22-175—22-180. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; disposition of unclaimed dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-21 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.; criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OAKRIDGE CEMETERY 

Sec. 26-31. - Purpose, applicability. 
For the mutual protection of every lot purchaser in the Oakridge Cemetery, this article is hereby adopted as the rules and regulations of the Oakridge Cemetery, and all property owners and visitors within the cemetery and all lots hereafter to be sold in the cemetery, shall be subject to the rules and regulations formulated and adopted by the city manager and council and set forth in this article; and subject, further, to such other additional rules and regulations, amendments or alterations as shall be adopted by the city for Oakridge Cemetery, being a public cemetery, owned and operated by the city; and reference to such rules and regulations in instruments and deeds conveying the ownership of lots and the right of interment, shall have the same force and effect as if the rules and regulations in such instruments and deeds were set forth therein. 
(Code 1974, § 6-16) 
Sec. 26-32. - Plat of lots. 
The location of any lots in the cemetery may be found by reference to a plat on file in the office of the city manager. 
(Code 1974, § 6-17) 
Sec. 26-33. - Sale of lots. 
Upon the sale of a lot, before the lot is used, it must first be offered to the city; if the city refuses such lot, it may be sold to an individual. 
(Code 1974, § 6-18) 
Sec. 26-34. - Price of lots. 
The price of cemetery lots in Oakridge Cemetery which shall be sold by the city shall be as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall donate a cemetery lot in which to bury any stillborn child or infant child whenever the mortician certifies to the city that his services have also been donated free of charge. 
(Code 1974, § 6-18.1) 
Sec. 26-35. - City not responsible for damages. 
The city shall not be liable and distinctly disclaims all responsibility for the loss or damage to property or rights of lot owners arising from causes beyond its control, and especially from damages caused by the elements, acts of God, common enemies, thieves, vandals, malicious mischiefmakers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots or order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage is direct or collateral. 
(Code 1974, § 6-19) 
Sec. 26-36. - Damage to raised structures and fixtures. 
While the city will exercise all possible care to protect raised lettering, carving or ornaments on any memorial or other structure on any lot, it disclaims any responsibility and shall not be liable for any damage or injury thereto. 
(Code 1974, § 6-20) 
Sec. 26-37. - Order or request prerequisite to grave opening. 
An order or request, in writing, is required of the lot owner or authorized funeral director before a grave is to be opened, giving the name, age, sex, date of death and location of grave in reference to the lot. 
(Code 1974, § 6-21) 
Sec. 26-38. - Who may do maintenance and improvement. 
All grading, landscape work and improvements of any kind, and care of the lots, and all trees and shrubs moved and herbage of any kind, with the exception of planting grass, shall be planted, trimmed, cut or removed, only by the city. The planting of grasses on the lot shall be left to the lot owner as to the type of grass to be planted, the grass shall be planted at cost to the lot owner. Permanent planting of shrubs, flowers, etc., shall be made by the city and further planting may be permitted only at the discretion of the city. The whole cemetery is to be landscaped, and to keep it uniform it is necessary that all plantings shall be under the control of the city, including the following additional care: 
(1)  Removal of rubbish when necessary, raking and cutting of grass, trimming of trees and shrubbery and other care that the city may deem necessary. 
(2)  The ownership of rights of interment in lots does not convey any right to do planting or other improving without the express approval of the proper officials of the city. 
(3)  The city retains control and supervision of all lots that are sold and the city retains the right to enter upon any lot and prohibit, modify or remove any structure, object or improvement on such lot, which has been placed thereon, subsequent to the adoption of these rules and regulations and which may be considered objectionable or injurious to the lot, adjoining lots or the cemetery in general. 
(Code 1974, § 6-22) 
Sec. 26-39. - Right to regulate sprinkling and drainage. 
The right to lay, maintain, operate or alter, or change pipelines and gutters for sprinkling systems, drainage, etc., is also expressly reserved to the city, as well as its right to use such land for cemetery purposes. 
(Code 1974, § 6-23) 
Sec. 26-40. - Removal of cut flowers, potted plants. 
The city reserves the right to remove all cut flowers and potted plants that may be dead or otherwise objectionable. 
(Code 1974, § 6-24) 
Sec. 26-41. - Gathering plants, disturbing wildlife. 
All persons are prohibited from gathering flowers, either wild or cultivated, or breaking trees, shrubbery or plants or disturbing birds or other wildlife in the cemetery. 
(Code 1974, § 6-25) 
Sec. 26-42. - Signs, notices, advertisements. 
No signs, notices or advertisements of any kind shall be allowed in the cemetery unless placed by the city. 
(Code 1974, § 6-26) 
Cross reference— Sign regulations, app. A, § 10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 26-43. - Markers. 
No memorial, such as family marker, grave marker, slab or corner post, shall be placed in the cemetery, either on the grave or lot, unless the memorial or marker is made of marble, granite or bronze. Corner posts or nameplates shall be placed flush with the finished grade of the surrounding ground. 
(Code 1974, § 6-27) 
Sec. 26-44. - Depth of vaults and containers. 
The top of any vault or container holding a body shall be placed at least 12 inches below the finished grade of the surrounding ground. 
(Code 1974, § 6-28) 
Sec. 26-45. - Lot enclosures. 
(a)  No coping, curbing, fencing, hedging, grave mounds, borders or enclosures of any kind shall be allowed around any lot except in accordance with all of the following rules: 
(1)  Coping must be a minimum four inches wide and six inches high; 
(2)  Soil must be treated with weed sterilant; 
(3)  Coping joints must be flush; 
(4)  When butting up to existing coping, joints will be ground to make joints flush; 
(5)  Coping will be anchored at least every five feet, not to exceed natural ground; 
(6)  Inside coping will be a minimum of two inches concrete and a minimum of two inches loose gravel; 
(7)  Disturbed area around outside of coping will be dressed out with top soil; 
(8)  All work and material shall be at the expense of the lot owner; and 
(9)  Notification shall be required to the city park and cemetery department prior to proceeding. 
(b)  No loose gravel shall be allowed on any lot. The city reserves the right to remove such gravel if so placed, other than gravel placed inside coped areas. 
(c)  All gravesites must be marked within 90 days of burial with markers made of either bronze, granite or marble. 
(Code 1974, § 6-29; Ord. No. 99-26, § I, 9-13-1999) 
Sec. 26-46. - Prior approval required to be in cemetery during certain hours; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in Oakridge Cemetery one hour after sunset until one hour before sunrise without prior approval of the caretaker or chief of police. 
(Code 1974, § 6-30) 
Chapter 30 - COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; public safety, ch. 58; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-1. - Arrest of offenders; release on bond. 
It shall be the duty of the police of the city, for any violation of any ordinance of the city, to arrest the person so offending and hold him in custody until a trial is had in the manner prescribed for the trial of offenders; provided, any such person may be discharged from arrest upon giving to the chief of police a bond with good security for his appearance before the municipal court, to abide the action of the court in the premises, in such sum as will likely compel the appearance of the accused. 
(Code 1974, § 21-1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Incarceration if bond not posted. 
If any party, whether defendant or witness, fails to give the bond and security, or bond, as required of him, such person may be confined in the city jail so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify. 
(Code 1974, § 21-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Forfeiture of bond; issuance of rule to show cause. 
Upon failure of any principal in any bond or recognizance given by a person charged with a violation of any ordinance of the city to appear, or by a witness to appear and testify, the municipal judge shall forfeit such bond or recognizance in the manner practiced in the superior courts of this state, and shall pass a rule requiring the principal and securities on such bond to show cause, on any day therein named, not to be less than 20 days from the passage of such rule, why they should not pay the amount of such bond. 
(Code 1974, § 21-3) 
Sec. 30-4. - Service of rule to show cause on forfeiture. 
A copy of the rule provided for in section 30-3 shall be served upon the principal and security or securities, if found to be in the city, by any officer or member of the police force, at least 20 days before the time set therein for the hearing of the rule. 
(Code 1974, § 21-4) 
Sec. 30-5. - Judgment of forfeiture; satisfaction thereof. 
If no sufficient cause is shown, the municipal judge shall proceed to enter judgment against the principal and securities for the amount of the bond, and the clerk shall issue an execution for the amount of such judgment and place the execution of judgment in the hands of the chief of police, who shall proceed to collect the judgment by levy and sale as in the case of tax execution. The hearing may be continued to perfect service or for any other good cause. If either of the parties liable on such bond is not found to be in the city and an entry is made to that effect on the rule, judgment may be entered against those served. 
(Code 1974, § 21-5) 
Sec. 30-6. - Surrender of principal by surety. 
Any surety on a bail bond of any person charged with the violation of a city ordinance may surrender his principal at any time to the chief of police or officer on duty at the station or jail, who shall confine such principal until discharged by order of the court or by giving other or good security. The delivery of the principal shall discharge the securities or security of all further liability upon such bond; provided, such delivery shall be made before any judgment of forfeiture upon such bond shall have been entered; and, provided, all costs, which may have accrued in any proceeding to forfeit such bond, are paid. 
(Code 1974, § 21-6) 
Sec. 30-7. - Procedures in court generally. 
Upon the appearance of the accused, the municipal judge shall try the case under the same rules of practice and evidence as govern the superior courts of the state, and after an impartial hearing, shall make such order or disposition of the case as the law and facts may justify. Continuance shall not be granted, either to the prosecution or the defense, unless for reasonable grounds. Any part defendant may file a plea of guilty, and if such party cannot attend the trial, the court may pass sentence in his absence, if such defendant consents thereto. 
(Code 1974, § 21-7) 
Sec. 30-8. - Right to process for witnesses; speedy trial required. 
Any person charged with a violation of the city ordinances shall have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses and a speedy trial. 
(Code 1974, § 21-8) 
Sec. 30-9. - Issuance, service of witness subpoenas. 
The municipal judge shall issue subpoenas for all witnesses necessary, either for the prosecution or defense, before the municipal court, and also in cases appealed to the superior court. All subpoenas in behalf of the city shall be served by the chief of police or a police officer. Those in behalf of a defendant may be served by any person who may be authorized to perform such service. 
(Code 1974, § 21-9) 
Sec. 30-10. - Absent witnesses may be cited for contempt; procedure penalty. 
Should any witness, subpoenaed for either the city or defendant, fail to appear at the trial, the court may instruct a rule to be issued directing such witness to appear at such time and place as may be therein set forth, to show cause why he should not be adjudged in contempt. Such rule shall be served by the chief of police, or any of the police officers, at least one day before the hearing. At the hearing the court, if no good excuse shall be shown, may, in its discretion, punish the offender by fine or imprisonment. Should the witness fail to appear in response to the rule, the court shall pass an order directing the witness to be arrested and brought before the court to answer the charge. 
(Code 1974, § 21-10) 
Sec. 30-11. - Issuance, satisfaction of executions for fines and costs. 
Executions shall issue instanter for any fines and costs imposed by the municipal court, which shall be signed by the municipal judge and may be levied on any property of the person fined. 
(Code 1974, § 21-11) 
Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses and business regulations, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Restrictions on operation, installation, maintenance, etc. of electronic security systems by local governments, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 911 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Use of automatic dialing devices regulated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person, partnership, corporation or association of persons to have in their possession any device or combination of devices which will automatically dial any telephone number of the police department of the city or any telephone number of the fire department or any telephone number of the city hall. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person, partnership, corporation or association of persons to use, key or activate any device or combination of devices which will automatically dial or deliver a recorded message to any telephone number of the police department of the city or any telephone number of the fire department or any telephone number of the city hall. 
(c)  All automatic dialers shall be keyed to a private service that can then notify the appropriate agency. 
(Code 1974, § 16-33) 
Secs. 34-2—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Operation of electronic alarm systems by county or municipality, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; license required to engage in low voltage alarm system contracting, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-8.1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person or designee designated by the chief of police to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts. 
Alarm registration means the notification by an alarm company or an alarm user to the alarm administrator that an alarm system has been installed and is in use. 
Alarm system means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon the police department, fire department or county emergency medical services, including local alarm system. The term "alarm system" does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle or person unless the vehicle or personal alarm is permanently located at a site. 
False alarm means the activation of a fire, burglary and/or robbery or personal alarm by other than a medical emergency, fire, unintentional smoke, forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no fire has occurred, no emergency medical treatment is needed or no burglary, theft, robbery or forcible entry is being committed or attempted on the premises. False alarms shall include negligently activated alarms, alarms which are the result of equipment which has been improperly installed or maintained, and alarms which are purposefully activated to summon the police, firemen or emergency medical technicians in nonemergency situations, but does not include an alarm caused by violent weather conditions, acts of God or other causes which are beyond the user's control. 
Multiple alarm sites means more than one alarm system on the premises. 
Panic or personal alarm means an alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring emergency medical service, fire or law enforcement response. 
(Ord. No. 2001-027, § 21.5-201, 10-9-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-32. - Responsibility of alarm user. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to activate any alarm system, otherwise cause an alarm system to be activated, or operate or maintain an alarm system which is activated at a time when no fire, burglary, or robbery is in progress at a premises that causes a public safety officer to be dispatched and is later determined to be false. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to activate, otherwise cause to be activated, or operate or maintain any alarm system which automatically sends a prerecorded message or coded signal indicating the activation of an alarm system to any public safety agency. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly and intentionally to activate any alarm system as set forth in subsection (a) or (b) of this section with the full knowledge that no fire, burglary or robbery is in progress at a premises. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to obey a cease and desist order issued pursuant to this section. 
(e)  All alarm users shall be required to respond to the location where the alarm is activated or when requested by the police department, fire department or alarm administrator. The key holder will be given 30 minutes from the time the officer or foremen arrive at the premises to respond to the alarm, unless other arrangements are made through the alarm administrator. Upon activation, the alarm shall not sound any longer than 15 minutes. 
(Ord. No. 2001-027, § 21.5-203, 10-9-2001) 
Sec. 34-33. - Responsibility of alarm administrator. 
(a)  The police department, the monitoring agency for this article, will make notification to any owner or occupier of the premises who have violated this article. 
(b)  The alarm administrator will issue a written notice of all false alarms to alarm users. This notice is in addition to the notice issued to the key holder answering the false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 2001-027, § 21.5-204, 10-9-2001) 
Sec. 34-33.1 - Responsibilities of alarm company. 
Each alarm company, for each alarm system that it sells, installs and monitors, shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  Ensure that all alarm users are provided with adequate training in false alarm prevention. 
(2)  Review with all their installation customers and provide the alarm administrator with a false alarm prevention checklist. 
(3)  Provide the alarm administrator or designee with completed permit registration forms and permit fees for all installations, transfers, or conversions. 
(4)  Verify alarm calls and attempt to cancel dispatch when verification of a false alarm is received. 
(5)  Provide the alarm administrator with updated/current contact information regarding each alarm. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 2008-09, § A, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 34-34. - Exemptions. 
(a)  There shall be a 30-day grace period following the installation of any new alarm system during which period false alarms shall not be counted. This grace period is provided to allow the installing company or other installer and the user to take necessary corrective action with regard to the operation of the alarm system. A responsible person at such premises must maintain written proof, in the form of an invoice, of the date of installation of an alarm system for exemption under this section. 
(b)  An alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the user's alarm company, or designee, or the police department to test the system. 
(c)  The police chief shall issue a cease and desist order to any person violating subsection 34-32(c). Such order shall direct that the alarm system in question be permanently disconnected immediately upon receipt of such order. 
(d)  The police chief shall also issue a cease and desist order to any person who has violated subsection 34-32(a) and/or subsection 34-32(b) six times within any calendar month or three times within any 24-hour period. Such order shall direct that the alarm system in question be disconnected and shall not be reconnected until it has been inspected and serviced by a properly trained and licensed technician. Such order shall be rescinded upon receipt by the chief of police of written proof that such inspection and service has been performed and any malfunction or maladjustment corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2001-027, § 21.5-205, 10-9-2001) 
Sec. 34-35. - Offenses. 
(a)  Upon the police, fire or emergency medical service responding to the fifth false alarm within a 12-month period, the owner or occupier of the premises where such alarm or burglary system is maintained shall be given a written notice that five responses to false alarms have occurred within a 12-month period. Any additional false alarms would result in the alarms administrator assessing a service fee due and payable within 30 days following notice thereof, and treated as any other municipal liability, such as taxes, and issue a fi. fa. and an execution for the owner of the premises for violation of this article. In cases where the fee is to be assessed to the alarm company, payment of the fee is required as a condition for doing business, or continuing to do business, in the city. The violation would result in fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Upon the police or fire department responding to each false alarm, the responding key holder will be advised of the false alarm. If the key holder fails to respond to any false alarm, the responding officer or firemen will notify the alarm administrator who will assess a fee to the owner or occupier for violation of this article. If the key holder fails to respond to any false alarm after the fifth false alarm, the alarm administrator will issue a double assessment. One assessment will be for the owner or occupier for violation of this subsection, and one assessment will be issued for the owner or occupier for violation of subsection (a) of this section. The violation of this subsection would result in an assessment of $25.00. 
(c)  If an alarm company fails to register an alarm system as required, the alarm administrator will assess a fee to the alarm company for violation of this article. The violation of this subsection would result in an assessment of $75.00. 
(d)  If an owner or occupier is a corporation or government entity, the summons will be addressed to the corporation or government entity and made attention to a designated individual. It will be the responsibility of the corporation or governmental entity to provide the police department with the name of the designated individual. 
(Ord. No. 2001-027, § 21.5-206, 10-9-2001; Ord. No. 2008-05, §§ B, C, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 2008-09, §§ B, C, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 34-36. - Appeals. 
If a location is assessed a false alarm fee, and the owner, business or legal entity does not agree that the alarm activation should be classified as a false alarm, the owner, business or legal entity may choose to appeal the ruling through the proper process as follows: 
(1)  The proper representative of the owner, business, legal entity, or alarm company having or maintaining the alarm system may contact the chief of the agency that responded to the alarm (fire, police or emergency medical service) and appeal the ruling. The alarm administrator will present any documentation on behalf of the city. 
(2)  If the owner, business, legal entity, or alarm company (proper representative) and the chief of police, fire chief or director of emergency medical services are not able to resolve and agree on the alarm classification, the proper representative may request a meeting with the city manager to appeal the ruling. The alarm administrator will present any documentation on behalf of the city. 
(3)  The ruling of the city manager will be final. 
(Ord. No. 2001-027, § 21.5-207, 10-9-2001; Ord. No. 2008-05, § D, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 2008-09, § D, 5-5-2008) 
Secs. 34-37—34-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 34-56. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain within the city an alarm system on commercial or residential premises unless the alarm company has registered such alarm with the police department or designee on such valid alarm registration form supplied by the alarm administrator or designee. A separate registration is required for each alarm site (multiple alarm sites). Fire alarms, burglary or robbery alarms, or panic alarms (any combination) on one site will be considered as one registration. 
(Ord. No. 2001-027, § 21.5-202(a), 10-9-2001; Ord. No. 2008-05, § E, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 2008-09,:s; E, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 34-57. - Application. 
Each alarm registration application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, complete address, and telephone numbers of the person who will be the registration holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this article; 
(2)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential, commercial, government entity or apartment; 
(3)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the classification of the alarm system, i.e., fire, burglary, holdup, panic or other, for each purpose, whether audible or silent; 
(4)  Mailing address if different from the alarm site; 
(5)  Any dangerous or special conditions present, i.e., attack dog at the alarm site; 
(6)  Name and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are able and have agreed to receive notification of an alarm activation at any time; respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes; and will deactivate the alarm system if such becomes necessary; 
(7)  Type of business conducted at the alarm site; and 
(8)  That law enforcement, fire or emergency medical service response may be based on factors such as: availability of police units, fire or emergency medical technicians, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2001-027, § 21.5-202(c), 10-9-2001) 
Sec. 34-58. - Issuance; conditions. 
Upon receipt of a completed application form for registration under this division, the alarm administrator shall register the applicant and assign an alarm index number unless the applicant has failed to pay a prior fi. fa. assessment or had an alarm registration for the alarm site suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2001-027, § 21.5-202(b), 10-9-2001) 
Sec. 34-59. - False application. 
Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration under this division shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a registration or to revoke a registration upon the discovery of a false statement of a material fact. 
(Ord. No. 2001-027, § 21.5-202(e), 10-9-2001) 
Sec. 34-60. - Transferability. 
An alarm registration under this division may not be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that alters any information listed on the registration application within five business days. 
Sec. 34-61. - Fee. 
A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall accompany each application for registration under this division, except that governments shall be exempt from paying such registration fee. 
(Ord. No. 2001-027, § 21.5-202(f), 10-9-2001) 
Sec. 34-62. - Duration. 
Each registration completed under this division shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-027, § 21.5-202(g), 10-9-2001) 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; rabies control, § 14-151 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; moving buildings, § 18-91 et seq.; demolition, § 18-141 et seq.; floods, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 50; planning and zoning, ch. 54; historic preservation, § 54-131 et seq.; sewers, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE REGULATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-19, § I, adopted Dec. 15, 2016 , repealed former Art. II, §§ 38-31—38-40, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2014-11, § I, adopted June 2, 2014 . 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 78. 

Sec. 38-31. - Purpose and standards. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Tifton through the control of noise. It is the intent of this section to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. 
(b)  Sound measurement standards for law enforcement and code enforcement personnel. For the purposes of this article, "plainly audible" shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth below which can be heard from the distances set forth below, using the following sound measurement standards: Measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the source of the sound. For music and other noise, words and phrases need not be discernable. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included. 
( Ord. No. 2016-19, § I, 12-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-32. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(1)  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible more than 300 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(2)  Human-produced sounds. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, holler, whistle or sing on the public streets, sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible more than 300 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(3)  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property, or more than 300 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(4)  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the property boundary on which the party or social event is located, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs (1) or (2) above. 
(b)  Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(1)  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(2)  Human-produced sound. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, holler, whistle or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(3)  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property, or more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. onSunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(4)  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or event to produce noise in such a manner so as to such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the property boundary on which the party or social event is located between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs (1) or (2) above. 
( Ord. No. 2016-19, § I, 12-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-33. - Exclusions. 
The prohibitions of section 38-32 shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Noises and/or sounds caused to be made by manufacturing, governmental, or commercial entities in the normal course of their business; 
(b)  Noises or sounds made by domestic animals, which noises or sounds are controlled by Chapter 14 [Animal Control]; 
(c)  Noises or sounds made by law enforcement and other public safety officials performing their public functions; and 
(d)  Organized school and college sporting events or practice, including marching bands. 
( Ord. No. 2016-19, § I, 12-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-34. - Time restrictions on use of landscape maintenance motorized devices such as leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chain saws. 
It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any noise-generating, motorized landscape maintenance devices, including but not limited to leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chain saws, within any residential zoning district or in areas within 300 feet of any residential zoning district from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. Monday through Friday or 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. on the weekends. The time restrictions contained herein shall not apply to the City of Tifton in the conduct of its governmental functions. 
( Ord. No. 2016-19, § I, 12-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-35. - Motor vehicles sound volumes. 
Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction equipment, including, but not limited to boom cars, shall not be operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the equipment. 
( Ord. No. 2016-19, § I, 12-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-36. - Sound volumes public rights-of-way. 
Boom boxes, or any similar device, shall not be operated in a public place or public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator. 
( Ord. No. 2016-19, § I, 12-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-37. - Construction noise. 
(a)  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. on the weekends, construction noise of any type, including, but not limited to, noise caused by the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any earth-moving equipment, crane, saw, drill, pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, hoist, automatic nailer or stapler, or any similar equipment, shall not be plainly audible within any residential zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noise emanates. 
(b)  A variance from the above-referenced hours of operation for construction noise may be requested, in writing, at least 48 hours prior to the proposed construction operation, for consideration by the director of environmental management. Such a request shall state: 
(1)  The reasons that support a claim of urgent need based on specific loss or inconvenience for such a variation from the allowable work hours; 
(2)  The impact that the denial of this request would have on the applicant's project and the surrounding properties; 
(3)  The steps which have been taken by the applicant to communicate those needs and impacts to owners of surrounding and nearby properties; 
(4)  The steps that have or will be taken to limit the impact of the proposed activity upon surrounding and nearby properties; and 
(5)  The possible risks to public health and safety. 
(c)  If the director finds that the application adequately demonstrates the urgent need for a variance from the above allowable work hours, adequately provides for mitigation of the impact upon surrounding and nearby properties, and poses no additional risk to public health and safety, then permission shall be granted for a variance to alter the allowable work hours during one ten-day period. 
(d)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to government road, water, sewer, storm water construction or maintenance projects or to utility company construction or maintenance projects. 
( Ord. No. 2016-19, § I, 12-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-38. - Commercial entities located in commercial downtown or near single-family residential zoning districts. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this article concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of section 38-32, "Prohibited Conduct," subsection (a), concerning "Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday" shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any single-family residential zoning district or a residence within the commercial downtown zoning district more than 300 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of section 38-32, "Prohibited conduct," subsection (b), concerning "Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday," shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any single-family residential zoning district or a residence within the commercial downtown zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. 
(c)  Commercial entities allowing music shall be required to keep all doors closed during hours of operation while music is playing except for the ingress and egress of patrons. Doors shall not be propped open or be allowed to remain open. 
( Ord. No. 2016-19, § I, 12-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-39. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  The city may prosecute noise related violations by issuance of a city ordinance citation, in which case, the penalty for a violation shall be as set forth in Chapter 1, section 1-11. 
(b)  In addition to issuing a fine as provided in Chapter 1, section 1-11, or in lieu thereof, the municipal court judge may issue an order requiring immediate abatement of any sound source alleged to be in violation of this section. 
(c)  No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefore, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this section. 
(d)  A determination of the invalidity or unconstitutionality by a court of competent jurisdiction of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection or part of this article shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-19, § I, 12-15-2016 ) 
Secs. 38-40—38-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Unlawful operation of adult entertainment establishments declared nuisance, § 10-43; nuisances of animals, § 14-50. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-111. - Definition. 
A nuisance is anything within the city that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this article. 
(Code 1974, § 16-17; Ord. No. 2000-026, Art. II, § 1, 10-2-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 38-112. - Enumeration. 
(a)  The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
(b)  The following are declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the city. 
(2)  Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood. 
(3)  Discharging of offensive matter. The placing, throwing or discharging from any house or premises, and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)  Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city, or floating debris in impounded waters. 
(5)  Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, as published and used by the United States Geological Survey, shall be the standard for such grading; and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(6)  Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  Nonconforming structures and machines. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or city ordinance. 
(8)  Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
(9)  Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. 
(10)  Depositing trash, garbage and refuse on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the city or which unreasonably annoys others. 
(11)  Unoccupied buildings. Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed. 
(12)  Unsafe vehicles, machinery and equipment. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more, except in licensed junkyards. The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked. 
(13)  Gutters or spouts. Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-026, Art. II, § 1, 10-2-2000) 
Sec. 38-113. - Powers and duties of city manager. 
The city manager shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17, as well as the following additional powers: 
(1)  The city manager shall have the power to investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which buildings, dwelling or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use, or are vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations to determine such facts as the city manager deems necessary to determine whether a violation of this article has occurred; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2000-026, Art. IV, Pt. III, § 9, 10-2-2000) 
Sec. 38-114. - Prohibited generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. 
(Code 1974, § 16-18; Ord. No. 2000-026, Art. II, § 1, 10-2-2000) 
Sec. 38-115. - Issuance of summons for abatement. 
Whenever any nuisance exists within the city, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the city that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the city, and the owner or other responsible person refuses or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate the nuisance, the city manager, or the officer having responsibility for enforcement of this article, may issue a summons and cause the summons to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts of ordinances claimed to be violated, and requiring such person to appear before the municipal judge at a time, date and place specified in the summons, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
(Ord. No. 2000-026; Art. IV, Pt. I, § 2; Pt. 3, § 4; 10-2-2000) 
Sec. 38-116. - Order for abatement. 
(a)  If the municipal judge at the hearing required by section 38-115 shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code or the ordinances of the city is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his order and judgment so finding and shall order the property owner or other responsible person to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated, including but not limited to rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property owner or other responsible person shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the city shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever actions deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition; and the expense shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for city taxes. 
(b)  Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of city taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as in the case of city taxes. 
(Code 1974, §§ 16-18, 16-19; Ord. No. 2000-026; Art. IV, Pt. I, § 2; Pt. III, § 4; 10-2-2000) 
State Law reference— Authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 38-117. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in sections 38-115 and 38-116. 
Sec. 38-118. - Service on nonresidents and others. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the city to proceed under sections 38-115 and 38-116 and the owner of the property or other responsible person resides outside the city limits, or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 38-116 shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved, and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the city once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to the hearing. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the city limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
Sec. 38-119. - Other powers preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his order. 
Sec. 38-120. - Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the mayor and city council from summarily and without the notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
Sec. 38-121. - Criminal penalties. 
In addition to any civil penalties which may be imposed on any violator of this article, the violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to punishment under section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2000-026, Art. IV, Pt. II, 10-2-2000) 
Sec. 38-122. - Collection of cost from the owner or parties in interest. 
(a)  The owner or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on any lien created pursuant to this article by paying to the city within one calendar year after perfection of the lien, the total amount due, together with interest at the rate of ten percent per annum. The city council shall be authorized to grant an extension of an additional one year for the payment of such lien to prevent hardship on the citizens of the city, with any unpaid balance during such extension to accrue interest at the rate of ten percent per annum. 
(b)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of such one-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city. 
(c)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of such one-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided in subsection (b) of this section, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon such property. 
(Ord. No. 2000-026, Art. IV, Pt. III, § 7, 10-2-2000) 
Secs. 38-123—38-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEGETATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 86. 

Sec. 38-141. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions. 
(a)  Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this division. 
(b)  Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section. 
(c)  The provisions of this division shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, and to the original city lots. The provisions of this division shall not apply to undeveloped areas of unsubdivided land within the city. 
(Code 1974, § 12-3; Ord. No. 2000-026, Art. II, § 2, 10-2-2000) 
Sec. 38-142. - Height permitted. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible for its management, maintenance or upkeep, to permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a height in excess of 12 inches above the ground. 
Sec. 38-143. - Notice to abate. 
(a)  For a violation of this division, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove excess growth within seven days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail, or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. 
(b)  Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made. 
Sec. 38-144. - Abatement by city; notice of abatement. 
(a)  Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified pursuant to the provisions of section 38-143, the city is authorized to have the contractor enter upon the property; and the contractor is authorized to enter the property, and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. The city shall issue a lot cleaning order to the contractor, who shall promptly perform the work and submit his bill to the city. The city shall inspect the work, and if satisfactory, shall approve the bill for payment and forward it to the city treasurer for payment. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment on or before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than 15 days nor later than 45 days after payment to the contractor. 
(c)  If payment under subsection (b) of this section shall not have been made on or before the date named, the city treasurer shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the municipal judge, notifying such owner to show cause before the judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue against the property for its approval amount. 
(d)  If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this division, that the notice required in section 38-143 was given, that the work was performed and the cost paid by the city, and that the city has not been reimbursed, execution shall issue for such amount, and shall be executed by the chief of police in the same manner as tax executions are executed. 
(e)  If the owner of the property is unknown or cannot be located, the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply; but in lieu thereof a notice shall be published once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern;" shall describe with reasonable particularity the property involved; shall provide a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation, and shall notify all persons interested to show cause before the municipal judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount. In such event, subsection (a) of this section will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in rem. 
Sec. 38-145. - Remedies. 
The remedies provided in this division are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this division. Nothing in this division shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code, all ordinances, laws or regulations of the city, or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance; and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
Sec. 38-146. - Award of contracts for clearing of lots by city. 
Prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, the city shall obtain bids from contractors or other qualified persons for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation not in excess of two inches in diameter, and for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation in excess of two inches but not in excess of four inches in diameter; and the mayor and city council shall award a contract to the lowest and best bidder, such contract to remain in effect during the ensuing fiscal year. 
Secs. 38-147—38-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 

Sec. 38-166. - Nuisance declared. 
A violation of any provision of this division is a nuisance. 
Sec. 38-167. - Keeping water in which mosquitoes may breed. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed unless such collection of water is so treated as to effectually prevent such breeding. 
(b)  The collections of water prohibited by subsection (a) of this section shall be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, or other similar water containers. 
Sec. 38-168. - Treatment of collections of water. 
The method of treatment of any collections of water that are specified in section 38-167 directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the health officer and may be one or more of the following: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way, or with any other material that will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough drying and cleaning. 
(3)  Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the health officer. 
(4)  Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven days. 
(5)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish. 
(6)  Filling and draining to the satisfaction of the health officer, his agent or accredited representative. 
(7)  Proper disposal by removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
Sec. 38-169. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding. 
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there; and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the health officer, his authorized agent or representative, shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
Sec. 38-170. - Failure to remedy conditions after notice. 
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes, within three days after due notice has been given to him, the health officer or his authorized agent is authorized to do so; and all necessary costs incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. 
Sec. 38-171. - Right of entry of health officer. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this division, the health officer, or his duly accredited agent under his authority, may at all reasonable times lawfully enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction. 
Secs. 38-172—38-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MOTOR VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 38-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer which: 
(1)  Has been left by the owner or some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman, or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of 30 days after the time agreed upon; or within 30 days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer, repairman, or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within 30 days after the completion of necessary repairs; 
(2)  Is left unattended on a public street, road, highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(3)  Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone having made claim to the vehicle; 
(4)  Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without the owner having made claim to the vehicle; or 
(5)  Has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone having made claim to the vehicle. 
Motor vehicle and vehicle mean motor vehicle or trailer. 
Owner means the owner, lessor, lessee, security interest holders, and all lienholders as shown on the records of the state department of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2000-026, Art. I, § 2, 10-2-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. 
Sec. 38-192. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise, to store or deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, any abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-026, Art. I, Pt. III, § 1, 10-2-2000) 
Sec. 38-193. - Removal—Required. 
Any abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle shall be removed upon ten days' written notice to the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the motor vehicle is stored or deposited, or to the owner thereof if the identity of such owner of the motor vehicle can be ascertained through license plates or otherwise. If such motor vehicle is not removed after ten days' written notice, the police department of the city shall remove or cause the removal and sale at the cost of the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of such motor vehicle, if such owner can be ascertained. Sale shall be made to the highest of two bids obtained from dealers in such property. 
Sec. 38-194. - Same—Notice to owner and state. 
(a)  Any person who removes a motor vehicle from public or private property at the request of someone other than the owner or who stores any motor vehicle which has been left unattended shall seek the identity of the owner of such vehicle and shall, within 15 days of the day such vehicle became an abandoned motor vehicle, give notice in writing to the state department of revenue and the state bureau of investigation, stating the manufacturer's vehicle identification number, the license number, the fact that such vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle, and the present location of such vehicle, and requesting the name and address of all owners, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of such vehicle. If a person removing or storing the vehicle has knowledge of facts which reasonably indicate that the vehicle is registered or titled in a certain other state, he shall check the motor vehicle records of that other state in the attempt to ascertain the identity of the owner of the vehicle. 
(b)  Upon ascertaining the owner of such motor vehicle, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall, within three days, by certified or registered mail, notify the owner, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of the location of such vehicle and of the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(c)  If the identity of the owner of such motor vehicle cannot be ascertained, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall place an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such vehicle was obtained or, if there is no newspaper in the county, shall post such advertisement at the county courthouse in such place where other public notices are posted. Such advertisement shall run in the newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks or shall remain posted at the courthouse for two consecutive weeks. The advertisement shall contain a complete description of the motor vehicle, its license and manufacturer's vehicle identification numbers, the location where such vehicle was initially left unattended by the owner, the present location of such vehicle, and the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2. 
Sec. 38-195. - Inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  Except as provided in this division, the open storage of inoperable or unclaimed operable vehicles on private property is prohibited. 
(b)  Any person lawfully engaged in the repair of damaged or inoperable vehicles may store such vehicles on private property for a period not to exceed 60 days. Thereafter, any such vehicles shall be screened from view by a fence or shrubbery on all sides of the property on which the vehicles are stored. 
(c)  Persons lawfully engaged in the operation of a junkyard or salvage yard in accordance with the zoning and other requirements of the city ordinances shall ensure that such yards are screened from view on all sides of the property upon which the vehicles are stored. Persons determined to be in violation of this provision shall have a period of six months from the date of finding the violation to install screening as required in this subsection. 
(d)  A vehicle lacking a current, valid state tag shall be considered inoperable for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2000-026, Art. I, Pt. III, § 2, 10-2-2000) 
Sec. 38-196. - Special provisions for old, unused, stripped, junked automobiles. 
(a)  Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within the corporate limits of this city is a nuisance. 
(b)  The owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of this city upon which the storage of property is made, and also the owners and/or lessees of the property involved in such storage shall jointly and severally abate the nuisance by the prompt removal of the property into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes, if within the corporate limits of the city, or otherwise by removing it to a location outside the corporate limits. 
Secs. 38-197—38-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - UNSANITARY, UNSAFE, AND UNFIT BUILDINGS, DWELLINGS AND STRUCTURES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 

Sec. 38-216. - Authority, scope and applicability. 
(a)  This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17. O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 specifies the scope and purpose of this chapter. All powers and authorities granted to public officers and public authorities by the statute are hereby incorporated by reference so as to be assumed, delegated and granted pursuant to this chapter. The mayor and city council for the city specifically finds that conditions of the character described in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city due to dwellings, buildings, structures or properties which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light or sanitary features; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, structures or properties unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; or which are vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes. Such dwellings, buildings, structures or properties are declared to be a public nuisance. Power is conferred upon the city to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings, structures or properties as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  All the provisions of this chapter may also be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, public officer or city director of environmental management that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said property is in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to both residential and nonresidential property within the City of Tifton whether being occupied or not and whether being developed or not. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09 , § I, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-217. - Definitions. 
(a)  Specific terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and definitions shall apply: 
Applicable codes means (A) any optional housing or abatement standard as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (B) any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, chapter 2; and (C) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2, after October 1, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this chapter, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the mayor and city council of the city. 
Interested party means: 
a.  Owner; 
b.  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
c.  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
d.  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the Tift County Courthouse or by the clerk of the court. "Interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
e.  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Municipal court means the Municipal Court of Tifton, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter or any agent of such officer or officers. For the purposes of this chapter the city manager or his designee shall exercise the primary responsibilities prescribed by this chapter and shall be the "public officer" defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8(10). The city director of environmental management, or his designees, is hereby designated as the public officer as defined herein. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose." 
(b)  Definitions incorporated by reference. To the extent not stated above, the definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 are incorporated herein by reference. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-218. - Unsafe dwellings, buildings, structures, or properties. 
(a)  Duty of the owner of dwellings, buildings, structures or properties. It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and to maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with applicable codes in force in the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  Standards for determining unfitness for habitation of unsafe dwellings, buildings or structures. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such building, dwelling, or structure is illegal and shall be abated by repair, demolition, or qualify for a secured building status in accordance with this chapter. Such conditions may include the following without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
(1)  Any means of egress or portion thereof is not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Any means of egress or portion thereof, such as, but not limited to, fire doors, closing devices and fire resistive ratings, which is in disrepair or in a dilapidated or nonworking condition such that the means of egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  The stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads including dead load, exceeds the stresses allowed in the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings. 
(4)  The building, dwelling or structure or portion thereof has been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, wind or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings. 
(5)  Any exterior appendage or portion of the building, dwelling or structure that is not securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings. 
(6)  If for any reason the building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(7)  The building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof as a result of decay, deterioration or dilapidation is likely to fully or partially collapse. 
(8)  The building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of the standard codes or of a city, county or state law. 
(9)  Any building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof that is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(10)  Any building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof that is unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise a danger to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, disrepair, uncleanliness, structural defects, dilapidation, obsolescence, abandonment, or any defects to any building, structure or dwelling or portion thereof increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities. 
(c)  Standards for determining unfitness for habitation dwellings, buildings or structure being used in connection with drug crimes. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or upon report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(d)  Property endangering the public health or safety. Any property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity is illegal and in violation of this chapter. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, public officer or the city director of environmental management that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said property is in violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-219. - Procedures and requirements to secure structures for up to three years. 
The following procedures and requirements must be met in order to secure structures pending repairs. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a building owner to secure or cause to be secured a building without first obtaining a secured structure permit from the public officer. The owner must apply for and be approved for a secured structure permit and pay the required fees in the amount of $50.00; and the public officer and/or building official shall then inspect such structure. 
(2)  To qualify for secured status, the building must be structurally sound (walls and roof); otherwise, the secured structure permit will be denied. 
(3)  The repairs needed to bring the structure into compliance with the property maintenance code must not represent a cost that exceeds one-half of the fair market value of the structure as determined by the current ad valorem tax valuation or by an appraisal by a Georgia licensed appraiser. The property owner must provide, along with the application for a secured structure permit, a cost estimate for repairs and a valuation appraisal of the structure to the public officer for review and approval. 
(4)  The property owner must provide, along with the application for a secured structure permit, a schedule of repairs subject to the review and approval of the public officer. 
(5)  If the building is structurally sound, nonstructural interior portions (electrical wiring, plumbing, etc.) need not comply with appropriate codes while in secured status. 
(6)  Building or structure must remain vacant while in secured status. 
(7)  The secured structure permit must be posted on the front of the building in a clearly visible location while the structure remains in secured status. 
(8)  All utilities must remain turned off while in secured status unless otherwise approved by the public officer. 
(9)  Building must be secured, windows and doors covered and secured in accordance with the requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(10)  The public officer shall notify the police chief and fire chief of buildings that have been approved for secured status by the issuance of a secured structure permit and also shall provide notification when the secured status permit has expired or has otherwise been revoked. 
(12)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be inside a secured building or structure, except for the owner or duly authorized agent. Any person violating any provision of this paragraph shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(13)  All secured structures must be maintained in a manner which minimizes the appearance of vacancy, including the prompt removal of graffiti. 
(14)  All secured structures shall be maintained in a manner which does not create an unreasonable risk of fire, including the removal of weeds and the proper maintenance of grass areas which may constitute a fire hazard. No secured structure or portion thereof may be used for the storage of flammable liquids or other materials which would constitute a safety or fire hazard. 
(15)  All secured structures including all adjoining yard areas shall be maintained free of debris, solid waste, combustible materials, litter, and garbage. 
(16)  All exterior surfaces shall be applied with sufficient paint, stucco, or other finishes, in the same color or similar color as the adjoining areas, to weatherproof the vacant structure and to create a sufficient appearance of repair to deter unauthorized occupation. 
(17)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove securing material on a secured building or structure. Any person violating any provision of this paragraph shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(18)  The secured structure permit is valid for a period of 12 months from the issue date. The owner may make application for a secured structure permit for an additional 12 months. The owner must provide the documentation listed in (3) and (4) above along with the application and fee. The application for renewal shall be made no later than 30 days prior to the expiration of the current secured structure permit. Renewal of the permit is subject to the approval by the public officer and upon denial of the application to renew, the property will be subject to immediate nuisance abatement action. The secured structure permit may be renewed twice for a total of 36 months subject to the approval of the public officer. 
(19)  Periodic inspections of the structure and property will be performed by a code enforcement officer and/or building official. A report detailing the inspector's findings shall be included in the case file. If compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter is not present at the time of the inspection, enforcement action will be taken. In addition, the secured structure permit may be revoked by the public officer and nuisance abatement action initiated. 
(20)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of the secured building/structure permit during the permit year to violate any of the provisions of paragraphs (1) through (19) above. Any person violating any provision of these paragraphs shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-220. - Procedures and requirements temporarily to secure structures for up to 60 days pending compliance by demolition or repair. 
The following procedures and requirements must be met in order temporarily to secure structures or temporarily to restrict access to a property prior to demolition of a structure or obtaining a building permit for the reconstruction of the structure: 
(1)  The public officer or the owner must have determined that the structure represents a hazard to life safety to the public and that such risk cannot be eliminated by affordable repairs as defined in section 38-219(3). 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a building owner to secure or cause to be secured such a building without first obtaining a temporary secured structure permit from the public officer. 
(3)  A temporary secured structure permit may be issued by the public officer for a maximum time period of 60 days prior to the repair or demolition of a structure which has been identified by the public officer as a nuisance. This temporary, short-term permit is for the purpose of restricting access to a structure or site that may pose an immediate hazard to life safety. 
(4)  The owner must obtain a temporary secured structure permit from the public officer for any structure that has been identified as a nuisance by the public officer so that the structure will remain secure until a building permit or demolition permit is issued and work has commenced on the repairs or demolition. Along with an application for a secured structure permit pending demolition or repair, the owner must provide to the public officer a schedule for repair or demolition and payment of the required fees in the amount of $25.00. 
(5)  The building must be secured, windows and doors covered and secured. If the condition of the building prevents securing of the windows and doors, the site must be fenced in order to deter unauthorized entry to the property. 
(6)  All secured structures including all adjoining yard areas shall be maintained free of debris, solid waste, combustible materials, litter, and garbage. 
(7)  The temporary secured structure permit must be posted on the front of the building in a clearly visible location while the structure remains in secured status. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a temporary secured structure permit issued by the public officer, pending compliance by demolition, to violate any of the provisions in paragraphs (1) through (7) in this section. Any person violating these provisions shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-221. - Reoccupying a secured building or structure. 
Before a building or structure can be reoccupied: 
(1)  That portion of the building or structure that necessitated its closure must be brought into compliance with building/fire codes; 
(2)  The building or structure must be re-inspected by the public officer and/or building official; 
(3)  Approval of required plans, if applicable; historic preservation, if applicable; request and purchase of all required building permits, sub-trade permits, etc., as may be required, for compliance with construction codes. 
(4)  No utilities shall be turned on until full compliance with construction codes (temporary service is permitted if necessary for construction work to bring building back in to compliance with construction codes). 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-222. - Inspection, complaint, hearing and order. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the director of environmental management by any public authority or by at least five residents of the city or by the director of environmental management on his own information charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(b)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, structure or property. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the municipal court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, structure, or property in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, structure or property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, structure or property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, structure or property in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and/or all debris from the property. For purposes of this Code section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure or property without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factors in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, chapter 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure or property shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-223. - Failure to comply with order to repair or to demolish. 
(a)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or property, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
'This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful.' 
(b)  In addition, the placard shall bear the date posted, street address and number of the building involved and the signature of the director of the building inspection department. It shall thereafter be unlawful for any person to mutilate or remove such placard or for such building to be occupied until the required corrective action is taken. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-224. - Demolition. 
No person shall begin demolition until a permit for demolition has been obtained and all utilities have been cut off and capped at the street. The person who has secured the permit shall remove from the property all debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and foundation exposed above the ground level; fill any excavation or other depressions to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than 25 percent stone or masonry; and adequately slope and drain all filled areas as determined by the director of environmental management. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-225. - Lien on property. 
(a)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(b)  The amount of the costs of repair or demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including but not limited to restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(c)  The lien provided for in paragraph (b) above shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under this chapter. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(d)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this chapter shall transmit to the county tax commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, chapter 4; provided, however, that the limitation of Code Section 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the city. 
(e)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this chapter. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. 
(f)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority and/or county tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(g)  The governing authority of the city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(h)  Where the abatement action does not commence in superior court, review of the court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a building, dwelling or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(i)  In addition to the procedures and remedies in this chapter, the public officer or his designee may issue citations for violations of state minimum codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard and general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this chapter. 
(j)  Nothing is this chapter shall impair or limit in any way the power of The City of Tifton to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-226. - Service of complaints, notices, orders and other filings. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served in the following manner: At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-227. - Nuisance conditions on property. 
Without limiting the generality of the provisions of section 3-13-3, paragraph (d), conditions constituting an endangerment to the health or safety of persons residing or working in the vicinity may include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(2)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl. 
(3)  The external or outdoor storage or use of refrigerators, freezers, stoves, air conditioners, and any other appliances shall be unlawful, except for those appliances held in connection with a licensed commercial establishment operated in an appropriately zoned district, or the residential use of one such appliance operated externally by the residents of the premises. All such appliances permitted to be stored externally shall be of the type that does not close or lock automatically. Any person violating any provision of this subparagraph shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(4)  Stagnant water on premises. 
(5)  An accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary and unsafe conditions that create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. 
(6)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-228. - Eminent domain. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the State of Georgia or to permit any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. Procedures under this chapter shall not constitute the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-229. - Right to enter and inspect. 
The public officer, or designee, or any person authorized to enforce this chapter, and any sworn officer of the police department shall be empowered to enter any property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the condition or work being performed thereon or therein. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-230. - Powers of public officer. 
The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise the following powers in addition to the other powers granted and set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purposes of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-231. - Code of Georgia. 
Any reference to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or O.C.G.A. shall include any amendment to a cited section as subsequently adopted. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 38-232. - Injunctions. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be heard by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13. 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § I , 7-1-2013) 
Secs. 38-233—38-239. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - LITTER[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-23, § I , adopted Dec. 1, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as Div. 6, §§ 38-230—38-239. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Div. 6, §§ 38-240—38-249. 

Sec. 38-240. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bulk container means a metal container of not less than four cubic yards nor larger than eight cubic yards, made of watertight construction with doors opening on top and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by a specially equipped truck. Containers shall be kept covered at all times. All new bulk containers shall meet these specifications. 
Commercial establishment means any retail, manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, religious, governmental, or other nonresidential establishment at which garbage or trash may be generated. 
Construction/demolition waste means the waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper or cardboard. 
Dunnage means loose materials utilized as packing to prevent damage to cargo or contents from breakage or damage during shipping. 
Garbage means food waste including waste accumulations of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Garbage receptacle means a plastic container designed and utilized for the collection of garbage, household trash and business trash which: 
(1)  Is of substantial construction and compatible with either semi or fully automated collection systems; 
(2)  Has sequential serial numbers identifying the year of manufacture; 
(3)  Is provided with handles and wheels sufficient for safe and convenient handling; 
(4)  Has a capacity of either 68 or 95 gallons; and 
(5)  Is supplied by the city. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans, or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Household waste means rubbish other than appliances and furniture which is normally produced attendant to routine residential housekeeping and includes paper, glass, cans, wood, crockery, metals, dunnage, dust, sweepings, rags, discarded clothing, tree and shrubbery trimmings, yard waste and similar materials but does not include garbage, dead animals, animal residue or manures, ashes, residue from incineration, construction/demolition waste, biomedical waste, hazardous waste, liquid waste, food processing waste, industrial waste, sludge or vehicles. 
Inert landfill means a disposal site accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to dirt and dirt-like products, concrete, rocks, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste. 
Junk means discarded appliances, furniture, mattresses, fence wire, bicycles, toys and similar items attendant to residential housekeeping. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, waste materials or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled as specified in this chapter. 
Municipal solid waste (MSW) means any solid waste resulting from the operation of residential, commercial, governmental, or institutional establishments except such solid waste disposed of in a private industry solid waste disposal facility. The term includes yard trash, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations. 
Nuisance means anything which meets that definition of the term as defined by O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 and which occurs during or as the result of the handling or disposing of solid waste. 
Refuse receptacle means a plastic or metal container designed and utilized for the collection of garbage, household trash and business trash which: 
(1)  Is of substantial construction; 
(2)  Has a tightfitting lid; 
(3)  Is provided with handles; and/or 
(4)  Is of a type approved by the city. 
Residential garbage means garbage produced by any residential unit. 
Rubbish means waste paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, cans, glass, crockery, dunnage, and/or similar materials. 
Scavenge shall mean uncontrolled picking from discarded refuse materials. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes (except water-carried body waste) and shall include garbage, rubbish (paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree and shrubbery trimmings, yard waste, furniture and appliances, metal, tin cans, glass, crockery, or dunnage), ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes (waste materials generated in industrial operations), residue from incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, vehicle waste, dredging wastes, construction wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in these definitions. 
Yard trash means vegetative matter resulting from landscaping maintenance and land clearing operations other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. This includes lawn, grass or shrubbery clippings, leaves, straw, tree branches, limbs and trunks. 
( Ord. No. 2014-23, § I , 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 2016-02, 4-4-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-241. - Unlawful accumulations of trash, weeds; authority of city to correct violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain premises, including vacant lots or land, upon which trash, garbage or miscellaneous municipal solid waste is permitted or caused to accumulate in any manner which is, or may become a nuisance, or cause injury to the health or welfare of residents in the vicinity or may injure neighboring property. Drive-in restaurants and other food establishments that permit carry-out food service shall maintain at all times on their premises sufficient receptacles for the disposal of trash, garbage and miscellaneous municipal solid waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, cause or permit uncut grass or weeds on any property under such circumstances that the grass or weeds are breeding places for insects, rodents or reptiles, or are a fire hazard. 
( Ord. No. 2014-23, § I , 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 2016-02, 4-4-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-242. - Littering, scattering refuse prohibited; transporting loose materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Throw any municipal solid waste into any public or private street or scatter municipal solid waste about or litter any public or private street, alley, area or place. This does not preclude the ordinary and usual placement of municipal solid waste at curbside for regularly scheduled pickup. 
(2)  Throw or deposit any municipal solid waste, trash, or debris in any stream, stream bed, or body of water. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials, solid waste or yard trash within the city to transport such materials without suitable covers. This section shall not apply to the transportation of poultry or livestock or silage, or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any municipal solid waste, building material, building material waste, cement sludge, asphalt sludge or other substances accumulated as a result of construction, repairs to existing facilities or demolition of existing structures on or into any public right-of-way, public or private road, shoulder of any public or private road or public or private ditch or any public or private property not specifically permitted to receive such materials. 
( Ord. No. 2014-23, § I , 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 2016-02, 4-4-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-243. - Maintenance of property; sweeping litter into streets. 
(a)  Property. All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a litter-free condition. 
(b)  Sweeping into sidewalks or streets. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk the accumulation of litter, solid waste or yard trash from any building or property. 
( Ord. No. 2014-23, § I , 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 2016-02, 4-4-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-244. - Distribution, placement of handbills and advertising matter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place in or on any automobile in the city any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard, or other literature except with the express permission of the owner or occupant of such automobile. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place on private property any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard, or other literature, except with the express permission of the owner of the property or intended recipient. This section shall not apply to multipage printed publications. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to distribute or deposit any multipage printed publications in the city at any location where the owner of the property or intended recipients have notified the distributor, in writing, that he does not desire to receive such materials at such location. The distribution or depositing of such materials on public or vacant private property is prohibited. The name, address and telephone number of the distributor must be shown on all such materials. 
( Ord. No. 2014-23, § I , 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 2016-02, 4-4-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-245. - Vehicles hauling refuse to be covered. 
All persons who desire to haul municipal solid waste over the streets of the city shall use a vehicle provided with a cover and operate it so as to prevent municipal solid waste from being dropped, blown or spilled. 
( Ord. No. 2014-23, § I , 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 2016-02, 4-4-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-246. - Construction sites and demolition sites. 
All construction and demolition contractors shall provide on-site municipal solid waste receptacles, bulk containers, or detachable roll-off containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials, and other trash produced by those working on the site. The site shall be kept in a litter-free condition. The number of municipal solid waste receptacles, bulk containers, or detachable roll-off containers shall be determined by the size of the job. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public or private property as a result of construction or demolitions shall be removed by the contractor upon completion of the construction. 
( Ord. No. 2014-23, § I , 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 2016-02, 4-4-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-247. - Placing household garbage in commercial dumpster without permission of owner. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to put household garbage, trash, solid waste or any other waste in a commercial dumpster within the city without permission from the owner of such dumpster. 
( Ord. No. 2014-23, § I , 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 2016-02, 4-4-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-248. - Removing material from commercial dumpster without permission from owner/scavenging prohibited. 
No person shall be permitted to scavenge or reclaim any refuse which has been delivered to a public disposal site for disposal. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any article, trash or other material from any commercial dumpster without permission from the owner. 
( Ord. No. 2014-23, § I , 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 2016-02, 4-4-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-249. - Scattering material from commercial dumpster prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter material from a commercial dumpster around the commercial dumpster site. 
( Ord. No. 2014-23, § I , 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 2016-02, 4-4-2016 ) 
Sec. 38-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-16, adopted Nov. 7, 2016 , repealed former Art. IV, §§ 38-251—38-260, in its entirety which pertained to soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control and derived from Ord. No. 2010-02, §§ I—X, adopted Feb. 1, 2010. 

Secs. 38-251—38-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CLEAN AIR[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-017, §§ 1—12, adopted Aug. 9, 2004; and Ord. No. 2004-026, §§ 1—12, adopted Oct. 5, 2004, did not expressly amend this Code; hence, inclusion of their provisions as art. V, §§ 38-351—38-353, of this chapter was at the editor's discretion 

Sec. 38-351. - Title. 
This article shall be known, cited, and referred to as the City of Tifton Clean Air Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-017, § 1, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-026, § 1, 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-352. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The city council does hereby find that: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy non-smokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. 
(2)  Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. 
(b)  Accordingly, the city council finds and declares that the purposes of this article shall be: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places; and 
(2)  To guarantee the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air in such places; and 
(3)  To recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. No. 2004-017, § 2, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-026, § 2, 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-353. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Attached bar means the bar area of a restaurant or anywhere in a restaurant where alcoholic beverages are sold. 
Child care facility shall be defined as a facility wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article the term "children's day care facility" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school", "early learning center", "pre-kindergarten", "private kindergarten", "play school", or "pre-school". 
Dining area means an interior or exterior area (such as porch, patio or courtyard) containing a counter or tables upon which food is served. 
Employer means any person or entity who employs the services of an individual person. 
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer to provide services of any nature and description in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Enclosed means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling. It includes areas commonly described as public lobbies or lobbies in an area that is enclosed as defined herein. 
Establishment means any business, store, office or other place where goods or services are sold or provided as part of a commercial venture. The term "establishment" includes but is not limited to the following: (1) automobile dealerships, furniture or other showrooms for the display of merchandise offered for sale; (2) grocery, pharmacy, specialty, department and other stores which sell goods or merchandise; (3) service stations, stores or shops for the repair or maintenance of appliances, shoes, motor vehicles or other items or products; (4) barbershops, beauty shops, cleaners, laundromats and other establishments offering services to the general public; (5) offices providing professional services such as legal, medical, dental, engineering, and architectural services; (6) banks, savings and loan offices, and other financial establishments; and (7) hotels and motels and other places that provide accommodations to the public. 
Health care facility means any licensed general or specialized hospital, institutional infirmary, public health center, or diagnostic and treatment center, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-7-1(2), as amended. 
Intermediate care (nursing) home means any long-term custodial care facility that provides for the physical and mental welfare of the aged. 
Personal care home means a residential facility having at least 25 beds and providing, for compensation, protective care and oversight of ambulatory, non-related persons who need a monitored environment but who do not have injuries or disabilities which require chronic or convalescent care, including medical, nursing, or intermediate care. Personal care homes include those facilities which monitor daily residents' functioning and location, have the capability for crisis intervention, and provide supervision in areas of nutrition, medication, and provision of transient medical care. Such term does not include old age residences which are devoted to independent living units with kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals, or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. Personal care homes shall also mean residential care facilities for the elderly. 
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, hallways, employee lounges, cafeterias and snack bars, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a childcare facility, an adult day care facility, or a health care facility. The dining area of a restaurant shall be treated as a place of employment under this article. 
Public place means any area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted including, but not limited to, restaurants, waiting rooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, public transit, public restrooms, enclosed shopping malls, elevators, service lines, educational, recreational and health care facilities, child care facilities, auditoriums, theaters, arenas, meeting rooms, convention halls, polling places, bowling facilities, video arcades, pool halls and other amusement centers. Porches, courtyards or decks with a contiguous connection to a public place shall be considered a public place. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a childcare facility, an adult daycare facility or a healthcare facility. Common areas of an establishment or business not defined herein as a public place (such as restrooms, hallways, employee lounges, cafeterias and snack bars, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas) are not public places for purposes of construction of this article. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, dining areas, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term restaurant includes an attached bar as defined in this section. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
(Ord. No. 2004-017, § 3, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-026, § 3, 10-5-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-354. - Prohibited smoking. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in all public places including, but not limited to, recreational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2004-017, § 4, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-026, § 4, 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-355. - Prohibition of smoking applicable to city property. 
This article shall apply to all enclosed facilities including buildings and vehicles owned or operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-017, § 5, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-026, § 5, 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-356. - Reasonable distance. 
Smoking may occur outdoors but no less than 25 feet from any entrance to any public place or an establishment electing to be regulated by this article, so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means. 
(Ord. No. 2004-017, § 6, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-026, § 6, 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-357. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The smoking prohibition shall not apply in the following areas: 
(1)  Retail tobacco stores, private clubs, establishments and businesses not included in the definition of "public place" hereinabove; 
(2)  Private residences, including private residences which may serve as an office workplace, except if used as a childcare, an adult day care or a health care facility; 
(3)  Any property owned or leased by the State of Georgia or the federal government; 
(4)  Designated smoking rooms in hotels and motels rented by guests provided that such designated smoking rooms shall not comprise more than 25 percent of the total number of rooms available for rent; and 
(5)  Outdoor areas of public places or places of employment, except where the local government, an owner or employer (as appropriate) declares that the outdoor area is a smoke free environment, as provided in this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this article may declare that the entire establishment is a non-smoking establishment. In the event of such election and the posting of signage required in section 38-359, such establishment shall be entitled to request enforcement of this article by the city code enforcement office and/or the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 2004-017, § 7, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-026, § 7, 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-358. - Employers' responsibility. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees of public places, but employers are not required to make expenditures or structural changes to create a smoke free work area. 
(b)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment electing to be regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(c)  All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be removed from an area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(d)  Each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within the city is encouraged to adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy that incorporates the smoking prohibitions of this article. 
(e)  The written smoking policy should be provided to all employees. 
(Ord. No. 2004-017, § 8, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-026, § 8, 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-359. - Posting of signs and notification. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every building where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or area. 
(b)  Every public place or establishment electing to be regulated by this article where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  Notice of the provisions set forth in this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-017, § 9, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-026, § 9, 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-360. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the city police department and/or the city code enforcement office. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the city code enforcement office. 
(c)  The health department, fire department, or their designees shall, while a public place or an establishment that has opted to be covered by this article is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article and forward along any notice of violation to the city code enforcement office. 
(d)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(e)  In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the police department, the code enforcement officer, or city manager, or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or establishment electing to be regulated by this article to comply with the provisions of this article may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2004-017, § 10, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-026, § 10, 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-361. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $50.00 for a first violation; and 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $75.00 for a second violation of this article within one year; and 
(3)  A fine to be determined in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
(b)  A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment that has opted to be covered by this article and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for first violation; and 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year; and 
(3)  A fine to be determined in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or establishment electing to be regulated by this article may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-017, § 11, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-026, § 11, 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-362. - Other applicable laws and disclaimer. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. By regulating smoking the city is assuming an undertaking for the sole purpose of promoting the general health and welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, the city, its councilmembers, officers, agents and employees shall not be liable in monetary damages to any person who claims that any breach of this article caused injury. 
(Ord. No. 2004-017, § 12, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-026, § 12, 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-363. - Burning prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall set fire to, or burn any papers or other municipal solid waste deposited at any disposal site or on the grounds thereof. 
(b)  No garbage, household trash, rubbish, solid waste, yard trash or construction/demolition waste shall be burned outside of any building. 
(c)  The city shall have authority to utilize an air curtain destructor at its disposal sites in accordance with EPD regulations and guidelines. 
( Ord. No. 2014-23, § I , 12-1-2014) 
Secs. 38-364—38-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE 

Sec. 38-451. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(a)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 [Legislative note: Adoption of this state-mandated ordinance [this article] and the specific language thereof does not expand, alter or modify zoning restrictions with regard to animals or livestock in the city]; 
(b)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinance and state guidelines; 
(c)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(d)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(e)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(f)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(g)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(h)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(i)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(j)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(k)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(l)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(m)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 2010-20, § I, 12-6-2010) 
Sec. 38-452. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)  The city manager, or designee, shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this [article] may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-20, § I, 12-6-2010) 
Chapter 42 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; planning and zoning, ch. 54; public safety, ch. 58; sewers, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-13, adopted Oct. 4, 2010, repealed the former Art. II, Div. 1, §§ 42-31—42-42, Div. 2, §§ 42-61—42-68, Div. 3, §§ 42-86—42-95, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to flood damage prevention and derived from Ord. No. 98-22, §§ 5-25—5-46, adopted 8-3-1998. 

DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 42-31. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council, of Tifton Georgia, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 1, § A), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-32. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Tifton, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 1, § B), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-33. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 1, § C), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-34. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 1, § D), 10-4-2010) 
Secs. 42-35—42-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 42-41. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Tifton, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 2, § A), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-42. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for (*Tift County*) are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 2, § B), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-43. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 2, § C), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-44. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 2, § D), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-45. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 2, § E), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-46. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 2, § F), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-47. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 2, § G), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-48. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 360 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 2, § H), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-49. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the director of planning and zoning's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 42-42 of this article. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building, means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
*Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before 5/1/1978 [the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community]. 
*Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before 5/1/1978 [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
*New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after 5/1/1978 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after 5/1/1978 [the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
*New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after 5/1/1978 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance [this article] requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the cast of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 6), 10-4-2010) 
Secs. 42-50—42-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 42-61. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 3, § A), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-62. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the director of planning and zoning on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 42-72(2) of this article; 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The director of planning and zoning shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 3, § B), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-63. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the director of planning and zoning shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-42 of this article, then the director of planning and zoning shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 42-62(2) of this article. 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 42-62(2) of this article. 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the director of planning and zoning shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 42-62(1)c. and subsection 42-72(2) or subsection 42-74(2) of this article. 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the director of planning and zoning shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the director of planning and zoning and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 3, § C), 10-4-2010) 
Secs. 42-64—42-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 42-71. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 4, § A), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-72. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-71(4), "elevated buildings", of this article. 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above three feet above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to three feet above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 42-63(6) of this article. 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 42-71(6) above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a, c. above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-42 of this article, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 4, § B), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-73. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-42 of this article, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-42 of this article, then the director of planning and zoning shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this division. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions of subsections (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a three feet increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-71(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The director of planning and zoning shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 4, § C), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-74. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-42 of this article, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than three feet at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 42-72 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 4, § D), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-75. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-42 of this article, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-71(4), "elevated buildings". 
The director of planning and zoning shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus three feet, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsection 42-62(1)c. and subsection 42-62(2) of this article. 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 4, § E), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-76. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 4, § F), 10-4-2010) 
Sec. 42-77. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 4, § G), 10-4-2010) 
Secs. 42-78—42-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 42-81. - Variances. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals as established by the city shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the director of planning and zoning in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The director of planning and zoning shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, (Art. 5), 10-4-2010) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Court, ch. 30; public safety, ch. 58; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Library rules and regulations adopted. 
The city council hereby adopts and approves the rules and regulations of the boards of the county libraries concerning the operation of such libraries. 
(Code 1974, § 16-14) 
Sec. 46-2. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to litter, place or throw rubbish, trash, debris, garbage, junk or refuse on or upon any of the streets, alleys or lanes in the city. 
(Code 1974, § 16-15) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 66. 
Sec. 46-3. - Professional organizers—License required. 
Every person who shall solicit membership in any association where there is any charge for membership therein, shall, prior to any solicitation for members thereof, apply to and obtain from the city clerk a certificate and license authorizing such activities upon his part. 
(Code 1974, § 16-21) 
Sec. 46-4. - Same—Prerequisites to license. 
Prerequisites for the obtaining of any license required by section 46-3 shall be: 
(1)  A showing that the applicant is of good moral character and that he has never been convicted of any offense against the laws of any state or of the United States; 
(2)  The applicant is not, nor has ever been, affiliated with or a member of any organization or group having communistic beliefs; and 
(3)  A payment of a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1974, § 16-22) 
Sec. 46-5. - Public drunkenness; consumption of alcoholic beverages on municipal property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person while intoxicated or drunk to appear in any public place while one or more persons are present or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own where one or more persons are present and manifest a drunken condition by boisterous or indecent conduct or loud or profane language or both. 
(b)  No person shall be intoxicated to such an extent as to be boisterous or noisy, or who shall commit any other act of disorder amounting to a breach of the peace. 
(c)  Consumption or possession of open alcoholic beverages of any kind is prohibited on any municipal property located within the limits of the city, to include but not be limited to all streets, sidewalks and thoroughfares, all municipal parking lots, all municipal buildings, and all public parks and recreational facilities. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic beverages in or at any restaurant, cafe, eating place, hotel, drugstores, or other place of business in the city unless such person first secures the express consent of the proprietor or manager then in charge of such place. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in or at any restaurant, cafe, eating place, hotel, drugstore, or other place of business in the city, in an intoxicated condition. 
(e)  No person shall maintain any place in the city at which he permits other persons to assemble and violate any provisions of this section. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated on the streets. 
(Code 1974, § 16-23) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 46-6. - Skating on streets. 
It shall be unlawful to skate on roller skates on any street in the city paved with asphalt or asphaltic concrete. 
(Code 1974, § 16-24) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
Sec. 46-7. - Solicitation for funds by nonresident organizations. 
(a)  All solicitations for funds by nonresident religious or charitable organizations in the city are hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful unless prior thereto a permit is obtained from the manager of the city and the chief of police of the city in the manner set out in this section. 
(b)  Any nonresident religious or charitable organization desiring to solicit funds in the city shall prior thereto make a written application to the manager and the chief of police which shall set forth the following: name and address of organization; period of time solicitations will be conducted; number and names of individuals who will solicit funds; time each day that solicitations will be made; and purpose of solicitations. 
(c)  The written applications shall be presented to either the manager of the city or the chief of police at least 48 hours prior to the proposed solicitation period, and following this the manager and chief of police within the 48-hour period shall either grant the permit or refuse the permit. The general welfare of the citizens of the city will be the primary factor considered by the manager and the chief of police in either granting or refusing such permit. 
(d)  Should the manager and the chief of police refuse to grant the permit for the solicitation of funds and the solicitations be carried on without such permit, any person or persons participating in soliciting funds shall be considered to be engaged in an unlawful activity and upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 16-30) 
Sec. 46-8. - Sale of literature advocating abuse of controlled substances. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to sell, offer for sale, distribute, display or promote to any minor or to any other person any item, object, printed matter, or any other material related to illegal drugs covered by the state controlled substances act (O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 13) which reasonably leads to any of the following: 
(1)  Intolerable invasion of privacy. 
(2)  Disruptions of the classroom. 
(3)  Incitement to imminent lawless activity. 
(4)  Solicitation of illegal activity. 
(Code 1974, § 16-31) 
Sec. 46-9. - Curfew for minors during school hours. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term: 
(1)  Minor means persons that are at least six years old but not yet 17 years old; and 
(2)  Public place means any street, highway, alley or right-of-way, including sidewalks; any park, playground, shopping center or other place or building open to the public; any cemetery, schoolyard, body of water or watercourse; any privately-owned or publicly-owned place of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation, including, parking lots and other areas adjacent thereto; and any vacant lot or land, whether publicly-owned or privately-owned. 
(b)  Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any school day, it shall be unlawful for any minor to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, places, buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply when the minor: 
(1)  Is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the legal care or custody of the minor; 
(2)  Is upon an emergency errand directed by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor; 
(3)  Is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places referenced in subsection (b) of this section during the prescribed period of time; 
(4)  Is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal interstate and intrastate travel through the city; 
(5)  Is enrolled in a valid home study program as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690; 
(6)  Has completed all course study requirements for high school graduation; 
(7)  Is married in accordance with applicable law; 
(8)  Has written proof from school authorities that the minor is excused from school attendance at that particular time; 
(9)  Is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; or 
(10)  Serves as a page of the general assembly as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-692. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody or control of any minor to allow such minor to be in or upon any public place within the city between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any school day, except in the circumstances set out in subsections (b)(1)—(9) of this section. An adult person who is in violation of this subsection shall be subject to such punishment as the city municipal court may impose, subject to all limitations contained in the city charter and O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690.1, and in case of conflict, the latter shall control. Each violation of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense if the parent or legal guardian of the minor has invoked the jurisdiction of the juvenile court against the minor prior to the time that the minor was found in violation of subsection (b) of this section. Any minor who violates subsection (b) of this section is subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. 
(e)  Any police officer who takes into custody a minor in violation of subsection (b) of this section shall comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 20-2-699 and 20-2-700. 
(f)  If a minor is suspended or expelled from school, for the duration of the suspension or expulsion, such minor's parent or legal guardian shall: 
(1)  Personally supervise the minor or arrange for a responsible adult 21 years of age or older to supervise the minor at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school if the minor had not been expelled or suspended; and 
(2)  Prohibit the minor from being in any public place at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school if the minor had not been suspended or expelled, unless the minor is: 
a.  Accompanied by his parent or legal guardian or a responsible adult 21 years of age or older selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor; or 
b.  Employed pursuant to an age or schooling certificate during the actual working hours, or traveling directly to or from the job site. 
(g)  A person who is in violation of subsection (f) of this section shall be subject to such punishment as the city municipal court shall impose, subject to all limitations contained in the city charter and O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690.1, and in case of conflict, the latter shall control. Each violation of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Any minor who violates subsection (b) of this section, while under suspension or expulsion from school, shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. 
(i)  It shall be an affirmative defense if the parent or legal guardian has invoked the jurisdiction of the juvenile court against the minor prior to the time that the minor violated subsection (f) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, § I, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 46-10. - Curfew for minors during evening hours. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term: 
(1)  Minor means persons that are not yet 17 years old; and 
(2)  Public place means any street, highway, alley or right-of-way, including sidewalks; any park, playground, shopping center or other place or building open to the public; any cemetery, schoolyard, body of water or watercourse; any privately-owned or publicly-owned place of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation, including, parking lots and other areas adjacent thereto; any vacant lot or land, whether publicly-owned or privately-owned; and any private property over which the public has either been granted or has taken the right of vehicular and/or pedestrian travel. 
(b)  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. it shall be unlawful for any minor to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon any public place as defined hereinabove unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply when the minor: 
(1)  Is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the legal care or custody of the minor; 
(2)  Is upon an emergency errand directed by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor; 
(3)  Is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places referenced in this section during the prescribed period of time; 
(4)  Is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal interstate and intrastate travel through the city; 
(5)  Is attending an event sponsored by such minor's school including, but not limited to, sporting events and dances; or 
(6)  Is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion. 
(c)  Any minor found by any police officer to be in violation of this section for the first time shall be taken to the city police department whereupon such minor's responsible adult parent or legal guardian shall be called to come pick up the child. A warning citation shall then be given to both the minor and to the responsible parent or legal guardian. 
(d)  Any police officer who takes into custody a minor in violation of subsection (b) of this section that has already received a warning citation shall then notify juvenile court authorities for processing consistent with the requirements of O.C.G.A. tit. 15, ch. 11. 
(e)  Any adult person who is in violation of this section after having first received a warning citation shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(f)  It shall be an affirmative defense if the parent or legal guardian of the minor has invoked the jurisdiction of the juvenile court against the minor prior to the time that the minor was found in violation of subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § I, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 46-11. - Indecent, evocative or provocative bodily exposure and dress in public. 
(a)  Title. The title of this section shall be "An ordinance prohibiting indecent, evocative or provocative bodily exposure or dress in public." 
(b)  Definitions. 
The term evocative as used in this section shall mean any display of any portion of the body which is normally covered by undergarments or clothing designed and intended to be worn as undergarments which convey an image that is lewd, indecent or sexually titillating to a person of ordinary and reasonable sensibilities. 
The term hips as used in this section shall be defined as the crest of the ilium of the wearer. 
The term pants as used in this section shall mean a usually loose-fitting outer garment for the lower part of the body, having individual leg portions that reach typically to the ankle but sometimes to any of various other points from the upper leg down. 
The term provocative as used in this section shall mean any display of any portion of the body which is normally covered by undergarments or clothing designed and intended to be worn as undergarments which conveys an image that is lewd, indecent to a person of ordinary and reasonable sensibilities or is intended to convey membership in identifiable gangs which have been previously associated with unlawful acts. 
The term public place as used in this section shall mean any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access. 
The term undergarment as used in this section shall mean clothing worn at or below the waist, usually next to the skin, that are designed, intended or worn under the clothes to cover a person's intimate parts. 
(c)  Indecent, evocative or provocative acts prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a public place or on public property wearing pants more than three inches below the top of the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing the skin or undergarments. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  A citation shall be issued to the offender and the person shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $25.00 on the first offense and not more than $200.00 for each subsequent offense. In addition to or in lieu of a fine, the court may order such person to participate in up to 40 hours of court approved community service activities. 
(2)  Any violation of this section shall be cited by the law enforcement officer by issuance of a citation and summons to appear before the municipal court of the city, or in the case of a juvenile, the juvenile court of the county. 
(3)  This section shall not, in and of itself, be grounds for an arrest or for search of the person cited. However, the municipal court or juvenile court shall have the same authority as the superior court to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences. 
(Ord. No. 2011-14, § I, 11-7-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-14, § I, adopted Nov. 7, 2011, enacted provisions intended for codification as § 46-10. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as § 46-11. 
Secs. 46-12—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 46-31. - Advertising—Posting on utility poles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tack, post or nail any paper, metal, wood, or other signs or advertising matter of any character, on any telegraph, telephone or electric light pole on any street or alley within the city. 
(Code 1974, § 16-1) 
Sec. 46-32. - Same—Posting on private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, or cause to be posted, any bill or bills on any building within the corporate limits of the city without the consent of the owner of the building. 
(Code 1974, § 16-2) 
Sec. 46-33. - Damaging city trees or property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut down or injure, in any way, any tree on the sidewalks or on the public streets, or to injure or deface any property of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 16-7) 
Sec. 46-34. - Unlawful possession of property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found in possession of property which the person does not own and which he has not obtained possession of with the consent of the owner of such property. 
(Code 1974, § 16-32) 
Sec. 46-35. - Unwanted presence on premises of another. 
(a)  The unwanted presence of a person on the premises of another person is hereby declared to be dangerous to the welfare and safety of the residents of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, who is on the premises of another, to fail and refuse to leave such premises when requested to do so by the owner of such premises, or by any person in charge of such premises or the agent or employee of such owner or such person in charge of such premises. 
(Code 1974, § 16-27) 
Secs. 46-36—46-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-61. - Disorderly conduct. 
Any person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if he: 
(1)  Acts in violent or tumultuous manner toward another. 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Endangers lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats, and abusive conduct. 
(4)  Causes, provokes or engages in any filth, brawl, or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another or public property. 
(5)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking, encouraging, or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(6)  Jostles or roughly crowds or pushes any person in any public place. 
(7)  Collects in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes. 
(8)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming. 
(9)  Frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from another by any illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device. 
(10)  Assembles with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city or aids or abets therein. 
(11)  Utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets. 
(12)  Frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated. 
(13)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another. 
(14)  No person shall attempt to force his person or company upon any other person against such person's will. 
(Code 1974, § 16-9) 
Sec. 46-62. - Aggressive begging. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall engage in aggressive begging in any public place in the city. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
Aggressive begging means begging with the intent to intimidate another person into giving money or goods. 
Begging means asking for money or goods as a gift, whether by words, bodily gestures, signs, or other means. 
Intimidate means coercing or frightening into submission or obedience. 
Public place means any road, alley, lane, parking area, sidewalk or any place, private or otherwise, adopted or fitted for vehicular or pedestrian travel, that is in common use by the public with the consent, expressed or implied, of the owner or owners, and further, any public playground, school grounds, recreation grounds, parks, parkways, park drives, park paths and wharves, station grounds, and rights-of-way open to the use of the public. 
(Code 1974, § 16-10) 
Sec. 46-63. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand, or remain idle either along and/or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic, or pedestrians. 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, regress therein, thereof and thereto. 
(d)  When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (c) of this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of the section. 
(Code 1974, § 16-13) 
Sec. 46-64. - Unlawful assemblies; dispersing. 
If any persons are unlawfully, riotously or tumultuously assembled within the city, any police officer or member of the police department of the city, whether such member is a regular or special police officer appointed for temporary service, when, in the opinion of the police officer or member of the police department, the assembly of such persons shall tend to create a disturbance or incite a riot or disorderly conduct, such officers shall command all of the persons, as assembled, immediately and peaceably to disperse, and if such persons so commanded do not thereupon immediately and peaceably disperse, such persons shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1974, § 16-26) 
Sec. 46-65. - Congregating on streets, sidewalks. 
The congregating of persons on the sidewalks and streets of the city so as to obstruct the sidewalks and streets is hereby declared to be dangerous to the welfare and safety of the residents of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person or number of persons to congregate in such numbers on the sidewalks and streets of the city so as to obstruct the sidewalks and streets. 
(Code 1974, § 16-6) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
Sec. 46-66. - Disorderly house. 
(a)  The following terms shall have the following definitions as applied to this Code section: 
(1)  Disorderly house means any place within or without any building or structure where persons assemble for the purpose of illegally dispensing or indulging in alcoholic beverages; gaming; prostitution; or the manufacturing, distribution or use of controlled substances. 
(2)  Person means owner, lessee or lessor of property, their guests and invitees, or officer of or agent for any corporation, association, club, lodge or other organization. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or operate either by himself or by others, a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, prostitution, illegally dispensing or indulging in alcoholic beverages, manufacturing, distribution or use of controlled substances, or other misbehavior, to the common disturbance, injury or endangerment to the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of the neighborhood or orderly citizens. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership or corporation having control over any house, building, structure, apartment, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle to knowingly lease, sublease or otherwise permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly house, and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a disorderly house, no persons, partnership or corporation shall continue to grant permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house; provided, however, before any person is charged under this subsection, written notice shall be given to the owner of the property and the person in possession thereof by the chief of police stating the general, customary and common habits of the house, giving fair notice of this subsection and the conduct prescribed thereby. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any boisterous, noisy, drunken or riotous person to assemble or remain in their house, apartment or upon their property, after receiving oral notice from a police officer that boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing activities have caused complaint and annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens; provided, however, no person shall be charged under this subsection unless the owner or person in possession of the premises has been afforded an opportunity to disburse the assembly or offending person from the premises. This subsection shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on private property after being notified by the owner or lawful occupant to depart. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § I, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 46-67. - Gambling; possession of gaming equipment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to assemble with another or others for the purpose of playing or betting for money or other thing of value, at any game played with cards, dice, or balls, or to play and bet money or other thing of value, at any table or whatever name, kind or description, for gaming, or to bet at any game of ninepins, or any other number of pins, or at any billiard or pool table. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain gaming devises in his or another's place of business for use or operation of any kind, at any time or under any circumstance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate or own or possess for the purpose of maintaining or operating any pinball or similar machine operated by depositing a coin therein for the playing of a game of engaging in any contest of chance or skill, including vending machines where the amount of merchandise to which the customer or person playing the machine is entitled is uncertain, or in some instances may be a larger amount than in other instance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-19, § I, 12-6-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-19, § I, adopted Dec. 6, 2010, enacted provisions intended for codification as § 46-47. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as § 46-67. 
Secs. 46-68—46-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 46-81. - Archery—Prohibited except at ranges. 
All archery activity of any nature or kind is hereby prohibited within the city, except such activity done at an established and marked archery range. 
(Code 1974, § 16-3) 
Sec. 46-82. - Same—Adult supervision. 
There shall be no shooting of arrows at a marked and established archery range unless an adult person is present and actively supervising all activity at the range during the shooting of arrows. 
(Code 1974, § 16-4) 
Sec. 46-83. - Same—Sale, use of hunting arrows. 
The sale of hunting arrows to a minor is hereby prohibited; no hunting arrows may be used or shot on a marked and established archery range. 
(Code 1974, § 16-5) 
Sec. 46-84. - Discharging firearms. 
(a)  Except upon property located in the suburban-agriculture zoning district (S-A), it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a gun, pistol or other firearm within the city except in defense of person or property. Within the suburban-agriculture zoning district it shall be unlawful to discharge a gun, pistol or other firearm within 1,000 feet of any structure. Despite the provisions hereof, no person shall be relieved of civil or criminal liability with respect to any such discharge. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the employees and other personnel of the police department, under the express authority and supervision of the department, may discharge firearms as required by the department on and upon the city police department pistol range located on Ferry Lake Road. 
(Code 1974, § 16-8; Ord. of 2000-001, § 16-8, 1-3-2000; Ord. No. 2001-31, § I(16-8), 11-12-2001) 
Sec. 46-85. - Slingshots prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a slingshot within the city. 
(Code 1974, § 16-25) 
Sec. 46-86. - Sale of certain weapons prohibited, regulated; reports of sales. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to sell or barter to anyone, to exchange or keep for the purpose of sale, any of the following weapons: a shotgun or rifle with barrel length of less than 18 inches; knucks; dirk; sword-cane; blackjack; springback knife; switchblade knife; or any knife which has a blade which exceeds four inches in length, excluding hunting knives or butcher knives, or case knives customarily used for domestic or industrial use. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person, partnership, corporation, pawn shop or firm to sell or barter to any purchaser a rifle, shotgun or pistol without complying with the following regulations: 
(1)  At the time of the sale or barter, there shall be obtained from the purchaser in writing the following information: buyer's name, height, weight, race, residence address, date of birth, place of birth, and answers by the buyer to the following questions: 
a.  Have you been convicted in any court of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year? (Note: The actual sentence given by the judge does not matter; a yes answer is necessary if the judge could have given a sentence of more than one year). 
b.  Are you under indictment or information in any court for a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year? 
c.  Have you been discharged from the armed forces under dishonorable conditions? 
d.  Are you a user of, or addicted to marihuana, or a depressant, stimulant, or narcotic drug? 
e.  Are you a fugitive from justice? 
f.  Have you ever been adjudicated mentally defective or have you ever been committed to a mental institution? 
g.  Are you an alien illegally in the United States? 
h.  Are you a person who, having been a citizen of the United States, has renounced his citizenship? 
This information will be obtained from the purchaser on a written form, which the purchaser must sign and date. 
(2)  Any person, partnership, corporation, pawn shop or firm selling or bartering a firearm as provided in this section shall provide to the police department the following information in writing: the manner in which the buyer of the firearm has identified himself to the seller; the type, model, caliber or gauge, serial number and manufacturer of the firearm. 
(3)  The information set out in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section shall be placed upon a printed form provided by the police department, and shall be made by the seller in duplicate. The original of such form showing such information shall be delivered by the seller to the police department on the same day that the firearm is sold or bartered, such delivery to be made by hand or by placing the original in the United States mail addressed to the police department. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person, partnership, corporation, pawn shop or firm required by subsection (b) of this section to obtain the information set out in subsection (b)(1) of this section to either fail to obtain such information or fail to provide such information to the police department, as required by subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person buying or bartering for a firearm, as set out in subsection (b) of this section, to give false information to the seller or to answer falsely any questions set out in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 16-29) 
Secs. 46-87—46-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC PANHANDLING, BEGGING, CHARITABLE AND POLITICAL SOLICITATION REGULATED 

Sec. 46-90. - Purpose and findings. 
The city council does hereby find that: 
(1)  It is the intent of council in enacting this article to recognize free speech rights for all citizens while at the same time protecting the coexistent rights for all citizens to enjoy safe and convenient travel in public spaces free from intimidating conduct, threats, and harassment that stem from certain types of abusive solicitation, or that may give rise to interference with other's activities if they occur in particular settings and contexts; and 
(2)  Council finds that there are numerous forms of solicitation that are not in and of themselves inherently threatening or aggressive, including vocal requests for a donation; carrying or displaying a sign requesting donations; shaking or jingling a cup of change; and ringing a bell in compliance with any applicable noise ordinance; and 
(3)  However, council finds that there has been an increase in aggressive solicitation in the city, which threatens the security, privacy, and freedom of movement of both residents and visitors; and 
(4)  Council also finds that the presence of solicitors in certain specific areas (such as near to or adjacent to automatic teller machines, adjacent to sidewalk cafes, at public bus stops, and in public garages in the nighttime) create reasonable concerns by citizens objectively worried about their privacy, freedom of movement, and personal security; and 
(5)  Council further finds that certain forms of solicitation impede the orderly flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and leads to concerns regarding traffic and public safety, particularly in congested roadways and sidewalks to include highly traveled areas, building entrances, narrow sidewalks, traffic medians of high-speed or high-volume streets and highways; and 
(6)  Both aggressive and passive begging, panhandling, charitable or political solicitation within streets and highway rights of way, or on traffic medians, give rise to an increased risk of injury to solicitors on medians, traffic congestion, and traffic accidents that may affect drivers or solicitors. This article provides ample alternative sites for passive begging, panhandling, charitable and political solicitation in areas that do not give rise to enhanced public safety concerns or personal privacy and security concerns. 
(7)  This article is not intended impermissibly to limit an individual's right to exercise free speech associated with solicitation; rather it aims to impose specific time, place, and manner restrictions on solicitation and associated conduct in certain limited circumstances; namely, limiting aggressive panhandling, panhandling at locations or times deemed particularly threatening and dangerous, and panhandling in places where people wish to avoid or reduce a threat of inescapable confrontations; and 
(8)  In promulgating this article, council seeks to impose regulations that are narrowly tailored to serve the aforementioned significant governmental interests. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 46-91. - Definitions. 
(a)  Aggressive begging, panhandling, or solicitation includes the following forms of conduct: 
(1)  Confronting someone in a way that would cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm; 
(2)  Accosting an individual by approaching or speaking to the individual or individuals in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his or her person, or upon property in his or her immediate possession; 
(3)  Touching someone without his or her consent; 
(4)  Using obscene or abusive language toward someone while attempting to panhandle or solicit him or her; 
(5)  Forcing oneself upon the company of another by engaging in any of the following conduct: 
a.  Continuing to solicit in close proximity to the individual addressed after the person to whom the solicitation is directed has made a negative response, either verbally, by physical sign, by attempting to leave the presence of the person soliciting, or by other negative indication; 
b.  Blocking the passage of the individual solicited; or 
c.  Otherwise engaging in conduct that could reasonably be construed as intending to compel or force a person to accede to a solicitation. 
(6)  Acting with the intent to intimidate someone into giving money, or 
(7)  Other conduct that a reasonable person being solicited would regard as threatening or intimidating in order to solicit a contribution or donation. 
(b)  Areas with heightened personal security concerns include the following locations: 
(1)  Public parking garage or lot, between dusk and dawn; 
(2)  Building entrances, public events venues, public accommodations or commercial businesses due to congestion and close proximity to others; 
(3)  Other areas in which congestion could give a reasonable person a reasonable, justified concern for his or her personal security due to congestion and close proximity to others. 
(c)  Areas with heightened personal privacy concerns include the following: 
(1)  Automated teller machine, or financial institution in which an automated teller machine is located. "Financial institution" means any bank, industrial bank, credit union, or savings and loan. 
(2)  Sidewalk café during operating hours unless the solicitor's presence is authorized by the proprietor . , 
(3)  Other locations in which a reasonable person would have a reasonable and justified concern about whether congestion and close proximity to others could compromise his or her interests in privacy. 
(d)  Areas with heightened public safety concerns include the following: 
(1)  Streets or highways; 
(2)  Sidewalks and corners at intersecting streets, highways and alleys; 
(3)  Traffic medians of whatever size within designated high traffic or high-speed roadways. 
(e)  Begging, panhandling and charitable or political solicitation includes the following activities: actions that are conducted in the furtherance of the purpose of immediately collecting contributions for the use of one's self or others. As used in this article, the word, "solicit," and its forms, includes requests for funding arising from begging, panhandling, charitable, or political fundraising initiatives. "Begging, panhandling and charitable or political solicitation" includes both "aggressive" and "passive" forms of begging, panhandling and charitable or political solicitation, but these forms are regulated separately under this article. 
(f)  Passive panhandling, begging, charitable or political solicitation includes conduct that falls within the definition in part (e) of this section, but only such conduct that involves requests for contributions presented in writing without speaking, oral requests for contributions that do not constitute "aggressive panhandling, begging, charitable or political solicitation," or other activities that do not fall within the definition of "aggressive begging, panhandling or solicitation" as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 46-92. - Passive begging, panhandling, charitable and political solicitation: when regulated. 
Passive panhandling, begging, charitable or political solicitation are permitted except where expressly prohibited. 
The city council finds that "passive panhandling, begging, charitable or political solicitation," as defined in this article should be treated as speech protected under the first amendment unless other well- grounded governmental concerns are implicated. Accordingly, passive panhandling, begging, charitable or political solicitation is permitted throughout the jurisdiction except as prohibited in sections 46-94 and 46-95 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 46-93. - Aggressive panhandling, begging, charitable and political solicitation prohibited. 
Aggressive panhandling, begging, charitable and political solicitation prohibited. No person shall engage in aggressive panhandling, begging, charitable or political solicitation as defined in this article at anytime, anywhere in this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 46-94. - Regulation of panhandling, begging, charitable and political solicitation in areas with specific personal safety and privacy concerns. 
Passive begging, panhandling, charitable and political solicitation are prohibited in the following areas that give rise to specific personal safety and privacy concerns: 
(1)  Locations within eight feet from the entrance of any building entrances, public events venues, public accommodations or commercial businesses; 
(2)  Locations within eight feet of an automated teller machine, or financial institution in which an automated teller machine is located. "Financial institution" means any bank, industrial bank, credit union, or savings and loan; 
(3)  Public parking garage or lot, between dusk and dawn 
(4)  Locations within ten feet of a sidewalk café during operating hours unless the solicitor's presence is authorized by the proprietor. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 46-95. - Panhandling, begging, charitable protection of public access and vehicular safety in public streets and highways and on traffic medians and on high volume and high-speed highways. 
Passive begging, panhandling, charitable and political solicitation are prohibited in the following areas that give rise to concerns of public access, vehicular safety in public streets and highways: 
(1)  Upon any street, highway or alley; 
(2)  Within eight feet from the corner of a intersecting street, highway or alley; 
(3)  Within or upon any median on a state highway. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 46-96. - Penalties. 
Any person who is convicted of violating this article shall, upon conviction, be penalized as provided in chapter 1, section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , § I, 4-16-2018) 
Chapter 50 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; authority to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

Sec. 50-1. - Statutes adopted. 
O.C.G.A. chs. 36—64 is hereby adopted as an ordinance of the city, and full effect shall be given to the provisions of such chapter. 
(Code 1974, § 17-1) 
Sec. 50-2. - Statutory powers, duties vested in commission. 
The powers and duties enumerated in O.C.G.A. chs. 36—64 for the governing body of the supervised park systems shall be vested in the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1974, § 17-2) 
Sec. 50-3. - Facilities dedicated to park and recreational use. 
Such parks and playgrounds as may be acquired by the city are hereby dedicated to the uses contemplated and described under O.C.G.A. chs. 36—64. 
(Code 1974, § 17-3) 
Sec. 50-4. - Fulwood Park declared recreational area. 
Fulwood Park, located and bounded by East 12th Street on the north, Prince Avenue on the east, East 8th Street on the south and Tift Avenue on the west, is hereby declared to be a recreational area owned and maintained by the city for the enjoyment of the citizens of the city and their families. 
(Code 1974, § 17-4) 
Sec. 50-5. - Coordination of recreational activities. 
Any agency, organization or group desiring to use the city recreational facilities shall consult with the park superintendent prior to the use of such facilities and all recreational activities shall be cleared through the park superintendent in order that the recreational activities of the city will be coordinated. 
(Code 1974, § 17-5) 
Sec. 50-6. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession beer or any beverage containing any alcoholic content whatsoever, or to drink beer or any beverage containing any alcoholic content whatsoever, in any park. 
(Code 1974, § 17-7) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 50-7. - Presence in park at night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in or occupy any park from 10:00 p.m. each day until 7:00 a.m. the following day; provided, however, any person or group of persons may secure the prior approval of the caretaker of the park to remain in such park during such hours and upon being given approval, may do so without being in violation of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 17-8) 
Sec. 50-8. - Damaging property. 
It shall be unlawful to destroy, deface or damage any park equipment or furnishing or playground equipment. 
(Code 1974, § 17-9) 
Sec. 50-9. - Moving park equipment. 
It shall be unlawful to move or remove any park benches, furniture or other equipment. 
(Code 1974, § 17-10) 
Sec. 50-10. - Damaging vegetation generally. 
It shall be unlawful to break, cut or otherwise damage any shrubbery, flowers or trees in any city park. 
(Code 1974, § 17-11) 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 86. 
Sec. 50-11. - Reckless driving destroying vegetation in parks. 
It shall be unlawful to drive so recklessly within any city park as to destroy any shrubs or hedges. 
(Code 1974, § 17-12) 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 86. 
Sec. 50-12. - Vehicles to be on roadways. 
It shall be unlawful to drive or operate any vehicle in a city park, other than upon roadways furnished for that purpose. 
(Code 1974, § 17-13) 
Sec. 50-13. - Speed of vehicles in parks. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle, motor-driven or not, within any city park at a rate of speed greater than ten miles per hour. 
(Code 1974, § 17-14) 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 78. 
Sec. 50-14. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any paper, trash or refuse in or about any city park, other than in receptacles provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1974, § 17-15) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 66. 
Sec. 50-15. - Advertising. 
It shall be unlawful to place any sign in any park, or to distribute any circulars or other advertising matter therein. 
(Code 1974, § 17-16) 
Cross reference— Sign regulations, app. A, § 10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 50-16. - Camping; building fires. 
It shall be unlawful to camp in any park; and it shall be unlawful to build any fire therein, except in areas and facilities specifically set aside for such purpose. 
(Code 1974, § 17-17) 
Chapter 54 - PLANNING AND ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-6(10); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 42; sewers, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82; subdivisions, app. B. 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Miscellaneous provisions not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall repeal: 
(1)  Ordinance Number 2000-021, adopted July 10, 2000, establishing the Heights-South Tifton enterprise zone. 
(2)  Ordinance Number 2000-022, adopted July 10, 2000, establishing the Midtown enterprise zone. 
(3)  Ordinance Number 2009-11, adopted May 4, 2009, establishing the Ferry Lake Road enterprise zone. 
(b)  All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, §§ I—V, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 2010-21, §§ I—V, 12-27-2010) 
Secs. 54-2—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY OF TIFTON PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, adopted June 13, 2012, deleted the former Art. II, §§ 54-31—54-51, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to the Greater Tift County Planning and Zoning Commission and derived from the Code of 1974, §§ 18-31—18-49; Ord. No. 2000-007, § I(a)—(d), adopted 3-20-2000. 

Sec. 54-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any individual or business entity applying for rezoning action. 
Business entity means any corporation, partnership, limited partnership firm, enterprise, franchise, association, or trust. 
City zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance of the city adopted October 6, 1986, as now and hereafter amended. 
Commission means the City of Tifton Planning and Zoning Commission.. 
Financial interest means all direct or indirect ownership interests of the total assets or capital stock of a business entity where such ownership interest is ten percent or more. 
Governing authority means the mayor and city council of Tifton. 
Member means a member of the commission. 
Member of the family means the spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son or daughter of a member. 
Property interest means the direct or indirect ownership of real property and includes any percentage of ownership less than total ownership as well as both legal and equitable interest. 
Real property means any tract or parcel of land and, if developed, any buildings or structures located on the land. 
Rezoning action means action by one of the governmental entities adopting or rejecting a proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance or zoning map of the governmental entity which would have the effect of rezoning real property from one zoning classification to another. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-32. - Establishment of commission. 
There is hereby established the Tifton Planning and Zoning Commission which shall function in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-33. - Membership. 
The planning and zoning commission shall consist of five members who shall be selected from time to time as follows: 
(1)  One member shall be selected from time to time by the mayor and city council of Tifton for an initial term expiring June 30, 2013, and three-year terms thereafter with such position to be designated as Tifton post number one; 
(2)  Two members shall be selected from time to time by the mayor and city council of Tifton for an initial term expiring June 30, 2014, and three-year terms thereafter with such position to be designated as Tifton post number two; 
(3)  Two members shall be selected from time to time by the mayor and city council of Tifton for an initial term expiring June 30, 2015, and three-year terms thereafter with such position to be designated as Tifton post number three. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-34. - Filling vacancies. 
All vacancies in the membership of the planning and zoning commission which shall from time to time exist shall be filled for the unexpired term thereof by the respective governing authority which selected the member whose position shall become vacant. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-35. - Limitation on service. 
(a)  Members of the planning and zoning commission shall, notwithstanding their terms of office, serve at the pleasure of the governing authority which selected each such member and each member shall be subject to removal prior to the termination of his term by action of the governing authority which so selected such member. 
(b)  Upon selection and commencement of his term, each member shall serve, subject to death or resignation and subject to removal, until both the selection of and the commencement of the term of his successor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-36. - Compensation. 
Members of the planning and zoning commission shall receive no compensation for their services except that they may be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by them in direct connection with the performances of their services and duties subject to approval thereof by the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-37. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the planning and zoning commission shall be held from time to time as necessary for the commission to perform its duties and responsibilities with meetings to be held at least once per month on a regularly scheduled day and at a regularly scheduled time and place as determined from time to time by majority vote of the members of the commission. Meetings shall also be held upon call by the chair, the vice-chair in the absence or disability of the chair, or by a majority of the members. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public and shall be held in accordance with the requirements of state law relative to open public meetings. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-38. - Disclosure of financial interest. 
A member of the planning and zoning commission who: 
(1)  Has a property interest in any real property affected by any proposed rezoning action pending before the commission; 
(2)  Has a financial interest in any business entity which has a property interest in any real property affected by any proposed rezoning action pending before the commission; or 
(3)  Has a member of the family who has any interest described in either subsection (1) or subsection (2) of this section; 
shall at or prior to the initial meeting of the commission at which the matter is to be considered disclose the nature and extent of such interest in writing to the applicant and to the commission. All such disclosures shall be entered into the minutes of meetings of the commission (but in no event later than immediately following the announcement of the matter for consideration by the commission) shall be matters of public record of both the commission and the governing authority and shall be available for public inspection at any time during normal working hours. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-39. - Disclosure of contributions. 
(a)  When any applicant for any proposed rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of that applicant's application for the rezoning action, gifts having in the aggregate a value of $250.00 or more to any member, it shall be the duty of the applicant or the attorney representing the applicant to disclose in writing to the planning and zoning commission: 
(1)  The name of members to whom the gift or gifts were made; and 
(2)  An enumeration and description of each gift having a value of $250.00 or more made by the applicant to each such member during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the zoning change. 
(b)  The disclosures required by subsection (a) of this section shall be filed within ten days after the application for the proposed rezoning action is first filed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-40. - Disclosure of relationships. 
Each member of the planning and zoning who shall have any business or financial relationship with any applicant or with any owner of any property proposed for rezoning action and who, due to the nature or extent of such relationship or relationships, may not be able to objectively act with respect to the proposed rezoning action shall, at or prior to the initial meeting of the commission at which the matter is to be considered (but in no event later than immediately following the announcement of the matter for consideration by the commission), disclose the nature and extent of such relationships to the applicant and to the commission. All such disclosures shall be entered into the minutes of the commission, shall be matters of public record of both the commission and the governing authority and shall be available for public inspection at any time during normal working hours. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-41. - Disqualification of members. 
(a)  Any member of the planning and zoning commission who shall have: 
(1)  A property interest, a financial interest, or a member of the family who has either a property interest or financial interest which is subject to disclosure pursuant to the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Received any contribution which is subject to disclosure pursuant to the provisions of this article; or 
(3)  Any relationship which is subject to disclosure pursuant to the provisions of this article; 
may disqualify himself from participation in the consideration of the proposed rezoning action in issue or may be disqualified by vote of the commission as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any other member, the applicant and any other interested person shall each be entitled at the time of the call for consideration of the matter or at any time prior thereto to raise any issue of possible disqualification of any member whereupon, following such consideration as the commission shall deem appropriate, the commission shall determine by majority vote of those members who are not subject to potential disqualification in connection with the proposed rezoning action whether the member shall be disqualified. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-42. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The planning and zoning commission shall function only in an advisory capacity to the governing authority. In connection therewith the commission shall, subject to the direction, control and instructions of the governing authority, conduct surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and shall develop plans for physical, social and economic growth which will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, general welfare, efficiency and economy in the development of the governing authority and submit the plans to the governing authority, and shall also, subject to the direction, control and instructions of the governing authority: 
(1)  Develop and submit to the governing authority for its consideration a master plan, and amendments thereto, for the development of the city; 
(2)  Develop and submit to the governing authority for its consideration recommendations relative to amendments to or revisions of the zoning ordinances and zoning maps of the city; 
(3)  Review proposed amendments to or revisions of the zoning ordinances and zoning maps of governing authority which shall be submitted by others, make findings with respect thereto, and make recommendations to the governing authority with respect to the adoption, rejection, modification or conditional adoption of each such proposed amendment or revision; 
(4)  Develop and submit to the governing authority for its consideration regulations and amendments thereto for the subdivision of land; 
(5)  Develop and submit to the governing authority for its consideration official maps or plats, and amendments thereto, which designate the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened and narrowed streets, public ways, public open spaces and public buildings and sites together with regulations and amendments thereto for the erection of buildings and other structures to be located therein; and 
(6)  Perform such additional functions and services for and on behalf of the governing authority as shall be authorized or directed from time to time by the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-43. - Rules and regulations. 
The planning and zoning commission shall adopt such rules, policies, procedures and regulations as shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this article, the zoning ordinances of the governing authority and applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-44. - Chair and vice-chair. 
The planning and zoning commission shall annually select from among its members a chair who shall preside at meetings of the commission and a vice-chair who shall preside at meetings of the commission in the absence of the chair or the disqualification of the chair. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-45. - Secretaries of board. 
The secretary of the commission with respect to matters relative to the city and this city's zoning ordinance shall be the director of the environmental department or such other person or official as shall from time to time be so designated by the city manager to perform the functions of secretary of the commission on behalf of this city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-46. - Duties of secretaries. 
The secretary of the planning and zoning commission shall provide administrative assistance to the commission relative to matters relating to the governing authority and specifically shall with respect to matters which are relative to the governing authority: 
(1)  Prepare and conduct all correspondence of the commission; 
(2)  Receive and file all correspondence to the commission; 
(3)  Receive and file all applications and filings to and with the commission; 
(4)  Receive and file all transmittals to the commission from the zoning administrator of the governmental entity and other public officials; 
(5)  Review and evaluate all applications and filings to and with the commission for compliance with the rules and regulations of the commission and notify those filing the applications and filings of any noncompliance therewith; 
(6)  Following consultation with the chair (and to the extent necessary the other members) schedule meetings of the commission in accordance with applicable law, ordinances, resolutions and the rules and regulations of the commission; 
(7)  Prepare and maintain a calendar and docket of proposed rezoning actions before the commission; 
(8)  Prepare and submit to the members at least 24 hours prior to a scheduled hearing an agenda therefor as well as copies of all applications and other filings made in connection with each such proceeding; 
(9)  Determine all notices to be given in connection with proceedings before the commission and cause such notices to be given to those entitled thereto; 
(10)  Attend all meetings and hearings of the commission; 
(11)  Cause a mechanical record to be made of all meetings and hearings of the commission relative to proposed rezoning actions by use of tape recorder or other appropriate device; 
(12)  Cause to be retained and maintained a copy or a facsimile of all physical evidence presented in connection with proposed rezoning actions; 
(13)  Prepare and maintain minutes of proceedings of the commission indicating therein all significant information, matters and facts pertaining thereto including specifically all motions, votes and decisions of the commission together with the vote of each member upon each such motion, vote and decision including those absent, disqualified or failing to vote thereon together with such other matters as shall be pertinent to the activities of the commission; 
(14)  Cause to be retained and maintained all minutes, records, files and notices of the commission; 
(15)  At hearings of the commission with respect to proposed rezoning actions attempt to obtain the name and address of all persons who shall present any evidence, testimony or opinions, make any statement to the commission or present any argument in connection with the matter before the commission; and 
(16)  Perform such other duties as shall be directed from time to time by the commission which is approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-47. - Authority of commission. 
The planning and zoning commission shall have no authority or power other than as specifically provided from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the governing authority and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing shall have no authority, right or power to expend any funds, to direct the activities of any employee or official of the governing authority (except solely the secretaries of the commission and then only to the extent specifically authorized in this article) or to contract for or on behalf of either itself or the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-48. - Legal assistance. 
With respect to this city's zoning ordinance and matters relative to the city, the city attorney shall act as the legal advisor and representative of the planning and zoning commission and shall render such legal assistance to the commission as shall be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-49. - Decisions of commission/quorum. 
Three commissioners shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the commission. Decisions of the planning and zoning commission as to its recommendations on applications for rezoning action shall be rendered by majority vote of members who are not disqualified to vote thereon which shall be made either at the time of the consideration thereof or at a later public meeting of the commission to which notice has been given to those entitled thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-50. - Minutes and records. 
All minutes, upon approval thereof by the planning and zoning commission, and all files, dockets, calendars, physical evidence, notices and records of the commission which relate to matters with respect to the governing authority shall be maintained in the office of the clerk of the city subject to court orders relative thereto and subject to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Sec. 54-51. - Transitional provisions. 
The adoption of this article and the provisions contained in this article shall not affect or alter the status or validity of any decision or recommendation made by the Tifton-Tift County Planning and Zoning Commission either prior to or subsequent to the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § I, 6-13-2012) 
Secs. 54-52—54-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN VEHICULAR USE AREAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 86. 

Sec. 54-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Architectural planter means a container within which plantings may be placed to meet the requirements of this article. 
Bond means a written instrument issued or executed by a bonding, surety, or insurance company licensed to do business in the state, guaranteeing that the person bonded shall faithfully fulfill and satisfy all requirements of this article, made payable to the city for costs and expenses which result from nonperformance or failure of the person bonded to satisfy the requirements of this article. 
Commercial property means any real property within the city that is not zoned single-family residential. 
Construction means any activity which either: 
(1)  Is of a type for which an application for a building permit must be made prior to the commencement of any improvements; 
(2)  Involves soil preparation for and pavement of any vehicle use area; or 
(3)  Constitutes any activity for which a land disturbance permit is required pursuant to chapter 38, article IV of this Code, and which also involves the installation of any vehicle use area; provided that the installation of any vehicle use area shall not include the resurfacing, repairing or replacing of any existing vehicle use area unaccompanied by land disturbance of adjacent surface areas. 
Developed area means that portion of a lot, excluding public rights-of-way, upon which buildings, structures, pavement, landscape materials, and/or their other improvements have been or are to be located. 
Encroachment means the protrusion of a vehicle outside of a parking space, display area, storage area, driveway, or access aisle or other vehicle use area into or across a planting area. 
Ground cover means natural mulch or low growing plants other than deciduous varieties installed for the purpose of providing a continuous cover over the surface of the ground. 
Historic district means that area which is located within the boundaries of the city's historic district as described in subsection 54-131. 
Interior area means the total area of a lot which is to be the subject of construction or redevelopment exclusive of the front, rear and side perimeter landscape areas thereof as provided in section 54-86. 
Knowingly means having a knowledge of the existence of facts which bring an act or omission within the provisions of any portion of this article either with or without knowledge of this article, the provisions or requirements hereof or that such act or omission constitutes a violation of any provision of this article. 
Landscape means the placement of landscape material in an area in accordance with the requirements of this article including (with respect to trees, shrubs, vines, lawn grasses and other living plant material) the planting in a suitable growing medium, with the proper drainage therefor of a species thereof which will thrive under normal conditions in the city with a list of trees, shrubs, vines, lawn grasses and living ground covers deemed to meet such requirements being maintained by the responsible official and the zoning administrator of the city, provided that such list shall not be considered as exclusive of species which meet such requirement. 
Landscape material means material consisting of one or any combination of the following: 
(1)  Living plant material, including but not limited to trees, shrubs, vines, lawn grasses, and ground cover; 
(2)  Landscape water features; and/or but not limited to rocks pebbles, sand, brick pavers and earthen mounds, but excluding impervious surfaces designed for, or to be utilized for, vehicular use purpose, sidewalks and walkways. 
Landscape plan means a plan required by this article. 
Lot means a parcel of land described by metes and bounds or by reference to a recorded plat of survey in instrument or instruments recorded in the deed records in the office of the clerk of the county superior court, and which is held in a single ownership by one person or in common ownership by more than one person, and which is either: 
(1)  One which has both lot area and lot dimensions equal to or greater than the lot width and lot area requirements established by the zoning ordinance of the city for the zoning district in which the parcel of land is located and for the use proposed for the parcel of land pursuant to such zoning ordinance; or 
(2)  A substandard lot of record determined in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
Pavement means any cover installed over the surface of land in such a manner as to provide a surface for vehicle use by utilization of impervious materials such as asphalt, concrete, bricks, stone and similar products. 
Permit review committee means a committee appointed by the city manager for the purpose of reviewing applications for landscape plan approval. No member of the city council shall be eligible for membership on this committee. 
Responsible official means that person who shall from time to time occupy the position which shall from time to time be responsible for the issuance of building permits of the city as designated from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the city council or in the absence thereof by administrative order of the city manager. 
Shrub means a woody plant normally characterized by persistent wood stems, low stature and branching near its base. For purpose of this article the word "shrub" also includes all woody plants of all species which have developed (or which under normal conditions in the city will develop) trunks of a caliper diameter of less than two inches at a height of six inches above ground level. 
Sight triangle means the areas of a lot on both sides of a driveway formed by the intersection of each side of the driveway and public right-of-way with the two sides of each triangle being not less than 12 feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a straight line connecting the ends of the two other sides. 
Tree means a self-supporting woody plant of a species which has developed (or which under normal conditions in the city will develop) a single trunk of a caliper diameter of two inches or more at a height of six inches above ground level and an overall height at maturity of at least 20 feet. 
Vehicle use area means any ground surface area, excepting public rights-of-way, used by any type of vehicle whether moving or at rest, including, but not limited to, driving, parking, loading, unloading, servicing, storage and display, as well as vehicular uses under, on, or within buildings. 
Vines means any of a group of woody or herbaceous plants which may climb by twining or which normally require support to reach mature form. 
Visual screen means a barrier of living or nonliving landscape material or other inert materials established for the purpose of complying with the zoning ordinance of the city or with the requirements for zoning changes, special exceptions or variances pursuant to the provisions of such zoning ordinance. 
Except to the extent that the context of this article clearly indicates otherwise all other words, terms and phrases utilized in this article shall have the same definitions as provided therefor in the zoning ordinance of the city to the extent applicable thereto. 
(Code 1974, § 18-72) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-82. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The city voluntarily opts to be included and governed under this article and, to the extent possible within the confines of state law, will seek to include all other governmental entities under this article. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any construction which, upon completion, will result in a total square footage of ground level paved vehicle use area below the minimum set forth in section 54-86; 
(2)  Any paved vehicle use area existing as of July 1, 1991; or 
(3)  Any resurfacing, repair or replacement of any then existing paved vehicle use area unaccompanied by land disturbance of any adjacent surface area. 
(Code 1974, § 18-73) 
Sec. 54-83. - Landscape plan required. 
Except in those instances in which compliance with this article is specified exempted pursuant to the provisions of this article, approval of a landscape plan pursuant to this article is required as a precondition for, and prior to, any construction and for the issuance of a building permit by the city. 
(Code 1974, § 18-74) 
Sec. 54-84. - Applications for approval of plan. 
A person seeking approval of a landscape plan required pursuant to section 54-83 shall file an application with the city building inspector along with an application for a building permit. At the time of the filing of the application for approval of a landscape plan there shall also be filed therewith five copies of the proposed landscape plan which is the basis of the application and which shall: 
(1)  Be a graphic depiction of the lot as well as existing and proposed structures, vehicle use areas, sidewalks and other walkways, landscaped areas and other landscape improvements and the relationships thereof to each other as well as to adjacent public and private streets, adjacent sidewalks and walkways, and adjacent properties; 
(2)  Include the square footage of both existing and proposed paved vehicle use areas; and 
(3)  Generally provide sufficient information (including location of landscape areas) so as to enable a determination whether the proposed plan complies with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 18-75) 
Sec. 54-85. - Landscape standards. 
The following landscape standards shall be followed to satisfy the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Landscape area size requirements. 
a.  Located in whole or in substantial part (i.e., more than 50 percent) within the historic district. If paved vehicle use area exceeds 3,000 square feet, then six percent of such area shall be landscaped. 
b.  Located in whole or in substantial part (i.e., more than 50 percent) outside historic district. If paved vehicle use area exceeds 20,000 square feet, then six percent of such area shall be landscaped. 
(2)  Landscape area location requirements. Any paved vehicle use area that exceeds 10,000 square feet in the historic district and 40,000 square feet elsewhere shall have at least 50 percent of required landscape area located with interior planting areas. 
(3)  Tree requirements. One tree shall be planted for each 25 feet of frontage of a subject lot on all public streets, except alleys. Trees may be planted in groups as long as the distance between them ensures proper health and growth of such trees. At least 25 percent of the trees shall be genuine shade trees and not of an ornamental variety. 
(4)  Encroachment limitations. Vehicle encroachment into landscape areas shall not exceed two feet. 
(5)  Interior planting areas. 
a.  Interior planting areas shall be located to relieve the large expanses of paving and provide for the orderly flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
b.  Water facilities to interior planting areas shall be provided. 
c.  If strict application of this section unreasonably interferes with the function of the vehicle use area, then the interior landscaping required may be located near the perimeter of the vehicle use area. 
(6)  Plant material standards. 
a.  Trees utilized to comply with the requirements of this article shall, at the time of planting, have a minimum height of five feet and a minimum diameter of two inches at a point one foot above ground line. 
b.  Shrubs and hedges utilized to comply with the requirements of this article shall not be of noncreditable species. No species of deciduous shrub shall be credited for purposes of the visual screening requirement. 
c.  Vines, ground cover and lawn grasses shall be of a species and size that under normal conditions in the city will thrive and provide complete ground cover within two years of planting. 
d.  Architectural planters utilized to comply with the requirements of this article shall have for shrubs, planting area of not less than ten square feet and a depth of not less than 18 inches. Architectural planters for trees shall have a planting area of not less than 12 square feet and a depth of not less than four feet. 
e.  No credit shall be given toward compliance with the requirements of this article for any synthetic or artificial plant material. 
f.  The preservation of existing trees of at least four inches caliper diameter and a height of at least 15 feet which are located upon the lot is encouraged and such trees may be substituted on a one for one basis for the trees required to be planted under this article. 
g.  The construction of additional paved vehicle use areas in a phase development is required to meet the landscape standards only for the most recent additional paved vehicle use areas. 
h.  Upon satisfactory demonstration by the applicant that a proposed landscape plan for a particular project, notwithstanding variance thereof with any or all of the requirements contained in the above subsections of this section, meets and satisfies the intent and purposes of this article, the proposed landscape plan of the applicant may be approved with such approval as well as building permits issued and landscape plans approved based thereon to all be subject to such conditions, limitations and restrictions as shall be imposed in order to ensure compliance with the intent and purposes of this article. 
(7)  Phased developments. The application of this article and the standards thereof shall apply to any incremental increases in commercial development on the same lot when the aggregate paved vehicle use area exceeds the minimum square footage set forth in this section. 
(Code 1974, § 18-76) 
Sec. 54-86. - Utilities and easements. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any portion of a lot which is the subject of any public utility easement, drainage easement, or public or private right of ingress or egress shall be landscaped, to the extent required or permitted pursuant to this article, consistent with and in such a manner so as to not interfere with the uses, rights, duties, obligations and purposes of such easements and rights. 
(Code 1974, § 18-77) 
Sec. 54-87. - Consideration of applications. 
Each application for approval of landscape plans shall promptly following receipt thereof be submitted to the permit review committee for consideration. Should the proposed landscape plan fail to meet the requirements of this article, the applicant, as well as those responsible for issuing building permits, shall be notified in writing of the rejection of the application. 
(Code 1974, § 18-78) 
Sec. 54-88. - Modified landscape plan. 
The permit review committee may (but need not), in lieu of rejection of a landscape plan, approve a landscape plan which varies from the proposed landscape plan of the applicant conditioned upon the adoption and implementation of such modified landscape plan by the applicants. An applicant desiring to accept such a modified plan shall, within seven calendar days after written notice of such action, file a written notice of acceptance with the city clerk. If the applicant fails to file such a written notice of acceptance within such time period, the application shall be deemed to have been rejected effective as of the date of written notice to the applicant of the modified plan. Modified landscape plans shall conform to the requirements of this article and shall constitute approved landscape plans under this article upon acceptance thereof by the applicant. 
(Code 1974, § 18-79) 
Sec. 54-89. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the permit review committee in connection with an application for a landscape plan shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed in writing with the city clerk within 15 calendar days after written notice of the adverse decision in issue is published in the official minutes of the permit review committee. The minutes of such committee shall be open for public inspection at the city hall during normal business hours and, further, the city shall comply in all respects with the state open records act, as amended. 
(Code 1974, § 18-80) 
Sec. 54-90. - Revocation and suspension of building permits. 
Upon determination by the city manager that either: (i) a building permit for which approval of a landscape plan is required has been issued in error or based upon incorrect or misleading information; or (ii) any landscape work, construction or redevelopment is not being carried out in accordance with a required landscape plan or the provisions of this article; then in any and all such events the city manager may suspend or revoke the applicable building permit. 
(Code 1974, § 18-81) 
Sec. 54-91. - Rules and regulations for administration and enforcement. 
The city manager is authorized to adopt and implement rules and regulations for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article or the intent and purpose thereof, subject to the right of the city council to vacate any such rule or regulation within 60 days following submission thereof to the city council. If the provisions of this article are not met, the city manager (or his designee) shall not issue to the applicant a certificate of occupancy or a business license. 
(Code 1974, § 18-82) 
Sec. 54-92. - Mandatory time period. 
The provisions of this article shall be mandatory upon all covered property owners for a period of three years from the time of initial issuance of a certificate of occupancy and shall be voluntary thereafter. 
(Code 1974, § 18-83) 
Sec. 54-93. - Relationship to permits. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued with respect to any work to be performed upon any lot unless and until a landscape plan, if required pursuant to this article, has been approved pursuant to this article. 
(b)  If a landscape plan is required pursuant to this article, then no land disturbance permit, if required pursuant to chapter 38, article IV of this Code, or other applicable law or ordinance, shall be issued with respect to any work to be performed upon the lot unless and until a landscape plan has been so approved. 
(c)  If a landscape plan is required pursuant to this article, then no certificate of occupancy with respect to any work performed upon the lot shall be issued unless and until it has been determined after final inspection that the requirements of this article have been completed in accordance with the building permit, the landscape plan and the provisions of this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in lieu of withholding the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the city manager may require a performance bond or other security for an amount equal to 110 percent of the cost of materials, labor and other attendant matters, including costs of the city, incidental to the completion of the landscape work required under this article and pursuant to the applicable landscape plan as estimated by the city manager and may further require as condition therefor that the required landscape work be satisfactorily completed within a specified period of time; provided that the amount of such bond or other security shall not be less than $1,000.00. Any such bond or security shall be of such form and substance as shall be determined to be satisfactory by the city manager and shall provide for the time for completion of the landscaping requirements of this article and the applicable landscape plan with the time for completion thereof to not exceed six months duration subject to such extensions as may be granted by the city manager from time to time for good cause shown. 
(Code 1974, § 18-84) 
Sec. 54-94. - Suspension of permits. 
Upon determination by the city manager that reasonable grounds exist to believe that: 
(1)  Any construction upon any lot is being conducted without a required landscape plan for the lot having been approved in accordance with this article; 
(2)  Any construction or landscape work upon any lot is being conducted in violation of any landscape plan for the lot or any provision of this article; 
(3)  Any construction upon any lot is being conducted during the suspension of any building permit for the lot; or 
(4)  Landscape work required pursuant to a landscape plan is not being conducted in such a manner that completion thereof can reasonably be anticipated prior to the termination date of the building permit; 
then the city manager may suspend, or cause to be suspended, any and all building permits and/or land disturbance permits issued by the city with respect to the lot until such time as the condition or situation giving rise to the suspension has been remedied and to issue, or cause to be issued, stop work orders with respect to activities permitted under the permits. 
(Code 1974, § 18-85) 
Sec. 54-95. - Maintenance, replacement and use requirements. 
(a)  Maintenance. The owner of each lot which is subject to the landscape requirements of this article shall at all times following installation thereof for a period of two years following the date of the certificate of occupancy with respect to construction permitted by the applicable building permit (or the scheduled date for completion of work as specified in the building permit in the absence of a certificate of occupancy) utilize, or cause to be utilized, reasonable efforts to maintain all living plant materials planted pursuant hereto in a healthy state and to maintain, or cause to be maintained, all nonliving landscape material installed pursuant hereto in essentially the same state of repair and condition as at the time of the installation thereof. 
(b)  Replacement. The owner of each lot which is subject to the landscape requirements of this article shall replace, or cause to be replaced, within a time period appropriate to the growing season of the species involved, not exceeding 90 days' duration, all dead and diseased plants which are planted in accordance with the provisions of this article or are preserved trees pursuant to the provisions hereof and die or become diseased within two years following the date of the certificate of occupancy with respect to construction permitted by the applicable building permit, or the scheduled date for completion of work as specified in the building permit in the absence of a certificate of occupancy. Extensions of time for replacement may be granted by the tree board upon written application therefor due to material unavailability, seasonal requirements or other undue hardship. 
(c)  Protection of landscaped area. To the extent determined to be necessary in order to prevent vehicular encroachment, if any portion of required landscape area both: 
(1)  Contains landscape plant materials other than lawn grass; and 
(2)  Is located within three linear feet of any paved vehicle use area, the required landscape area shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by the use of wheel stops, curbing or other appropriate methods. 
(d)  Use of landscape areas. No required landscape area shall be used for parking (except encroachment to the extent permitted in this article), for driveways, for garbage or trash storage or collection purposes or for any other functional use which is contrary to the intent and purposes of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 18-86) 
Sec. 54-96. - Variances. 
(a)  Upon written application by any party at interest filed either in conjunction with an application for approval of a landscape plan or following the approval thereof, the tree board may grant a written variance from any of the requirements of this article upon determination that: 
(1)  The granting of the requested variance will not impair the attainment of the intent and purpose of this article; and 
(2)  The literal enforcement of this article would result in undue hardship. 
(b)  Applications for variances shall be in writing and shall be filed with the zoning administrator, or such other official as the city manager may designate, not less than ten calendar days prior to the meeting at which the application for the variance in issue will be heard designating the reasons for the requested variance. Applications for variances shall be considered at the next meeting of the tree board. 
(Code 1974, § 18-87) 
Sec. 54-97. - Post permit modifications. 
Upon written application therefor, the provisions of building permits relative to landscape plans and such landscape plans may be modified following review and approval thereof by the permit review committee; provided that any and all such modified permits and modified landscape plans shall conform to the requirements of this article as well as the intent and purpose of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 18-88) 
Sec. 54-98. - Certificate of occupancy. 
Upon completion of landscape work required pursuant to the landscape plan and the requirements of this article, the responsible official shall upon request of the applicant inspect the landscape work to determine if the work is in compliance therewith. If following inspection it is determined that compliance has been had with the landscape plan and requirements of this article then a certificate of occupancy shall be issued therefor by the responsible official upon compliance with all other requirements relative to the building permit. 
(Code 1974, § 18-89) 
Sec. 54-99. - Enforcement. 
Upon determination by the city manager that reasonable grounds exist to believe that there exists any violation of any provision of this article, the building permit or a landscape plan, the city manager shall be entitled to take any, all or any combination of the following actions, or to cause such actions to be taken, as the city manager in his sole discretion shall determine to be appropriate: 
(1)  Give written notice to the applicant, owner, contractor, landscape contractor and/or other appropriate persons of the existence of such violations, the nature and extent of the violations, the actions necessary to correct the violations, and the time limit within which remedial actions must be taken; 
(2)  Suspend or revoke any or all building permits and approval of all landscape plans for the subject lot as well as any or all land disturbance permits issued relative to the lot by the city; 
(3)  Issue stop work orders in connection with any or all construction, work or other activity then being conducted upon the lot pursuant to any building or construction license or permit, any landscape plan or any land disturbance permit which has been issued or approved by the city; 
(4)  Declare any bond or security given pursuant to this article forfeited in the event of circumstances authorizing the forfeiture following the giving of written notice to the principal and any surety thereon of intention to so do and the failure of the circumstances giving rise thereto to be remedied within 60 days thereafter, to take all actions necessary to collect the proceeds thereof, and to proceed to remedy the circumstances giving rise to the forfeiture upon collection of the proceeds of the bond or security; 
(5)  Institute civil proceedings to effectuate remedy of the circumstances giving rise to the violations; and 
(6)  Take such other actions as are appropriate under the circumstances in order to obtain compliance with the provisions of this article consistent with applicable law and available resources of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 18-90) 
Sec. 54-100. - Offenses. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly engage, participate or assist in any construction for which approval of a landscape plan is required pursuant to this article unless a landscape plan shall have been approved in accordance with the provisions of this article except when such activity is exempted pursuant to provisions of this article. 
(b)  No owner or developer of any lot shall knowingly authorize or allow any construction for which approval of a landscape plan is required pursuant to this article to be conducted upon the lot unless a landscape plan shall have been approved in accordance with the provisions of this article except when such activity is exempted pursuant to provisions of this article. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly continue to engage, participate or assist in any construction upon any lot following the suspension or revocation of a building permit issued with respect to the lot or of a landscape plan approved with respect to the lot unless and until the building permit and landscape plan are reinstated or another issued and approved. 
(d)  No owner or developer of any lot shall knowingly authorize or allow any construction to continue upon a lot following the suspension or revocation of a building permit issued with respect to the lot or of a landscape plan approved with respect to the lot unless and until the building permit and landscape plan are reinstated or another issued and approved. 
(e)  No person shall knowingly conduct, allow or permit any construction upon any lot which is at variance with or is not in compliance with a landscape plan approved with respect to the lot except solely to the extent permitted pursuant to a variance granted pursuant to provisions of this article. 
(f)  No person shall knowingly conduct, allow or permit any landscape work which is at variance with or is not in compliance with landscape plan therefor except solely to the extent permitted pursuant to a variance granted pursuant to provisions of this article. 
(g)  No owner or developer of any lot shall knowingly allow or permit the use of any landscape area required pursuant to this article to be used for any use prohibited pursuant to the provisions of subsection 54-95(d). 
(h)  No owner or developer of any lot shall fail to cause any required landscape area to be protected as required pursuant to the provisions of 54-95. 
(i)  No owner or developer of any lot or any contractor for any construction, redevelopment or landscape work shall fail to cause any tree or preservation landscape area to be protected as required pursuant to the provisions of subsection (h) of this section. 
(j)  No owner or developer of any lot or any contractor charged with responsibility for implementation of any landscape plan shall without justification therefor fail to cause to be completed landscape work required pursuant to this article for such lot. 
(k)  No person shall knowingly violate any provision of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 18-91) 
Sec. 54-101. - Violations. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 18-92) 
Sec. 54-102. - Conditions constituting nuisances. 
Conditions and circumstances existing or arising from the failure of those responsible therefor to comply with the provisions of this article shall constitute a nuisance which shall both authorize the abatement of such nuisance by the city pursuant to this Code and, in connection therewith, to the assessment of a lien against such persons and the lot in issue for the cost of the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Code 1974, § 18-93) 
Secs. 54-103—54-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; utilities, ch. 82; zoning, app. A. 

Sec. 54-131. - Historic districts. 
There is hereby created, established and designated the following historic district(s): 
The Tifton Historic District shall include all property located within the following described boundaries of such historic district: all that certain parcel of land located in Land Lots 290, 291 and 309 of the 6th Land District in the City of Tifton and of Tift County, Georgia, more particularly described as follows: commence at the intersection of the north right-of-way line of Fulwood Boulevard with the east right-of-way line of G S & F Railroad (Norfolk Southern Railway); thence southeasterly along the east right-of-way of such railroad past the intersection thereof with the south right-of-way line of Ninth Street to the intersection thereof with the north right-of-way line of the former A B & C Railroad (later Seaboard Coast Line Railroad and later CSX Railroad) right-of-way (the Northern portion of which at this point of intersection was heretofore conveyed by Seaboard Coast Line Railroad Company to Short & Paulk Supply Company, Inc. by deed recorded in Deed Book 188, page 411, Tift County, Georgia records); thence easterly along the north right-of-way of such railroad right-of-way to the intersection thereof with a line parallel with and 150 feet east of the centerline of Tift Avenue as the same exists in the block between Fifth Street and Ninth Street extended southerly across Ninth Street to such point of intersection; thence northerly in a line parallel with and 150 feet east of the centerline of Tift Avenue as so extended and constituted to the intersection thereof with the north right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 82 (Seventh Street); thence northerly with a line parallel with and 150 feet east of the centerline of Tift Avenue to the intersection thereof with a line parallel with and 150 feet south of the centerline of Third Street; thence easterly in a line parallel with and 150 feet south of the centerline of Third Street to the intersection thereof with a line parallel with and 150 feet east of the centerline of Chestnut Avenue as the same exists between Second Street and the north right-of-way line of Seaboard Coastline Railroad extended across the Seaboard Coastline Railroad right-of-way to such point of intersection; thence northerly along a line parallel with and 150 feet east of the centerline of Chestnut Avenue as so extended and constituted to a line parallel with and 150 feet south of the centerline of Second Street; thence easterly along a line parallel with and 150 feet south of the centerline of Second Street to the intersection thereof with a line parallel with and 150 feet east of the centerline of Prince Avenue as the same exists between Fourth Street and Second Street extended southerly across Second Street to such point of intersection; thence northerly in a line parallel with and 150 feet east of the centerline of Prince Avenue as so extended and constituted to the north right-of-way line of Twelfth Street; thence northeasterly along a line parallel with and 150 feet east of the centerline of Old Ocilla Road to the intersection thereof with a line which is parallel with and 150 feet north of the centerline of Twelfth Street as it exists on the east side of Old Ocilla Road; thence west along a line parallel with the centerline of Twelfth Street as it exists on the east side of Old Ocilla Road and 150 feet north thereof to the west right-of-way line of Old Ocilla Road; thence northeasterly or southeasterly, as the case may be, along the west right-of-way line of Old Ocilla Road to the point of intersection thereof with the following call; thence westerly in a series of courses consisting of arcs and curves which are all parallel with and 150 feet north of the centerline of Twelfth Street from the west right-of-way line of Old Ocilla Road to the east right-of-way line of Tift Avenue; thence in a line parallel with and 150 feet north of the centerline of Twelfth Street to the intersection thereof with the centerline of Forrest Avenue at its intersection with the centerline of Twelfth Street extended northerly across Twelfth Street; thence northwesterly in a straight line to the point of intersection of the west right-of-way line of Moore Highway with the north property line extended of the property acquired by the Tifton Council of Garden Clubs, Inc. by deed recorded in Deed Book 233, page 90, Tift County, Georgia records; thence westerly along the north property line of the property acquired by the Tifton Council of Garden Clubs, Inc., in such deed to the east right-of-way line of G S & F Railroad; thence southerly along the east right-of-way line of such railroad to the place of beginning; together with all structures (as such word is defined in the zoning ordinance of the City of Tifton, Georgia) any portion of which is now or hereafter located within the above described parcel of land it being the specific intent hereof that all portions of any present or future structure located either totally or partially within the above-specified boundaries shall be included within the district, and shall consist of the specifically described properties which are designated pursuant to the current tax parcel number system of Tift County, Georgia, and the City of Tifton, Georgia: Tax parcel number, street address of location and owner (per current tax digest) of all such properties are shown on the exhibit attached to Ordinance No. 89-09. 
(Ord. No. 89-09, §§ 1—5, 3-13-1989) 
Editor's note— The exhibit attached to Ordinance No. 89-09 is not set out at length herein but is on file in the office of the city clerk. The above-described historic district shall be shown and designated upon the official zoning map of the City of Tifton. Certificates of appropriateness as required pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be required and obtained prior to any material change in appearance of any structure, site or work of art located within the historic district. The city manager, or his designees, shall within 30 days following the adoption of Ordinance No. 89-09 give written notification to the owners and occupants of each structure, site and work of art located within such historic district of the adoption of such ordinance and the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to the undertaking of any material change in appearance of any structure, site or work of art located within the historic district. 
Sec. 54-132. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document approving a proposed material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district which has been obtained in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Commission means the historic preservation commission established pursuant to this article. 
Designation means a decision by the governing body pursuant to the provisions of this article to designate a property or district as a historic property or as a historic district and thereafter to prohibit all material changes in appearance of such property or within such district prior to issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material; the type and style of all windows, doors, and signs; and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, which contains structures, sites, works of art, or a combination thereof which: 
(1)  Have special character or special historical or aesthetic interest or value; 
(2)  Represent one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the city, county, the state or the region; and 
(3)  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city. 
Historic property means a structure, site, work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of its value to the city, the county, the state or the region for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to the city, the county, the state or the region; or 
(4)  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, county, the state, or the region. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect only the exterior architectural features of a historic property or of any structure, site, or work of art within a historic district and may include any one or more of the following: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public way on any historic property; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-133. - Historic preservation commission. 
There is hereby established a historic preservation commission with the title of "Historic Preservation Commission of the City of Tifton, Georgia" which shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council, all of whom shall be residents of the city, and a majority of whom shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history or architecture. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-134. - Terms and compensation. 
Members of the historic preservation commission shall be appointed for three-year terms and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. Initial terms of the member of such commission shall be two members for a one-year term; two members for two-year terms; and three members for three-year terms. Members shall not receive any salary or any other compensation except expense reimbursement approved in advance by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-135. - Power and duties of commission. 
The historic preservation commission shall be authorized, in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-25, to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny the applications in accordance with the provisions hereof and the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28; 
(4)  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city to the extent specifically authorized by the city council; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976 (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1—44-10-5A); 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, as the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of this article; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired by the city as a result thereof; 
(10)  Consult with historic preservation experts in the historic preservation section of the state department of natural resources or its successor and the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Inc. or its successors; and 
(11)  Submit to the historic preservation section of the state department of natural resources or its successor a list of historic properties or historic districts designated as such pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-136. - Determination of historic districts and historic properties. 
(a)  Historic properties and historic districts shall be established and revoked by ordinance adopted by the city council upon application therefor by either the historic preservation commission or any other interested party with any ordinance which so establishes any such designation being subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Any ordinance designating any property as a historic property or any district as a historic district shall require that the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city; 
(2)  Any ordinance designating any property as a historic property shall describe each property to be designated, shall set forth the name or names of the owner or owners of the property, and shall require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained prior to any material change in appearance of the designated historic property; and 
(3)  Any ordinance designating any district as a historic district shall include a description of the boundaries of the district, shall list each property located therein, shall set forth the name or names of the owner or owners of each property, and shall require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained prior to any material change in appearance of any structure, site, or work of art located within the designated historic district. 
(b)  No ordinance designating any property as a historic property and no ordinance designating any district as a historic district nor any amendments thereto may be adopted by the city council nor may any property be accepted or acquired as historic property by the city council until the following procedural steps have been taken: 
(1)  The commission shall make or cause to be made an investigation and written report on the historic, cultural, architectural, or aesthetic significance of each place, district, site, building, structure, or work of art proposed for designation or acquisition; 
(2)  Such report of the commission to the city council shall contain at least a physical description of the property covered therein; a statement of relevant historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; a map showing district boundaries and classification of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; a statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and representative photographs; 
(3)  Such report shall have been submitted by the commission to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources or its successor which will be allowed 30 days to prepare written comments concerning the report; 
(4)  The commission and the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance; 
(5)  Notice of the public hearing on such proposed ordinance has been published at least three times in the principal newspaper of general circulation within the city and written notice of such hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of properties proposed to be designated as a historic property or proposed to be located within a historic district with such notices to be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date of such public hearing; 
(6)  Within 15 days following such public hearing, the commission has recommended to the city council whether such proposed ordinance should be adopted, rejected, or modified and if so, in what respect; and 
(7)  Following such public hearing and receipt of such recommendation from the commission the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, adopt the proposed ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the proposed ordinance. 
(c)  Within 30 days following the adoption of an ordinance establishing any property as a historic property or any area as a historic district, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property and the owner and occupants of each structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, or by such persons as it shall designate, which notice shall apprise the owners or occupants of the necessity for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in the appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-137. - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property or of a structure, site, or work of art within such historic district, including but not limited to demolition, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless and until an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been filed, such application has been approved and a certificate of appropriateness issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-138. - Certificate of appropriateness not required. 
Notwithstanding any other provision concerned in this article, the state department of transportation and any contractors, including cities and counties, performing work funded by the state department of transportation are exempt from this article and the city, the county, the state and the county board of education are exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness; provided, however, that such local government entities shall notify the commission 45 days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the commission an opportunity to comment relative thereto. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-139. - Guidelines and criteria. 
When considering applications for certificate of appropriateness relative to existing building, the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Preservation Projects including the Secretary's Standards for Rehabilitation shall be used as guidelines along with local design guidelines set forth in the City of Tifton Historic District Manual along with such other criteria as may be adopted by the historic preservation commission or the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988; Ord. No. 2003-025, § I, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 2014-09, § I , 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 54-140. - Review procedure. 
(a)  An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be reasonably required by the historic preservation commission with applications involving demolition being required to be accompanied by postdemolition plans for the site and shall be filed by the applicant with the commission or its designee. 
(b)  Not earlier than 20 days nor later than seven days prior to the review of a certificate of appropriateness by the commission, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application of the filing of such application and shall afford the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard in connection with the determination on such application. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing with respect to an application. 
(c)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that a proposed material change in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(d)  The commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that a proposed material change in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(e)  In making its determination to either approve or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance of the property involved; the architectural style of the property involved; the general design, arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style; and the pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(f)  In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider the interior arrangement of property or the interior use of property which does not have any effect on exterior architectural features. 
(g)  The commission may seek such outside technical advice concerning its decision on any application as its members deem necessary, provided that any expenses incurred in connection with such technical advice must have the prior approval of the city council. 
(h)  The commission shall approve or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property or by the owner or occupant of a structure, site, object, or work of art located within a historic district. 
(i)  Failure of the commission to act within such 45 days shall constitute approval of an application described in subsection (h) of this section, with no other evidence of approval being required. 
(j)  Evidence of approval of an application shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. 
(k)  Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be furnished by United States mail within ten days of a decision thereon to the applicant and to all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(l)  In the event the commission denies an application, it shall specify its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may at its option suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it denies the application submitted. The applicant, if the applicant so desires, may make modifications to the plans and application and may resubmit another application at any time. 
(m)  In circumstances where the application seeks a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the denial of the application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be binding upon the building inspector and other administrative officers of the city charged with issuing building permits and, upon denial of such application no building permit shall be issued with respect to work or changes covered by such application. 
(n)  Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of any specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to such provisions, or to interpret the meaning of such provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variations, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will in its judgment best fulfill the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988; Ord. No. 89-12, § 1, 4-3-1989) 
Sec. 54-141. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city manager within 15 days after the date of receipt of notification to such appellant by the commission of its determination or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days after the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for commission action. Upon appeal the city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the city council finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision with such determination by the city council to be made within 45 days of the filing of such appeal. Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the county superior court in the same manner provided for appeals from a conviction for city ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-142. - Changes not prohibited. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a historic property, which maintenance or repair does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of the property of such owner which is not prohibited by other laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-143. - Conformity with certificate. 
No person shall perform any work pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness except to the extent that such work and conditions conform to the requirements and conditions of such certificate. In the event any work is performed which is not in accordance with such a certificate, then the building inspector, or such other official of the city as shall be designated by the city manager relative thereto may issue a cease and desist order relative thereto whereupon all work thereunder shall immediately cease. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-144. - Administrative enforcement. 
The building inspector, or such other official of the city as shall be designated by the city manager relative thereto, shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or of any site, structure or object of art located in a historic district, except to the extent that such changes are made in compliance with the provisions of this article and to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to any such historic property or to any site, structure or object of art located in a historic district and to issue citations to any person engaged in any such activity. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 54-145. - Duration and lapse of certificate. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall lapse and shall be rendered void and ineffective unless construction as authorized pursuant thereto is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and shall be renewable thereafter upon application to the commission therefor. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-146. - Records of commission. 
The historic preservation commission shall maintain a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all the commission's proceedings relative thereto as well as all of its other actions, decisions and proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-147. - Rules and policies. 
The historic preservation commission shall adopt such rules and policies for the transaction of its business, for consideration of applications for designations, and for certificates of appropriateness as it deems necessary, subject to approval thereof by the city council. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings, provide notice to the public thereof as required by law, and shall provide a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum of the commission shall consist of a majority of the members thereof. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-148. - Conflict of interest. 
Any member of the historic preservation commission who has any ownership or other interest in any property which is the subject of any proceeding before the commission is prohibited from consideration of or voting upon any such matter. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-149. - Negotiations for acquisition. 
The historic preservation commission may, where such action is authorized in advance by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations on behalf of the city with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein by the city; provided that no commitment of any nature whatsoever relative thereto may be made by the commission except to the extent specifically authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Sec. 54-150. - Violations. 
Any violation of section 54-137, 54-143 or 54-148 shall be punished in the same manner as provided by ordinance for the punishment of violations of other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 6-6-1988) 
Chapter 58 - PUBLIC SAFETY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; moving buildings, § 18-91 et seq.; court, ch. 30; floods, ch. 42; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; municipality's liability for torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Compensation of municipal law enforcement officers to be by fixed salary only, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9. 

Sec. 58-31. - Liability of chief and sureties to city. 
If it shall appear to the city council that the chief of police has failed to collect the money due the city, as required of him, by reason of inattention, carelessness or neglect, the chief of police shall be liable for the amount of the money as though he had collected it. If it shall appear to the city council that the chief of police has not used the proper diligence in the care and preservation of the city property or effects placed in his hands and the money has been lost, injured or destroyed thereby, or the city, in any way damaged as a consequence of such carelessness, neglect or inattention, he and his sureties shall be liable therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 20-2) 
Sec. 58-32. - General duties of chief; accountability to manager. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to execute all of the duties and various requirements as set forth in the city ordinances at the time and in the manner therein provided, and shall be, at all times, subject to the instructions of the manager and shall obey all orders of the manager. 
(Code 1974, § 20-3) 
Sec. 58-33. - Chief to supervise subordinates. 
The chief of police shall superintend, direct and control all persons placed under him and shall see that they faithfully and punctually discharge their duties. 
(Code 1974, § 20-4) 
Sec. 58-34. - Attendance at court. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee to attend all trials before the municipal court. 
(Code 1974, § 20-5) 
Sec. 58-35. - Chief responsible for property in his custody. 
The chief of police shall take proper care of and be accountable for all city property that may be put in his charge, and report to the city council the condition of the property at such time as it may require. 
(Code 1974, § 20-6) 
Sec. 58-36. - Preservation of order generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police and his subordinates to suppress riots or public outbreaks in the city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police and his subordinates to quell all disturbances and to preserve the peace and good order of the city. The chief of police and his subordinates shall take up all turbulent and disorderly persons who are disturbing the peace and quiet of the city and confine them in the jail as directed by the city ordinances. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police and his subordinates to disperse all illegal assemblages of persons. 
(Code 1974, § 20-7) 
Sec. 58-37. - Duty to serve process. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and his subordinates to execute all warrants, serve all summons, subpoenas, notifications or rules placed in their hands by the city council, the manager, the municipal court or clerk, in accordance with the requirements of the city ordinances. 
(Code 1974, § 20-8) 
Sec. 58-38. - Jail designated. 
The present jail, or such other place as may be designated by the city council, is established as the place of imprisonment in the city. All persons held under arrest for violating any of the ordinances of the city may be confined therein until they are tried, unless they give bond for their appearance before the municipal court. 
(Code 1974, § 20-10) 
Sec. 58-39. - Duty of chief of police in tax sales. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to levy all of the tax executions placed in his hands on the goods, chattels, lands and tenements in the city of the person or property in default, and to sell the goods, chattels, lands and tenements at the usual place of sale in the city on the day of constable's sales, giving such notice as required by law for tax collectors' sales. 
(Code 1974, § 20-14) 
Sec. 58-40. - Chief to report property sales; disposition of proceeds. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make a full return at the next meeting of the city council of all property sold under execution by him, specifying the property, on whose account sold, the amount for which it was sold and the purchaser. The surplus of the sale, after paying the principal debt and all costs, shall be refunded to the proper party, taking his receipt therefor and filing the receipt with his report to the city council, or else be paid to the city treasurer, taking his receipt therefor, which surplus shall be subject, on the warrant of the manager, to the order of the person legitimately entitled to the surplus. 
(Code 1974, § 20-15) 
Sec. 58-41. - Appointment of special police. 
In cases of emergency special police officers may be appointed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1974, § 20-19) 
Chapter 59 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 59-1. - Fire prevention code—Adopted. 
The rules and regulations for fire prevention as recommended by the International Code Council, International Fire Code , latest edition, with appendices, with state amendments and as modified by the state safety fire commissioner are hereby adopted in their entirety as the fire prevention code of the city. Copies of the code is on file with the clerk, the building official and the chief of the fire department. Such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this chapter as fully as if set out at length in this section, and the provisions of such code shall be effective and controlling within the corporate limits of the city from and after the date of adoption and approval of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-2. - Same—Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in section 59-1 or any person who shall aid, abet or assist any other person in violation of the code shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-3. - Life safety code—Adopted. 
The rules and regulations for safety to life from fire and other similar hazards in buildings and structures as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association and known as the Life Safety Code , latest edition, including state safety fire commissioner modifications and the latest edition of the State of Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner's Minimum Fire Safety Standards with amendments are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this subsection are hereby adopted in their entirety as the life safety code of the city. Copies of such code are on file with the clerk, the building official and chief of the fire department. Such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this chapter as fully as if set out at length in this section, and the provisions of such code shall be effective and controlling within the corporate limits of the city from and after the date of adoption and approval of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-4. - Same—Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the life safety code adopted in section 59-3, or any person who shall aid, abet or assist any other person in violation of the code, shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-5. - Fire limits. 
The fire limits of the city shall be the corporate city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-6. - Bonfires and other open type burning. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to collect, accumulate or assemble any inflammable material of any kind for the purpose of a bonfire of any magnitude, large or small, and it shall be unlawful to light, cause to light, burn, execute or maintain a bonfire within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Portable outdoor fire places can be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instruction and shall not be used within 15 feet of any structure, under any balcony, shelter or roof. Burning uncontained piles is prohibited. 
(c)  Burning in barrels or any other homemade type container is prohibited. 
(d)  No man-made items, including but not limited to trash, construction/demolition waste or sewn lumber, can be burned in any manner. 
(e)  Land and lot clearing for the purposes of construction can be done with permitting through the state forestry commission and approval from the chief or designee as long as all of the following are met: 
(1)  An air curtain destructor is utilized in accordance with the instructions on file at the fire department. 
(2)  The location of the air curtain destructor is located 300 feet from any structure. This distance can be increased or decreased with written notice from the fire chief or designee. 
(3)  No more than one air curtain destructor is located on no more than a ten-acre lot. For land clearing involving roadways or utilities only, this ten acres can be reduced with written permission from the chief or designee. 
(4)  Only wood waste consisting of trees, logs, large brush and stumps that is relatively soil free may be burned. 
(5)  The air curtain destructor cannot be utilized before 10:00 a.m. and must be fully extinguished by water or covered with dirt one hour prior to sunset. 
(6)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec 59-7. - Non-resident vehicle accident and roadway fire fees. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to impose fees for services provided by the city fire department to insurance companies for accidents involving motor vehicles where the insured is determined to be at fault, and where: 
(1)  The coverage for such services is expressly provided by the insurance company to the insured and the services are lawfully billed to the insured; or where 
(2)  Other services are provided to the insured by municipality which are expressly authorized by state or federal law to be billed directly to an insurance company. 
(b)  The imposed fee shall be assessed for fire department responses to mitigate hazardous conditions caused by a vehicle crash or roadway fire. The responsible party of the vehicle crash or fire shall produce a valid auto insurance card and the city will bill the insurance company of the responsible party. Level 1—6 are rates determined by the services rendered which will be charged at one-hour increments. 

 
(c)  The city manager shall institute processes necessary for fire department reporting, municipal court tracking of traffic citations, and finance department direct billing of the fees authorized by this Code section, and may cause the functions and duties required by the subparagraph (c) to be provided using any of the procurement methods provided by this Code and state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Secs. 59-8—59-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 59-31. - Established; composition. 
A fire department is hereby established in and for the city, which shall consist of such fire companies as now exist or as may hereafter be created. The fire department shall be composed of a fire chief and such other officers and firefighters as may be deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-32. - Supervision. 
The supervision and control of the fire department is vested in the fire chief under the direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-33. - Rules and regulations. 
The fire department is hereby empowered to draw up appropriate rules and regulations for the conduct thereof and shall be designated as standard operating guidelines and/or standard operating procedures, including response guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-34. - Supervision of operations at fires. 
The fire chief or designee shall have full control over all fire apparatus, equipment, and of the members of the fire department in service at any fire. It shall be the duty of the fire chief or designee while serving as such, to superintend the fire department while performing such public duty in fighting a fire or other services set out by policy, and to give general and specific directions as to the manner of fighting fires, the use of equipment and apparatus and the specific duties and assignments of the various members of the fire department in attendance at a fire. The fire chief or designee may suspend any member of the fire department for insubordination at any fire. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-35. - Authority of fire chief. 
The fire chief or designee shall, in all cases of fire and fire alarms or other incidents, have full control and occupy sufficient ground or space necessary for the operation of all fire companies at the fires or other incident, and for the protection of life and property, and shall be protected in the discharge of their duties by the police officers of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-36. - Inspections; abatement of fire hazards. 
(a)  The fire chief or designee is hereby given the authority to inspect all construction or buildings within the city or upon property owned or controlled by the city, whether public, private or business, and shall enforce all laws of the state and the ordinances of the city relating to such construction or buildings for prevention, containment or investigation of fire and fire hazards, both as to the construction of buildings and as to the contents or occupancy thereof. 
(b)  No construction will begin, be caused to begin or be sustained without written permission from the chief or designee. 
(c)  No building or portion of building will be occupied without a certificate of occupancy signed by the chief or designee after any construction, addition, alteration, modification or remodeling of a building or installation of any life safety system required by state minimum fire safety regulations. 
(d)  The fire chief, or designee, shall, upon the determination of the existence of any fire hazard violating the provisions of the city's fire protection code or life safety code in any construction or building, or within the construction or building, or on or within any premises within the city, immediately notify the owner or occupant thereof of the existence of the fire hazard. Upon notification, the owner shall abate or remove the fire hazard within a reasonable amount of time based upon the hazard and curative measures required as determined by the chief or designee. Upon failure of the owner or occupant so to do, the fire chief or designee may, with the approval of the city manager, cause the issuance of a citation summoning the owner or occupant to appear in the municipal court to answer for having violated the city's fire prevention code or life safety code, for violation of which criminal penalties may be imposed pursuant to section 59-2 or section 59-4. 
(e)  If, in the opinion of the chief or designee, where it reasonably appears that there exists an imminent and immediate danger to the life or safety of any person, the chief or designee, along with approval of the city manager, may cause the immediate evacuation and closure of the building or structure. The chief or designee shall immediately seek injunctive relief from the superior court [of] the county to obtain an order prohibiting the occupancy of the building until further order of the court. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-37. - Records of fires. 
The fire chief or designee shall keep a permanent record of the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire and the damages resulting therefrom immediately after the occurrence of such fire. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-38. - Obstructing, tampering with, limited use of fire hydrants and fire protection equipment. 
(a)  Posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately discernible and/or usable. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants. 
(b)  No person shall in any way interfere with or tamper with any fire hydrant. 
(c)  No person shall use or operate any hydrant or other valve installed on any water system intended for use by the fire department for fire suppression purposes and which is accessible to any public highway, alley or private way open to, or generally used by, the public unless such person first secures a permit for such use. Such permits shall be issued by the city manager based on need, water availability, and the lack of alternative water sources available to the party requesting the permit. The permit fee shall be set by city council, which represents the cost of the city's labor to install, read, and remove the meter measuring the permittee's water usage for billing purposes. 
(d)  A three-foot (914 mm) clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants except as otherwise required or approved by the city's fire chief or designee. 
(e)  Private hydrants shall be properly tested, maintained, marked and in working order in accordance with state law and a copy of all testing documentation shall be given to the fire chief or designee. 
(1)  Private hydrants found to be not readily usable shall be repaired within 15 days of written notification. 
(2)  Upon failure to make hydrant readily usable, the fire chief or designee may, with the approval of the city manager, cause the issuance of a citation summoning owner of the hydrant to appear in the municipal court to answer for having violated the city's fire prevention code or life safety code, for violation of which criminal penalties may be imposed pursuant to section 59-2 or section 59-4. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-39. - Unauthorized use of equipment. 
Without the consent of the fire chief or designee, no person not an active member of the city fire department shall at any time ride upon any of the fire apparatus of the fire department, nor shall any person make use of any fire apparatus, hose or other equipment of the fire department other than for the purpose for which the equipment was intended, without the consent of the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-40. - Entering building where fire is being fought. 
No person not actually a member of the city fire department engaged in the extinguishment of a fire or the saving of property endangered thereby shall enter any building in which a fire is being fought by the fire department, either during or after such fire, without the express consent of the owner or occupant of such building. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-41. - Interference with firefighting activities. 
No person except an active member of the fire department shall at any time enter within the territory in the vicinity of any fire unless expressly authorized by the fire chief or designee, when the territory is roped off or access within the limits is denied by the police, or interfere with or attempt to operate any of the apparatus or equipment of the fire department or any fire hydrant, or interfere by giving orders to any individual, unless requested so to do by the fire chief or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-42. - Obstruction of fire chief in performance of duties. 
(a)  No person shall in any way obstruct or prevent or attempt to obstruct or prevent the fire chief or designee in the discharge of their duties by denying or attempting to deny access to any premises owned or occupied by such person, or by failing or refusing to furnish correct information requested by the fire chief or designee in the investigation into the cause, origin or circumstances of any fire. 
(b)  No person shall in any way obstruct or prevent or attempt to obstruct or prevent the fire chief or designee while inspecting any construction, building or premises to determine the existence of any possible fire hazard, nor shall any person deny access to the fire chief or designee to any construction, building or premises for inspection thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 59-43. - Sprinkler, fire alarm and other protection systems. 
(a)  Sprinkler systems shall be maintained and tested in accordance with state law and regulations. When deficiencies are noted by third party inspections, the inspection report is required to be submitted to the fire chief or designee by the third party inspector. The owner or occupier of the building or structure shall 30 days from the date of the inspection to cure any deficiencies and notify the chief or designee that corrective measures have been taken. In the event corrective measures have not been taken within the 30-day period, the owner or occupier shall be issued a citation to be and appear in the municipal court for violation of which criminal penalties may be imposed pursuant to section 59-2 or section 59-4. 
(b)  Fire alarms shall be tested and maintained in accordance with the state law and regulations. When deficiencies are noted by third party inspections, the inspection report is required to be submitted to the fire chief or designee by the third party inspector. In the event the alarm system will not be functioning for a period of four hours or longer, the owner or occupier of the building or structure will be required to institute a fire watch in accordance with the international fire code. The owner or occupier of the building or structure shall 30 days from the date of the inspection to cure any deficiencies and notify the chief or designee that corrective measures have been taken. In the event corrective measures have not been taken within the 30-day period, the owner or occupier shall be issued a citation to be and appear in the municipal court for violation of which criminal penalties may be imposed pursuant to section 59-2 or section 59-4. 
(c)  Fire alarm designers shall be of NICET level III for designing plans in accordance with state law and shall oversee any fire alarm project installation, renovation, replacement or addition to such systems. 
(d)  Fire alarm NICET inspection and testing level II is required for inspection and testing of fire alarm systems in accordance with state law. 
(e)  Fire alarms that are not required by state law shall not be required to conform to these standards. 
(f)  Kitchen suppression systems shall be installed, tested and maintained in accordance with state laws and regulations. When deficiencies are noted by third party inspections, the inspection report is required to be submitted to the fire chief or designee by the third party inspector. The owner or occupier of the building or structure shall have 30 days from the date of the inspection to cure any deficiencies and notify the chief or designee that corrective measures have been taken. In the event corrective measures have not been taken within the 30-day period, the owner or occupier shall be issued a citation to be and appear in the municipal court for violation of which criminal penalties may be imposed pursuant to section 59-2 or section 59-4. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 3-6-2017) 
Chapter 62 - SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; water supply and sewage disposal facilities, § 18-37; stormwater management plans, § 18-171 et seq.; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 42; planning and zoning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B; water supply and sanitary sewerage in subdivisions, app. B, § 6-5; stormwater drainage, app. B, § 6-8. 
State Law reference— Acquisition, construction and operation of water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-31. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of commercial and industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(6)  To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
(b)  This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; provides for user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this article. 
(Code 1974, § 22-1.1) 
Sec. 62-32. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, city officials, including the public utilities director, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 22-1.2) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 62-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act and the act mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority means the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
Authorized representative of the user means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: A general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand and BOD mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
Categorical pretreatment standard and categorical standard mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR article I, subchapter N, parts 405—471. 
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Environmental Protection Agency and EPA mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
Environmental protection division of EPD means the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division and the approval authority for the city industrial user program. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Indirect discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the act. 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is, (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b or c of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts, which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company corporation, society, group, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH means a measure of the acidity of alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutant unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards and prohibited discharges mean absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 62-131. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Public utilities director means the public utilities director of the city appointed by the city manager and authorized by the city manager to fulfill the requirements of this article and be responsible for the operations of the sewer system. 
Publicly owned treatment works and POTW mean a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Septic tank waste means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.) or the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater." 
Sewer means a pipe of conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load and slug mean any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 62-131, or any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow or exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and may adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Storm drain and storm sewer mean a drain or sewer for conveying stormwater. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid; and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
User and industrial user mean a source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater department means the city wastewater department, which is the operating organization working under the policies and direction of the city council. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment plant and treatment plant mean that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludges. Sometimes used as synonymous with the terms "waste treatment plant," "wastewater treat plant," "wastewater facilities," or "water pollution control plant." 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1974, § 22-1.4) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-34. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD means biochemical oxygen demand. 
CFR means Code of Federal Regulations. 
COD means chemical oxygen demand. 
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
gpd means gallons per day. 
mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
NPDES means the national pollutant discharge elimination system. 
POTW means publicly owned treatment works. 
RCRA means the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
SIC means standard industrial classification. 
TSS means total suspended solids. 
USC means the United States Code. 
(Code 1974, § 22-1.3) 
Sec. 62-35. - Confidentiality of information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the director of water and wastewater inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public subject to the restrictions of state law, codified at O.C.G.A. § 12-5-26, as amended, and federal regulations at 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(viii), as amended. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Code 1974, § 22-11.1) 
Sec. 62-36. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
(a)  The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this article. 
(b)  These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Code 1974, § 22-17.1) 
Sec. 62-37. - Surcharge fees. 
(a)  All commercial and industrial users shall be billed, as a surcharge, a fee based upon their pollutant load in excess of that found in the maximum residential waste effluent. The city, in accordance with the standard practice for sample taking and sample analysis, shall compute monthly for each commercial and industrial user, the amount of waste pollutants in pounds introduced in the sewer system in excess of the residential criteria hereafter established. 
(b)  Waste effluent contaminants to be analyzed and measured for surcharge are: 
(1)  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). 
(2)  Total suspended solids (TSS). 
(3)  Ammonia as nitrogen (NH 3 -N). 
(4)  Oil and grease (O&G). 
(c)  The criteria hereby established for maximum or upper limit of residential waste are: 
(1)  BOD, 250 mg/l. 
(2)  TSS, 250 mg/l. 
(3)  NH 3 -N, 25 mg/l. 
(4)  O&G, 100 mg/l. 
(d)  The surcharge to industrial and commercial users for excess pollutants over the maximum residential criteria each month will be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(e)  The prohibited concentration levels established for conventional pollutants are: 
(1)  BOD, 800 mg/l. 
(2)  TSS, 1,200 mg/l. 
(3)  NH 3 -N, 70 mg/l. 
(4)  O&G, 200 mg/l. 
(f)  Any concentration of pollutant measured over the prohibited concentration level is a significant violation and subjects the user to escalated enforcement measures. 
(Code 1974, § 22-17.2) 
Secs. 62-38—62-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 

Sec. 62-56. - Unsanitary dumping on public or private property prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste. 
(Code 1974, § 22-2.1) 
Sec. 62-57. - Unsanitary dumping in natural outlet prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 22-2.2) 
Sec. 62-58. - Unlawful to construct privy without proper approval. 
Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Code 1974, § 22-2.3) 
Sec. 62-59. - Connection to public sewer required. 
The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at the owners' expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 30 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(Code 1974, § 22-2.4) 
Sec. 62-60. - Entry of city personnel permitted. 
The public utilities director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1974, § 22-2.5) 
Secs. 62-61—62-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 62-76. - Connection to private wastewater system allowed. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 62-59, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this article and other county or state requirements. 
(Code 1974, § 22-3.1) 
Sec. 62-77. - Construction permit required. 
Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owners shall first obtain a written permit signed by the building inspector. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the building inspector or health department. A permit and inspection fee of an amount currently set by the city shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1974, § 22-3.2) 
Sec. 62-78. - Inspection prior to approval. 
A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed and approved by the chief building inspector. The building inspector shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the building inspector when work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. 
(Code 1974, § 22-3.3) 
Sec. 62-79. - Compliance with state requirements. 
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of human resources. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities unless approval of such method has first been obtained from the county health department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Code 1974, § 22-3.4) 
Sec. 62-80. - Connection to public sewer where available. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section 62-59, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1974, § 22-3.5) 
Sec. 62-81. - Owner operated and maintained. 
The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1974, § 22-3.6) 
Sec. 62-82. - Additional requirements by health department imposed. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the county health department. 
(Code 1974, § 22-3.7) 
Secs. 62-83—62-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 62-101. - Sewer use permit required. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public utilities director. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.1) 
Sec. 62-102. - Classes of permits; permit application required. 
The owner, or his agent, shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the public utilities director. The city may charge a permit and inspection fee at the time the application is filed for residential and commercial service, if such a fee is deemed necessary by the council to defer the city's costs of evaluating the permit application. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.2) 
Sec. 62-103. - Costs borne by owner. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owners. The owners shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.3) 
Sec. 62-104. - Separate building sewer required. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on a interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer; but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection as provided in this section. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.4) 
Sec. 62-105. - New-to-old building sewer connection requirements. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the public utilities director, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.5) 
Sec. 62-106. - Conformity to building and plumbing code requirements. 
(a)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(b)  Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city: 
(1)  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe, ASTM Specification D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe or, where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots, ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints may be required by the director. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the director. 
(2)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the director, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) shall be followed. 
(3)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(4)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the director. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(5)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C-564. 
a.  Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and shall be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
b.  PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber "O"-ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including oils), and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. 
c.  Installation of gaskets shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. 
d.  Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the director. 
(6)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45-degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the director. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.6) 
Sec. 62-107. - Building sewer elevation. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.7) 
Sec. 62-108. - Surface drainage prohibited. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the public utilities director for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.8) 
Sec. 62-109. - City supervision required for connection/testing. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the public utilities director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the public utilities director or his representative. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.9) 
Sec. 62-110. - Public hazard protection required. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be resolved in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.10) 
Sec. 62-111. - Sewer availability defined. 
The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.11) 
Sec. 62-112. - Connection to conform to building and plumbing code. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WEF Manual or Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.12) 
Sec. 62-113. - Infiltration/inflow. 
If any house sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the house sewer. 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property. 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system. 
(Code 1974, § 22-4.13) 
Secs. 62-114—62-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 62-131. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, gases, vapors or fumes in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant or which may result in the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(3)  Wastewater having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works or any waters or wastes having a pH that will cause the waste entering the wastewater works plant at any time to be in excess of 12.0; 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction of the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(5)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(6)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(7)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; or 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the public utilities director in accordance with section 62-160. 
(c)  Limited discharges. The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. Current limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the public utilities director are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater containing more than 200 milligrams per liter of floatable oils, fat, or grease; 
(2)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes containing more than one milligram per liter by weight of the following gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide, or any other noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entrance into sewers for their maintenance, inspections and repair; 
(4)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the public utilities director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(5)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug; 
(6)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters; 
(7)  Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes; 
(8)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the public utilities director; 
(9)  Sludges, screening, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(10)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the public utilities director in a wastewater discharger permit; 
(11)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(12)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; or 
(13)  Wastewater which impacts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent; and 
(14)  Other limitations that may be adopted by amendment to this article. 
(d)  Discharge of processed or stored pollutants and substances. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Code 1974, § 22-5.1) 
Sec. 62-132. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the public utilities director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the public utilities director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Code 1974, § 22-5.2) 
Sec. 62-133. - Local limits. 
(a)  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits: 

 
(b)  The limits in subsection (a) of this section apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The public utilities director may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the local limits, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance shall be provided to the director within 90 days. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set forth in section 62-232. The public utilities director shall have final approval of the compliance schedule prior to implementation. In no case shall the compliance schedule exceed three years. 
(Code 1974, § 22-5.3; Ord. No. 2003-003, § I, 2-3-2003) 
Sec. 62-134. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Code 1974, § 22-5.4) 
Sec. 62-135. - Dilution prohibition. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The public utilities director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Code 1974, § 22-5.5) 
Sec. 62-136. - Conditions for special agreements. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, as long as no federal or state pretreatment standards or requirements are violated. 
(Code 1974, § 22-5.6) 
Secs. 62-137—62-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 

Sec. 62-156. - Director's options to accepting wastes. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 62-131, and which in the judgment of the public utilities director may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or 
(4)  Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 62-136. 
(Code 1974, § 22-6.1) 
Sec. 62-157. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 62-131 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or public utilities director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the public utilities director for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 22-6.2) 
Sec. 62-158. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the city may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the public utilities director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, oil, or sand, as specified in subsection 62-131(c)(1) or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the public utilities director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the public utilities director. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(c)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Code 1974, § 22-6.3) 
Sec. 62-159. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
(a)  At least once every two years, the public utilities director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The evaluation will involve the degree and likelihood that an accidental discharge or slug would adversely affect treatment plant operations and/or compliance with its NPDES permit. If an accidental discharge/slug control plan is deemed necessary, it shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the public utilities director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 62-236; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures may include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(b)  The public utilities director shall work with the affected significant industrial user in developing the plan. 
(Code 1974, § 22-6.4) 
Sec. 62-160. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the public utilities director and at such times as are established by the director. Such waste shall not violate division 5 of this article or any other requirements established by the city. The public utilities director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(b)  The public utilities director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The public utilities director may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits and also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the public utilities director. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the public utilities director. The public utilities director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The public utilities director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Code 1974, § 22-6.5) 
Sec. 62-161. - Vandalism. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to the sanctions set out in divisions 8 through 11 of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 22-6.6) 
Secs. 62-162—62-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION 

Sec. 62-181. - Required. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the public utilities director, except that significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 62-183 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The public utilities director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in divisions 8 through 11 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Code 1974, § 22-7.2) 
Sec. 62-182. - Wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the public utilities director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The public utilities director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Code 1974, § 22-7.1) 
Sec. 62-183. - Existing connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, unless already issued a wastewater discharge permit, apply to the public utilities director within 30 days after the effective date for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 62-185, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 60 days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the public utilities director. 
(Code 1974, § 22-7.3) 
Sec. 62-184. - New connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 62-185, must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Code 1974, § 22-7.4) 
Sec. 62-185. - Application contents. 
(a)  All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The public utilities director may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by subsection 62-231(b); 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all significant raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Description of production process and final product; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed, average and maximum per day; 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the public utilities director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(b)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Code 1974, § 22-7.5) 
Sec. 62-186. - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Code 1974, § 22-7.6) 
Sec. 62-187. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
The public utilities director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the public utilities director will make a recommendation whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The city may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit on reasonable grounds. 
(Code 1974, § 22-7.7) 
Secs. 62-188—62-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS 

Sec. 62-206. - Duration. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall reference this article and be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the public utilities director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Code 1974, § 22-8.1) 
Sec. 62-207. - Contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the public utilities director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 62-210, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Any applicable self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain such other conditions as deemed appropriate to ensure compliance with this article, and applicable laws and regulations. 
(Code 1974, § 22-8.2) 
Sec. 62-208. - Appeals. 
The public utilities director shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the public utilities director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit or the denial of a permit application within 30 days of notice thereof. Guidelines for the basis for an appeal are as follows: 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the grounds for its objection. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the city fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties may seek judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision in the county superior court. 
(Code 1974, § 22-8.3) 
Sec. 62-209. - Modification. 
The public utilities director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(4)  Uncorrected violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(5)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(6)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(7)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(8)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(Code 1974, § 22-8.4) 
Sec. 62-210. - Transfer. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance notice to the public utilities director and the public utilities director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer (approval not to be unreasonably withheld). The notice to the public utilities director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes in such a manner that would adversely affect the ability of the city to treat the wastewater; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(b)  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable at the option of the city as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Code 1974, § 22-8.5) 
Sec. 62-211. - Revocation. 
(a)  The public utilities director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the public utilities director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(3)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(4)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(5)  Refusing to allow the public utilities director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(6)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(7)  Failure to pay fines; 
(8)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(9)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(10)  Failure to satisfactorily complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(11)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Code 1974, § 22-8.6) 
Sec. 62-212. - Reissuance. 
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting an updated permit application, in accordance with section 62-185, a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1974, § 22-8.7) 
Sec. 62-213. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another municipality, or user located with another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the public utilities director shall enter into a intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (a) of this section, the public utilities director shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the public utilities director may deem necessary. 
(c)  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (a) of this section, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 62-133. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the public utilities director with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(4)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(5)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(6)  A provision ensuring the public utilities director access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other duties deemed necessary by the public utilities director; and 
(7)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. 
(Code 1974, § 22-8.8) 
Secs. 62-214—62-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 62-231. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the public utilities director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the public utilities director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described in subsection (a) of this section shall submit the following information: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the public utilities director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and longterm average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 62-240. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set forth in section 62-241. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set forth in section 62-232. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 62-186. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.1) 
Sec. 62-232. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 62-133 or subsection 62-231(b)(7): 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation; 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the public utilities director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the public utilities director. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.2) 
Sec. 62-233. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the public utilities director a report containing the information described in subsections 62-231(b)(4) through (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 62-186. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.3) 
Sec. 62-234. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the public utilities director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by categorical pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 62-186. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the public utilities director, using the procedures prescribed in section 62-241, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.4) 
Sec. 62-235. - Reports of changed conditions. 
Each user must notify the public utilities director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. 
(1)  The public utilities director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 62-185. 
(2)  The public utilities director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 62-187 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 62-209 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.5) 
Sec. 62-236. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the public utilities director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the public utilities director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of emergency notification procedures. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.6) 
Sec. 62-237. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the public utilities director as the public utilities director may require. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.7) 
Sec. 62-238. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the public utilities director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the public utilities director within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the public utilities director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the public utilities director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.8) 
Sec. 62-239. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this section need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 62-231, 62-233 and 62-234. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the public utilities director, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This section does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.9) 
Sec. 62-240. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the public utilities director. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.10) 
Sec. 62-241. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. If flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the public utilities director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.11) 
Sec. 62-242. - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.12) 
Sec. 62-243. - Recordkeeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling; the name of the person taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; the person performing the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period of retention shall be automatically extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or POTW or when the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the public utilities director. 
(Code 1974, § 22-9.13) 
Secs. 62-244—62-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 

Sec. 62-261. - Right of entry; inspection and sampling. 
The public utilities director shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article. Users shall allow the public utilities director ready and reasonable access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination of any records required to be kept under division 9 of this article and copying of such records, and the performance of related duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the public utilities director will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The public utilities director shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The public utilities director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at the facility's own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated monthly to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the public utilities director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the public utilities director access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 22-10.1) 
Sec. 62-262. - Search warrants. 
If the public utilities director has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued under this article, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the public utilities director may seek issuance of a search warrant from the county superior court. 
(Code 1974, § 22-10.2) 
Sec. 62-263. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The public utilities director shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the public utilities director believes has caused, alone or in the combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the public utilities director's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation which the public utilities director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Code 1974, § 22-12.1) 
Secs. 62-264—62-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 62-281. - Notification of violation. 
When the public utilities director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the public utilities director. Submission of the plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Code 1974, § 22-13.1) 
Sec. 62-282. - Consent orders. 
The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 62-284 and 62-285 and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Code 1974, § 22-13.2) 
Sec. 62-283. - Show cause hearing. 
The city may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the public utilities director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or be registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1974, § 22-13.3) 
Sec. 62-284. - Compliance orders. 
When the public utilities director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1974, § 22-13.4) 
Sec. 62-285. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the public utilities director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the public utilities director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1974, § 22-13.5) 
Sec. 62-286. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  When the public utilities director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $50,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. In determining the amount of the fine, the city shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violations, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective action by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(b)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1.5 percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(c)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the city council may convene a hearing on the matter. If the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(d)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1974, § 22-13.6) 
Sec. 62-287. - Judicial review. 
Any user may seek relief from any action or decision of the city at any time in the administrative process by filing an action in the county superior court. At that time, both the user and the city shall be free to petition the court for bonds, damages, injunctions and other relief as any party may deem appropriate and for which state law provides redress. It is specifically stipulated that at the time the user chooses to opt out of any on-going administrative process by filing an action in the county superior court that all administrative remedies would be fulfilled and/or exhausted so as to make review by the county superior court. 
(Code 1974, § 22-13.7) 
Sec. 62-288. - Emergency suspensions. 
The public utilities director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The public utilities director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. Upon a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the public utilities director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The public utilities director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the public utilities director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 62-289 are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrences to the public utilities director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under section 62-283 or section 62-289. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Code 1974, § 22-13.8) 
Sec. 62-289. - Termination of discharge. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions in section 62-211, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Recurring violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operation or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Significant violation of the pretreatment standards in division 5 of this article. 
(b)  Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 62-283 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1974, § 22-13.9) 
Sec. 62-290. - Injunctive relief. 
When the public utilities director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the public utilities director may petition the county superior court through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The public utilities director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Code 1974, § 22-14.1) 
Sec. 62-291. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty up to at least the amount of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The public utilities director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Code 1974, § 22-14.2) 
Sec. 62-292. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(b)  A user who willfully or recklessly introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a punishment as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(c)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(d)  Upon a second conviction, a user shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 22-14.3) 
Sec. 62-293. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The public utilities director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the public utilities director may recommend other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the public utilities director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Code 1974, § 22-14.4) 
Sec. 62-294. - Performance bonds. 
The public utilities director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the public utilities director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(Code 1974, § 22-15.1) 
Sec. 62-295. - Liability insurance. 
The public utilities director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(Code 1974, § 22-15.2) 
Sec. 62-296. - Water supply severance. 
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Code 1974, § 22-15.3) 
Sec. 62-297. - Public nuisances. 
Significant violations of any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement may be declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the public utilities director. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provision of this Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying such nuisance. 
(Code 1974, § 22-15.4) 
Sec. 62-298. - Contractor listing. 
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the public utilities director. 
(Code 1974, § 22-15.5) 
Sec. 62-299. - Shortterm permits. 
The public utilities director may decide to use a permit's duration to force a noncompliant industry to review and account for variations in its issued permit through permit reapplication. Similarly, the public utilities director may decide to increase surveillance of a noncompliant industry and/or impose more stringent self-monitoring requirements for chronic violators. 
(Code 1974, § 22-15.6) 
Sec. 62-300. - Case referral to approval authority. 
In severe cases of continued noncompliance, the city may refer the noncompliant industrial user to the state environmental protection division or the United States Environmental Protection Agency, who are able to assess substantially greater penalties. 
(Code 1974, § 22-15.7) 
Secs. 62-301—62-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 62-316. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with permit conditions or this article because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance if the requirements of subsection (c) of this section are met. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and the user has submitted the following information to the public utilities director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance; 
(3)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof; 
(4)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance; 
(5)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent reasonable and necessary to maintain compliance with applicable requirements and standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Code 1974, § 22-16.1) 
Sec. 62-317. - General/special prohibitions. 
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in subsection 62-131(a) or the specific prohibitions in subsections 62-131(b) and (c) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Code 1974, § 22-16.2) 
Sec. 62-318. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. The term "severe property damage" does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  (1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the public utilities director, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the public utilities director of an anticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and time, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The public utilities director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  (1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the public utilities director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  The public utilities director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the public utilities director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 22-16.3) 
Secs. 62-319—62-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER PROVISION AND EXTENSION POLICIES 

Sec. 62-351. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide uniform policies and procedures relative to the provision and extension of sewer service by the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 26-400, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 62-352. - Application required. 
Any person desiring sewer service shall make application for such service at the office of the utilities department on a form to be furnished by the department. The form must be executed by the property owner or his authorized agent or provide the size of tap requested and a proper street address. 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 26-401, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 62-353. - Deposits. 
Applicants for sewer service who are commercial establishments shall be required, at the time of application for service, to make a deposit equal to the three-month bill of the average customer in that class. Tenants in a single-family residence or mobile home shall be required, at the time of application for service, to make a deposit as determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 26-402, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 62-354. - Sewer tap fees and manhole fees. 
At the time of application for sewer service, the applicant shall also pay a sewer tap fee in accordance with the rates set by resolution of the city council. When a sewer connection must be made to a sanitary sewer that is larger than eight inches, the connection shall be made only at a manhole. If a suitable manhole is not available, the cost of a new manhole shall be required of the applicant in addition to the tap fee stated above. 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 26-403, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 62-355. - Impact fee. 
The city council may, at its discretion, assess an impact fee by resolution on new sewer service customers at the time of application for service at such future date. The impact fee, which will be equal to or less than the equity in the sewer system established by existing customers through the payment of sewer rates, will be based upon a system of equivalent residential units (ERU). 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 26-404, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 62-356. - Basin specific fee. 
If the city undertakes at its expense a sewer system project to provide service for an unserved area, the city manager may require a basin specific fee to be assessed against each new customer who connects to the system to recoup a portion of the capital costs of the project. The fee shall be based upon the number of equivalent residential units (ERU) the project was designed to serve. 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 26-405, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 62-357. - Sewer extension. 
(a)  All applications for sewer service that require the extension of a sewer will be evaluated by the public utilities director to determine the estimated cost of the proposed extension for submittal to the city manager for his approval. Based upon the availability of funds, the city manager is authorized to approve or disapprove any application for sewer service requiring a sewer extension. A fee as set by resolution of the city council shall be required of the applicant at the time of application for sewer service requiring a sewer extension. This fee is to defray the costs associated with the development of the estimated costs of the extension. The fee will be applied to the costs of the extension should it be undertaken; otherwise, the fee shall be forfeited. Cost estimates are not binding upon the city. 
(b)  Within the corporate limits, the city will extend the sewer to the applicant's property line a distance of no more than 300 feet at no cost to the applicant. For extensions in excess of 300 feet, the applicant shall be required to pay the costs of the additional material required plus 15 percent to defray the city's costs of purchasing, inventory and handling of the material. 
(c)  Outside the corporate limits of the city, applicants are responsible for 100 percent of the costs of the sewer extension including all planning, engineering, material, labor, equipment and pavement replacement costs. Construction of the sewer extension shall be done by a licensed contractor in strict accordance with city standards for material and workmanship. The work will be inspected by utilities department personnel before being accepted into the city system. The city manager may approve an exception to this policy based upon the applicant's binding agreement to have his property annexed into the city at its convenience, in which case the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall apply. 
(d)  All costs of easements, jacking and/or boring, lift stations or other related costs which may be required for the sewer extension are the responsibility of the applicant. The city shall have no obligation or responsibility for the costs of any on-site facilities either inside or outside the corporate limits. 
(e)  All sewer extensions shall be of a minimum of eight inches. The city may, in its discretion, require the installation of a sewer larger than eight inches, in which case the city will be responsible for the additional costs directly resulting from the oversizing. 
(f)  Prior to any application being approved by the city manager and the work authorized, the applicant shall pay all estimated costs required under the provisions of these regulations. Any difference between the actual and estimated costs of the extension, either upward or downward, shall be reconciled as necessary upon completion of the project. 
(g)  In the event that a sewer extension makes sewer available to other property owners abutting such extension, such other property owners shall be required to pay to the city their proportionate share, if any, of the costs of the extension borne by the original applicant on a front foot basis before being permitted to connect to such extension. The charges collected will be refunded by the city to the original applicant, but in no case will the refunds exceed the amount paid by the original applicant. Any refunds due to the original applicant will be paid, without interest, on March 31 and September 30, as appropriate. 
(h)  All liability for payment of refunds by the city shall cease seven years from the date of payment by the applicant for sewer extension. The assignment by the applicant of any money due under the provisions of this refund policy without the written consent of the city is prohibited. 
(i)  In the event that a sewer is extended, either inside or outside the corporate limits, the costs of which is paid in part or in full by the city, applicants who wish to connect to the sewer shall be required to pay a connection charge in addition to the tap fee as referenced in section 62-354. The connection charge shall be the applicant's proportionate share, on a footage basis, of the city's share of the cost of the extension. If the sewer installed is larger than eight inches, the applicant shall be required to pay only its proportionate share of the cost of an eight-inch sewer. 
(j)  All sewer mains extended under the provisions of these regulations, whether inside or outside the city, shall become the sole property of the city upon the connection with the city sewer system and shall thenceforth be maintained by the city. 
(k)  Anything in these regulations to the contrary notwithstanding, the city in its sole discretion shall have the right to disapprove any application for sewer service when it determines that it is in its best interest to do so based on monetary or manpower constraints or on other considerations such as inadequate wastewater treatment capacity. Furthermore, the city reserves the right to extend its sewer system on a planned basis in the best interest of orderly communitywide growth. 
(Ord. No. 98-18, § 26-406, 6-1-1998) 
Secs. 62-358—62-365. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICES AND COSTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2006-13, § I, adopted February 13, 2006 did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as §§ 62-366—62-382, 62-396—62-401, 62-411—62-413 at the editor's discretion. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-366. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Governing authority shall variously refer to the City of Tifton, the Board of Commissioners of Tift County and their respective managers, acting through the Tifton-Tift County water and wastewater enterprise funds and as is consistent with the terms and provisions of the Interlocal Agreement between the City of Tifton and Tift County, Georgia for the cooperative provision of water and wastewater services, known as Addendum No. 11 dated July 25, 2005, together with all amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-367. - Right of entry of personnel. 
The officers and employees of the governing authority shall have the right to enter the premises of any consumer at any reasonable time to examine the pipes and fixtures, the quantity of water or wastewater used and the manner of its use; and in case of any fraudulent representation on the part of any consumer or evidence of the unnecessary waste of water, the supply of such service shall be stopped. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-368. - Tapping mains, using, tampering with curb stop. 
No person shall tap any main or connect any service pipe therewith, nor turn on or shut off the water at any corporation curb stop without authority from the governing authority on regular form. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-369. - Cut-off valve. 
The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-370. - Users to pay for service pipes and fixtures. 
Water or wastewater users shall pay for all tap service pipes and fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-371. - Governing authority to make connections; fee. 
The governing authority shall cause all connections to be made from the main to the curb stop, for which all consumers of water or wastewater service shall pay the uniform or agreed rate in advance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-372. - Approval of pipes and fixtures. 
Water and wastewater pipes or fixtures shall be subject to the approval of the director of the utilities department before the water or wastewater shall be turned on. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-373. - Reconnection without authority. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to turn his water back on after such service has been cut off by the governing authority for failure to pay any bill. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-374. - Notice to fire department when main shut off. 
No main or valve conducting water through the streets shall be closed without notice having first been given to the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-375. - Duty to maintain plumbing. 
All pipes and fixtures on any premises shall be kept in good repair by the user of water or wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-376. - Furnishing service to others. 
No water or wastewater user shall be allowed to supply such service to other persons or families, except by special consent of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-377. - Waste prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully waste or cause to be wasted any water from the Tifton-Tift County water supply. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-378. - Damaging system. 
No person shall, without legal right or authority, misplace, injure, deface, damage or interfere with, in any manner, any hydrant, pipe, fixture, manhole or other discharge collection apparatus belonging or in any manner relating to the water or wastewater system of the governing authority. The prohibition in this section is in addition to the prohibition and criminal penalties set forth in federal and state law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-379. - Installation of meter. 
The governing authority may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the governing authority's option, on the consumer's property within three feet, of the property line. Where meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefore, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-380. - Correct installation of lines or pipings. 
The governing authority reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such manner as to prevent cross-connections or back-flow. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-381. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
Water furnished by the governing authority shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any person or permit any other person to use said water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-382. - Proof of no physical connection of private wells. 
In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the governing authority's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the governing authority's water system and all applicants by becoming water consumers of the governing authority covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the governing authority they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the governing authority's water system. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Secs. 62-383—62-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER AND WASTEWATER EXTENSION POLICIES 

Sec. 62-396. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide uniform policies and procedures relative to the provision and extension of water and wastewater service by the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-397. - Application required. 
Any person desiring water or wastewater service extension shall make application for such service at the office of the Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department on a form to be furnished by the department. The form must be executed by the property owner or his authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-398. - Impact fee. 
The governing authority may, at its discretion, assess an impact fee by resolution on new water or wastewater service customers at the time of application for service at such future date. The impact fee, which will be equal to or less than, the equity in the entire water or wastewater system, as applicable, established by existing customers through the payment of water or wastewater rates, as applicable, will be based upon a system of established state and/or national standards known as equivalent residential dwelling units (ERDU). 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-399. - Basin specific fee. 
If the governing authority undertakes at its expense, a specific water or wastewater system project to provide service for an unserved area, the governing authority may require a basin specific fee to be assessed against each new customer who connects to the specifically identified new portion of the system to recoup a portion of the capital costs of the project. The fee shall be based upon the number of established state and/or national standards known as equivalent residential dwelling units (ERDU) the project was designed to serve. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-400. - Irrigation meters. 
Any person desiring the installation of a water meter for irrigation purposes shall make application for same in accordance with the provisions of section 62-397. At the time of application, the applicant will be required to pay the meter installation fee to be set by resolution as set forth in section 62-399. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-401. - Water and wastewater main extensions. 
(a)  All applications for water or wastewater service that requires the extension of a water or wastewater main will be evaluated by the director of utilities department to determine the estimated cost of the proposed extension for submital to the governing authority for approval. Based upon the availability of funds, the governing authority may approve or disapprove any application for water or wastewater service requiring a water main extension. Consistent with the terms and provisions of the interlocal agreement for the cooperative provision of water and wastewater services, as amended from time to time, entered into between the City of Tifton and Tift County, water and wastewater extensions fall into one of four categories known as "capital extensions," "economic extensions," "system improvements" and "basic extensions." The city manager and county manager and their staffs shall cooperate in developing and implementing "basic extensions" and "system improvements" using the strategic plan adopted by the City Council of the City of Tifton and the Board of Commissioners of Tift County as a general guide; but both the city council and the county board of commissioners must approve any revisions or modifications to the strategic plan as well as any "capital extension" or "economic extension." The terms set forth hereinabove related to extensions are hereby defined as follows: 
Basic water extension: Basic water or wastewater (i.e., sewer) extension is a customer requested extension, normally 1,000 feet or less, which accommodates an immediate development of a specific project. This extension is paid for by the customer, the developer or other external sources, but shall not be amortized into basic rates. 
Capital extension: Capital extension is a programmed/planned extension that is part of a long range capital improvement program for the water and/or wastewater system. The improvements to be constructed are to improve overall operation, enlarge customer base and service area, aid in economic development, and provide fire protection. These projects can be funded through SPLOST, Capital Revenues, and/or Loans/Grants. 
Economic extension: Economic extension is an extension to accommodate a proposed industrial, commercial, or residential customer. These extensions can be funded through Capital Revenues, SPLOST, Loans/Grants, and/or a private developer or individual. 
System improvement: System improvement is an extension or improvement that is part of the current budget year. The project may be an extension or replacement of an existing water or wastewater (i.e., sewer) main within the service area. The work is to improve overall quality, eliminate maintenance problems, or improve reliability of the water system. These improvements are to be paid for out of budget funds. 
(b)  All costs of easements, jacking and/or boring, fire hydrants or other related costs which may be required for the water or wastewater main extension are the responsibility of the applicant. The governing authority shall have no obligation or responsibility for the costs of any on-site facilities either inside or outside the corporate limits. 
(c)  All water main extensions shall include the installation of fire hydrants at a distance of not more than 600 feet apart. The cost of the hydrants and related appurtenances shall be paid in accordance with the provisions herein and any applicable resolutions of the governing authority relating thereto. 
(d)  All water or wastewater main extensions shall be of a minimum of eight inches. The governing authority may, in its discretion, require the installation of water or wastewater mains larger than eight inches, in which case the governing authority will be responsible for the additional costs directly resulting from the oversizing. 
(e)  Prior to any application being approved and the work authorized, the applicant shall pay all estimated costs required under the provisions of these regulations. Any difference between the actual and estimated costs of the extension, either upward or downward, shall be reconciled as necessary upon completion of the project. 
(f)  In the event that a private individual or entity installs a water extension or a wastewater main extension at his or her own expense, whomever thereafter benefits from such installation by connecting to the same shall reimburse said individual or entity for the cost of installation based on a front foot basis prior to being permitted to connect to such extension. In such event, if a private individual or entity connects to an extension, then such funds are to be paid directly to the governing authority for disbursement to the private individual or entity to recoup the cost of initial installation. 
If said extension is the result of a public extension, then the governing authority shall reimburse such private individual or entity an amount equal to the governing authority's proportionate share of the costs of the extension borne by the original applicant on a front foot basis before being permitted to connect to said extension. 
In the case of either private or public use of said extension, the proportionate charges will be paid by the governing authority to the original applicant, but in no case will the refunds exceed the amount paid by the original applicant. Any refunds due to the original applicant will be paid, without interest, on March 31 and September 30, as appropriate. 
(g)  All liability for payment of refunds by the governing authority shall cease three years from the date of payment by the applicant for water or wastewater main extension. The assignment by the applicant of any money due under the provisions of this refund policy without the written consent of the governing authority is prohibited. 
(h)  In the event that a water or wastewater main is extended, either inside or outside the corporate limits, the costs of which is paid in part or in full by the governing authority, applicants who wish to connect to the main shall be required to pay a connection charge in addition to the meter installation fee as referenced in section 62-413. The connection charge shall be applicant's proportionate share, on a footage basis, of the governing authority's share of the cost of the extension. If the water or wastewater main installed is larger than eight-inch, the applicant shall be required to pay only its proportionate share of the cost of an eight-inch main. 
(I)  All water and wastewater mains extended under the provisions of these regulations shall become the sole property of the governing authority upon the connection with the city-county water system and shall thenceforth be maintained by the city-county governing authority. 
(j)  Anything in these regulations to the contrary notwithstanding, the governing authority in its sole discretion, shall have the right to disapprove any application for water service when it determines that it is not in its best interest to do so based on monetary or manpower constraints or on other considerations such as the unavailability of water or wastewater supply. Furthermore, the governing authority reserves the right to extend its water system on a planned basis in the best interest of orderly community-wide growth. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006; Ord. No. 2007-32, § I, 10-15-07) 
Secs. 62-402—62-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COLLECTIONS 

Sec. 62-411. - Turn-off/turn-on policy. 
All of the provisions set forth in this article shall apply to the user of the water and/or wastewater service and to the owner of the property being served. The term "customer" shall mean the name on the account to which the service is charged and the user of the service at the physical location. Termination of service shall follow these procedures: 
(1)  Service will be terminated to the delinquent customer consistent with the collections policies of the governing authority. 
(2)  Service turned off for non-payment of a water or wastewater bill will be turned on only after payment of the delinquent bill plus a fee to be set by resolution of the governing authority to cover the cost of the additional trips to the service location by utilities department personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-412. - Deposits. 
Applicants for water or wastewater services shall be required, at the time of application for service, to make a deposit consistent with customer service policies. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 62-413. - Meter installation fees. 
At the time of application for water or wastewater service, the applicant shall also pay a meter installation fee in accordance with the rates adopted by the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 2-13-2006) 
Chapter 66 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-25 , adopted Dec. 1, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 66, §§ 66-1—66-29, 66-61—66-72, 66-91—66-96, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 66 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2001-021, §§ 10-1—10-29, 10-42—10-52, 10-54, adopted July 26, 2001; Ord. No. 2002-013, §§ IA—IF, adopted Dec. 19, 2002; Ord. No. 2004-005, § I, adopted Feb. 9, 2004; Ord. No. 2006-26, § I, adopted Dec. 4, 2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § I, adopted Jan. 23, 2008; and Ord. No. 2009-01, §§ 1—9, adopted Jan. 5, 2009. 
Cross reference— Disposal of dead animals, § 14-85; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; littering, § 46-2; littering in parks, § 50-14; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Intent and purpose. 
The City Council of City of Tifton hereby declares the intent and purpose of this chapter to be such that a uniform and consistent procedure for regulating the storage, collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste in the incorporated areas of the city is established so as to: 
(1)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare by preventing the dissemination of and providing for the removal of inorganic refuse materials laden with bacterial elements and contaminants detrimental to the general wellbeing of the citizens, their property, and the environment; 
(2)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare and enhance the quality of the water, air and overall environment of this city by providing for uniform rules and procedures for storage, collection, transportation and disposal of residential solid waste from residential premises and commercial properties within the incorporated areas of the city; 
(3)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare and enhance the quality of the water, air and overall environment of this city by prohibiting and restricting the operation of any business, enterprise or commercial activity within the incorporated areas of the city engaged in or carrying out services or operations for the storage, collections, transportation or disposal of solid waste except pursuant to a franchise license issued by the city, and providing for assessment of a franchise fee payable by such franchise license holder for the costs to the city of overseeing and regulating the activities permitted by such franchise license; and 
(4)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare and enhance the quality of the water, air and overall environment of this city by providing for certain additional rules and regulations applicable to the storage, collection, transportation and disposal of nonresidential solid waste in the incorporated areas of City of Tifton. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-2. - Enactment authority. 
The city council, under the authority of article 9, section 2, paragraphs I and III of the Constitution of the State of Georgia (1983), and O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 8, art. 2 and O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 7, hereby ordains and enacts into law this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-3. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Solid Waste Ordinance of City of Tifton, Georgia." 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-4. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to the storage, collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste in the incorporated areas of City of Tifton as presently or hereafter established. The provisions contained herein: (i) prescribe and provide certain uniform rules and procedures for the storage, collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste at and from residential premises and commercial enterprises within the incorporated areas of the city by residents commercial enterprises of such incorporated areas and by each and every business, enterprise or commercial activity engaged in providing such services and operations; (ii) provide for the franchising and licensing of such businesses, enterprises and commercial activities; (iii) prohibit businesses, enterprises or commercial activities from engaging in such services and operations except pursuant to and in accordance with such franchise license; and (iv) prescribe and provide certain additional rules and regulations for the storage, collection, transportation and disposal of nonresidential solid waste within and through the incorporated areas of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them below in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All terms used in this chapter, and not otherwise defined below in this section, shall have the definitions ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, as the same may be from time to time amended, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Except as specifically defined herein or in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, all words used in this chapter shall have their ordinary everyday meaning. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and words used in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. Unless otherwise specifically indicated in this chapter, references in this chapter to articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs, and the like, and to exhibits, attachments, schedules, and the like, are in each case to those of this chapter. 
Acceptable solid waste means residential, commercial and industrial waste as defined herein and which the landfill is authorized to accept for disposal pursuant to its permits and licenses and are not materials prohibited from disposal in the landfill pursuant to the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division Chapter 391-3-4. 
Approved containers shall mean: 
(1)  Ninety- to 100-gallon carts utilized for the collection of solid waste and recyclable materials from residential premises, multiple residential units and light commercial units; 
(2)  Four-, six-, and eight-yard dumpsters; and twenty-, thirty-, and forty-yard roll offs utilized by multiple residential units and commercial units. 
Asbestos means any naturally occurring hydrated mineral silicates separable into commercially used fibers, specifically the asbestiform varieties of serpentine, chrysatile, cummingtomite-grunerite, amosite, rieheckite, crocidolite, anthophyllite, tremolite, and actinolite. 
Biomedical waste means and includes the following: 
(1)  Pathological waste, which means all recognizable human tissues and body parts which are removed during surgery, obstetrical procedures, autopsy, and laboratory procedures. 
(2)  Biological waste, which means bulk blood and blood products, exudates, secretions, suctionings, and other bulk body fluids which cannot or are not directly discarded into a municipal sewer system. 
(3)  Cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals including cultures from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the production of biologicals, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate, and mix cultures. 
(4)  Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, their bedding, and other wastes from such animals which have been exposed to infectious agents, capable of causing disease in man, during research, production of biologicals, or testing of pharmaceuticals. 
(5)  Sharps, which means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, items such as needles, IV tubing and syringes with needles attached, and scalpel blades. 
(6)  Chemotherapy waste, which means any disposable material which has come in contact with cytotoxic/antineoplastic agents (agents toxic to cells) and/or antineoplastic agents (agents that inhibit or prevent the growth and spread of tumors or malignant cells) during the preparation, handling, and administration of such agents. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, masks, gloves, gowns, empty IV tubing bags and vials, and other contaminated materials. Such waste must first be classified as empty which means such quantity that it is not subject to other federal or state waste management regulations prior to being handled as biomedical waste. 
(7)  Discarded medical equipment and parts, not included expendable supplies and materials which have not been decontaminated, that were in contact with infectious agents. 
Building materials means any material such as lumber, brick, plaster, gutters, roofing materials, or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing structures. 
Bulk container means a metal container of not less than four cubic yards nor larger than eight cubic yards, made of watertight construction with doors opening on top and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by a specially equipped truck. Containers shall be kept covered at all times. All new bulk containers shall meet these specifications. 
Bulky waste shall mean white goods, appliances, furniture and other materials with weights or volumes greater than those capable of being placed in approved containers, not to include construction or demolition waste. 
Cart (recyclable) or recyclable cart shall mean a roll-out container of adequate strength for the purposes intended with a capacity of approximately 90 to 100 gallons constructed of plastic, having handles of adequate strength for lifting, sturdy wheels for easy movement, and having a tightfitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by vectors, to be used by residential and light commercial users for the storage of acceptable recyclable material. 
Cart (solid waste) or solid waste cart shall mean a roll-out container of adequate strength for the purposes intended with an approximate capacity of not less than 90 gallons nor more than 100 gallons constructed of plastic, having handles of adequate strength for lifting, sturdy wheels for easy movement, and having a tight-fitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by vectors, to be used by subscribers for the storage of acceptable residential solid waste material. 
City shall mean City of Tifton, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
City council, council shall mean the City Council of City of Tifton, Georgia. 
City manager shall mean the City Manager of City of Tifton. 
Commercial unit or commercial establishment means a business unit within the service area that uses four-, six- and eight-yard dumpsters; and twenty-, thirty-, and forty-yard roll offs. 
Commercial waste means food waste including accumulations of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables produced by any commercial unit, any accumulation of dust, paper, glass, cans, wood, crockery, metals, dunnage, dust, sweepings, rags, cardboard or other accumulations, which are usually attendant to the operation of stores, offices and similar businesses. 
Construction/demolition waste means the waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper or cardboard. 
Disposal site means the location authorized pursuant to this chapter where the final disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Dunnage means loose materials utilized as packing to prevent damage to cargo or contents from breakage or damage during shipping. 
Garbage means food waste including waste accumulations of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
EPD means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Franchise fee shall mean a fee to be paid by a franchisee to the city for the regulation in City of Tifton of residential solid waste and the administration enforcement of the solid waste ordinance. The franchise issued to such franchisee and the rights, terms and conditions granted thereunder. 
Garbage means food waste including waste accumulations of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid wastes, or any combination thereof. 
Handling facility means any location where any storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste, or any combination thereof, occurs. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in rules or regulations promulgated by the state department of natural resources and/or EPD and also specifically includes explosives, offal, fecal matter, acids, chemicals, caustics, asbestos, poisons, paint products, tires and petroleum products. This definition includes wastes that are ignitable, corrosive, reactive or extraction procedure toxic. 
Incineration means a controlled process by which solid, liquid and gaseous combustible wastes are burned and changed into gases and a residue produced which is relatively free of combustible materials. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges, and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Inert landfill means a disposal site accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to dirt and dirt-like products, concrete, rocks, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste. 
Landfill shall mean the Tifton/Tift County Landfill and the Tifton/Tift County Inert Landfill. 
Light commercial unit means a business within the service area which uses an approved 90- to 100-gallon cart. 
Liquid waste means any waste material that is determined to contain free liquids as defined by method 9095 (paints filter liquids test), as described in Test Methods of Evaluation of Solid Wastes, Physical/Chemical Methods (EPA Pub. No. SW-846). 
Litter means garbage, refuse, waste materials or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled as specified in this chapter. 
Loading and unloading area means space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping, and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Multiple residential unit means any apartment, group of apartments, condominium or similar multiple-family unit used for dwelling places having more than five units, mobile homes, or dwellings, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes. 
Municipal solid waste (MSW) means any solid waste resulting from the operation of residential, commercial, governmental, or institutional establishments except such solid waste materials prohibited from disposal in the landfill pursuant to the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division Chapter 391-3-4. 
Person shall mean an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, incorporated organization or other entity, or federal, state or local governmental body, unit, authority or agency. 
Public waste receptacle shall mean containers provided by the city or commercial enterprise for the disposal of solid waste and litter from the public streets, alleys, parking lots, etc. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being quickly decomposed by micro-organisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to, kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Recyclable materials means those materials which have known use, reuse or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recycling means any process by which reclaimed materials or other materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Residential premises shall mean any dwelling, house, residence, building or other structure, including single family homes, duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes, mobile homes, but excluding multi-family housing such as condominiums, mobile home parks, and apartments having more than five residential units, mobile homes, or dwellings, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
Residential solid waste means garbage and trash as ordinarily generated at a residence or light commercial unit. By way of example, such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste accumulated from the preparation, processing, consumption, handling, packing, canning, storage and decay of food products, food containers and other consumer goods containers, waste wood, paper, plant, crockery, cloth, glass, small appliances, such as, fans, toasters, lamps, small chairs, packing materials, floor sweepings, and deceased animal matter of less than ten pounds. 
Residential unit means any dwelling occupied by a person or group of persons. Each unit of an apartment, condominium dwelling or multi-family dwelling of any kind, whether of single or multi-level construction, shall be treated as a residential unit. 
Scavenge shall mean the picking from solid waste containers and/or public or private disposal facilities. 
Service area shall mean the incorporated areas of the City of Tifton. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes (except water-carried body waste) and shall include garbage, rubbish (paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree and shrubbery trimmings, yard waste, furniture and appliances, metal, tin cans, glass, crockery, or dunnage), ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes (waste materials generated in industrial operations), residue from incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, vehicle waste, dredging wastes, construction wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in these definitions. 
Solid waste collection service , or substantially similar terms, shall mean the collection, transportation and/or disposal of solid waste from residential premises, light commercial units, multiple residential units and commercial units located in the incorporated area of City of Tifton. 
Solid waste collection franchise or franchise , or substantially similar terms, shall mean the franchise, license and privilege granted and issued by the city to a franchisee to engage in the business, enterprise and commercial activity by such franchisee of offering and providing solid waste collection services to subscribers in the incorporated areas of the city. 
Solid waste collection franchisee or franchisee shall mean a person(s) to whom the city has granted and issued a franchise to engage in the business and operation of providing solid waste collection services in the incorporated areas of City of Tifton. 
Solid waste ordinance or ordinance shall mean this chapter, being the City of Tifton Solid Waste Ordinance, as amended. 
Subscriber shall mean the owner or occupant of a residential premises, commercial units or commercial enterprises in the incorporated areas of the city, who is subscribing to and receiving solid waste collection services from a solid waste collection franchisee. 
Unacceptable solid waste means any and all solid waste which the landfill is not authorized to accept for disposal pursuant to its permits and licenses, including, without limitation, highly flammable substances, hazardous materials (i.e paint, paint products or byproducts, acid of any type, rat or other animal poison, paint thinner, motor oil, insecticides, hazardous waste, and any item containing any type of liquid petroleum product), hazardous waste, certain pathological and biological wastes, explosives, radioactive materials, recycled waste and materials prohibited from disposal in the landfill pursuant to the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division Chapter 391-3-4. 
Yard waste means vegetative matter resulting from landscaping maintenance and land clearing operations other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. This includes lawn, grass or shrubbery clippings, leaves, straw, tree branches, limbs and trunks. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-6. - Responsibility of owners and agents. 
The owners or agents, tenants or lessees of all residential units and commercial establishments shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-7. - Authority, duty of city manager. 
The collection, transportation and disposal of municipal solid waste shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager or his designee. The city manager shall have the authority to establish routes and days of collection, types and locations of municipal solid waste carts and such other matters pertaining to the collection, transportation and disposal of municipal solid waste as he may find necessary, and to change and modify these requirements. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-8. - City collection/franchisee. 
(a)  Residential solid waste, yard waste, bulky waste and commercial and industrial waste which has been handled and segregated pursuant to requirements of this chapter and other applicable law, rules and regulations shall be collected, handled, transported and disposed of by the city or its franchisee, subject to exceptions provided for in this chapter, provided that such solid waste does not contain unacceptable solid waste. 
(b)  The city or its franchisee shall allow each residential unit and light commercial unit up to two solid waste carts; provided, however, upon determination by the city manager, or his designee, that the volume of residential solid waste generated upon such premises cannot be adequately serviced by solid waste carts, then he shall be entitled to require that such premises be serviced by bulk containers rather than solid waste carts. Commercial units and multiple residential units shall be provided bulk containers upon request and upon such terms and conditions that the volume of solid waste generated upon such premises requires. 
(c)  Residential solid waste which has been placed in solid waste carts and placed at designated locations, shall be collected by the city, or its franchisee, on a weekly basis pursuant to this chapter and upon such schedule as shall from time to time be determined or approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, the city, or its franchisee, shall provide for the collection of residential solid waste as well as recyclable materials which has been placed in solid waste carts or recyclable carts and which has been generated by the elderly or handicapped persons from a residential unit at locations other than curbside, alleyside or other designated collection site pursuant to policies and procedures promulgated by the city manager from time to time relative to determination and verification of elderly and/or handicap status which renders difficult or impossible for the ability of the occupants of the premises to physically move solid waste or recyclable carts to curbside, alleyside or other designated collection site. 
(e)  In addition to solid waste contained in solid waste carts, the city, or its franchisee, may also collect recyclable materials which has been both: (1) placed curbside, alleyside or other designated collection sites in recyclable carts; and (2) otherwise handled in accordance with all requirements relative thereto. The city may provide for the collection of recyclables at designated collection sites as an alternative to curbside collection. 
(f)  At any time the city, or its franchisee, is engaged in the collection of recyclable materials it shall, from time to time, establish the list of specific items of recyclable materials to be collected. 
(g)  All residential solid waste in excess of that which cannot properly be placed in solid waste carts or recyclable carts (if the city is then engaged in a recyclable solid waste collection service) shall be promptly disposed of by the generators thereof and the owners and occupants of the premises upon which it is generated by: 
(1)  The deposit thereof into a bulk container that is located upon such premises; 
(2)  Delivery thereof to an appropriate designated handling facility of the city; 
(3)  Delivery thereof to a commercial collector authorized to handle, transport and provide for disposal thereof; or 
(4)  Delivery thereof to an authorized handling or disposal site. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, the city, or its franchisee, shall have the exclusive and sole right to collect any and all municipal solid waste generated within the commercial downtown zoning district of the city. Upon determination by the city manager, that the volume of municipal solid waste generated in the commercial downtown zoning district cannot be adequately or safely serviced by solid waste carts, then he shall be entitled to require that as many solid waste customers as appropriate located within the same city block be serviced by common bulk containers rather than solid waste carts. Such bulk containers shall be placed within city alleys. Residential units shall pay collection fees consistent with published residential rates. Collection fees for commercial and multiple residential units shall be consistent with published commercial rates and shall be based upon usage as determined by the city manager or his designee. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-9. - Private collection prohibited; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and transport municipal solid waste except for: 
(1)  Employees of the city; 
(2)  Persons or entities holding a franchise for the collection and disposal of solid waste within the city or persons authorized to collect solid waste as may from time to time be authorized by the city; 
(3)  Persons transporting municipal solid waste from their own residence, business or industrial property; and 
(4)  Collection and disposal of recyclable materials generated from light commercial units, multiple residential units utilizing bulk containers and commercial units. However, nothing contained herein shall prohibit the collection and disposal of recyclable materials generated from a residential unit by the occupants of the residential unit. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-10. - Required receptacles, containers. 
(a)  It shall be required of every person in possession, charge or control of any place in or from which building materials, solid waste, or industrial waste is accumulated or produced to provide and at all times to keep in a suitable place readily accessible for collection, adequate and suitable receptacles and containers capable of holding all such waste materials which would ordinarily accumulate between the times of successive collections. The city manager, or one designated by him, shall determine the quantity and location of such receptacles, and shall determine whether such receptacles and containers are serviceable. 
(b)  Solid waste carts shall be provided by the city, or its franchisee, for each residential unit which utilizes solid waste carts. If a solid waste cart is damaged due to excessive abuse, gross neglect, intentional damage, or due to fire, the city, or its franchisee, shall have the right to charge for the cost of repair or replacement of the garbage receptacle. The city, or its franchisee, shall make available bulk containers by commercial units and multiple residential units. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-11. - Receptacles and containers to be safe. 
All solid waste and recyclable carts and bulk containers required under this chapter shall be of safe construction and design and shall be maintained in good and serviceable condition at all times. Any carts or containers which do not conform to the provisions of this article, or which have ragged or sharp edges or any other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof or the public generally, shall be promptly replaced upon notice. If such container, after proper notice, has not been replaced, the city manager or one designated by him shall have the authority to remove such container as refuse. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-12. - Pre-collection practices. 
(a)  Municipal solid waste (MSW). When practical, all municipal solid waste shall be placed and maintained in carts and containers as specified in this chapter. All carts and containers shall be kept covered at all times. All MSW shall be drained of liquids prior to its placement in the carts. MSW shall be combined with garbage when possible. 
(b)  Garbage. All garbage being placed in carts or containers for collection shall have drained from it all free liquid, and should be wrapped, bagged, or enclosed in paper or plastic material. 
(c)  Injurious trash items. All waste material of an injurious nature, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes, and television tubes, shall be securely wrapped to prevent injury to the collection crews. 
(d)  Hazardous waste, hazardous refuse and building materials. No hazardous waste, hazardous refuse or hazardous building materials shall be placed in any cart used for collection of waste, nor shall the hazardous waste, hazardous refuse or hazardous building materials be collected by the city or its franchisee. 
(e)  Yard waste. Yard waste shall be stacked or bundled. Trees and stumps shall not exceed six inches in diameter, and cannot exceed six feet in length. Yard waste material shall not exceed five cubic yards per collection. Tree and shrubbery limbs shall have protruding branches trimmed and must be neatly stacked and placed in an orderly manner at curbside, alley or other designated collection location. 
(f)  Trimmings cut by contractors, etc. Tree and shrubbery branches, yard waste, limbs and trimmings cut by tree service contractors, or resulting from land clearing operations, shall not be collected by the city or its franchisee, but shall be collected and removed by the business or person being paid by the resident for the service. 
(g)  Bulky waste. Bulky waste shall be collected by the city or its franchisee on a regular schedule provided that such items are placed at curbside, alley or other designated location. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-13. - Commercial establishments. 
All commercial establishments shall store their municipal solid waste in containers as specified in this chapter so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about their establishments. Approved methods of containerization include solid waste carts, bulk containers and detachable roll-off containers. Spillage and overflow shall be immediately cleaned up by such establishment when and as it occurs. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-14. - Loading and unloading areas. 
All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The number of containers necessary for each area shall be as required to maintain clean, neat and sanitary premises, as directed by the city manager. The owner of the premises and the occupant thereof shall jointly and severally maintain surveillance to ensure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-15. - Receptacles in parking areas. 
(a)  Obligation to furnish receptacles. All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide municipal solid waste receptacles distributed within the parking area. The city manager shall have the authority to determine the number and types of receptacles necessary to provide containerization. Such receptacles shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the manager of the parking lot to collect the municipal solid waste and trash deposited in such containers and store this material in an approved location. 
(b)  Obligation to use receptacles. It shall be the obligation of all persons using the parking areas to use such municipal solid waste receptacles or containers as provided in subsection (a) of this section for the purpose intended, and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, scatter, or throw upon any such parking lot, any municipal solid waste, garbage, or trash of any kind. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-16. - Collection and placement of containers. 
(a)  Roll-off/bulk containers. 
(1)  Placing/pickup. 
a.  Roll-off containers will be placed and collected between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
b.  Collection of commercial units and multiple residential units utilizing bulk containers shall not be collected prior to 7:00 a.m. in residential and residential/professional zoning districts. 
c.  Containers shall be placed in a clear zone as not to block visibility or normal vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic. 
d.  Collection of bulk containers and roll-off containers shall be collected at such intervals as requested by the customer. 
e.  Should the applicant/customer misrepresent what material is to be put in the roll-off container, the unit will be removed and any fees or deposits paid will not be refunded. 
(2)  Liability. 
a.  The city assumes no liability for damage to customer property due to any inferred negligence on the part of the city. 
b.  The customer assumes liability for damages to city equipment caused by overload, misuse or negligence on the part of the customer. 
(b)  Residential waste and recyclable carts/placement for collection. 
(1)  All residential units utilizing solid waste and recyclable carts and light commercial units shall place the carts either at the curbside on a street adjacent to their property, or on their property immediately adjacent to an alley, or other designated collection site, on the days designated by the city manager or the franchisee for pickup. Carts should have at least four feet of clearance on each side from any object including mailboxes, other solid waste and recyclable carts and other garbage receptacles and containers. 
(2)  Residential solid waste shall be collected every week from a 90-gallon cart supplied by the city or its franchisee. Solid waste carts shall be collected from all residential units utilizing solid waste carts and light commercial units one time per week. Only residential solid waste shall be placed in a solid waste cart. 
(3)  Residential recyclable carts shall be collected from all residential units utilizing solid waste carts every other week. Only approved recyclable materials shall be placed in a recyclable cart. Recyclable carts shall be stored near the residence and recyclable carts shall be stored in such a way as to keep the recyclable materials dry. 
(4)  Carts shall be placed by the resident at the designated collection site by 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. Each resident shall remove his cart from the curbside by 11:00 p.m. on the resident's collection day. If the city or its franchise fails to collect the items from a resident's cart on the regularly scheduled day of collection, the time limits in the immediately preceding sentence shall not apply for that regularly scheduled day of collection. However, in no event shall the cart(s) be left at street side later than 11:00 p.m. on the third day after the regularly scheduled day of collection which was missed. This requirement may be waived for any person physically unable to place the cart(s) at the collection site. Residents must provide proof of the condition in the form of a letter from a medical doctor. Any cart placed on the curb or other designated collection site after the departure of the collection crew shall be at the peril of the owner. Containers and carts not collected as a result of not being at the designated collection site by 7:00 a.m. shall be collected the following regularly scheduled collection day. 
(c)  Collection of bulky waste. Bulky items shall be collected every other week by the city or its franchisee either at the curbside on a street adjacent to their property, or on their property immediately adjacent to an alley, or other designated collection site, on the days designated by the city manager or the franchisee for pickup. Items shall be placed at said locations by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day. 
(d)  Collection of yard waste. 
(1)  Yard waste shall be collected by the city or its franchisee on an every other week basis and shall be placed at curbside, in an alley or other designated location four feet from any obstruction for timely collection. Yard waste material shall be placed at said locations by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day and shall not be placed in 90- to 100-gallon carts. It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with residential solid waste within incorporated City of Tifton. 
(2)  Yard trimmings, if not collected by a franchisee hereunder, shall be disposed of in the following manners: 
a.  Sorted and stockpiled; 
b.  Chipped; 
c.  Composted; 
d.  Used as mulch; 
e.  By otherwise beneficially reusing or recycling it to the maximum extent feasible; or 
f.  At certain types of landfills that are permitted to accept yard trimmings under O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2. 
(3)  Each subscriber shall ensure that his yard is free of non-inert material such as paper, metal, plastics and glass. 
(e)  Hazardous waste. No hazardous waste shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of municipal solid waste by the city or its franchisee or upon, in or across city curbside, alleys or rights-of-way. 
(f)  Dead animals. Owners of small or large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(g)  Building materials. Unless placed in a roll-off container, the city or franchisee shall not be responsible for the collecting or hauling of building material originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of new buildings, alterations or additions to existing buildings of whatever type or from demolition of existing structures. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. 
(h)  Hazardous or liquid wastes. Hazardous or liquid waste, or highly combustible industrial waste, shall not be disposed of in the landfill unless permitted under the rules and regulations of the EPD. 
(i)  Accumulations of municipal solid waste and trash. All accumulations of municipal solid waste and trash shall be stored or placed for collection in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of municipal solid waste and trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, or upon any private property except as stated in this chapter. 
(2)  Blockage of storm drains. No person shall place any municipal solid waste, trash, yard waste, carts or containers on, upon or over any storm drain, or so close thereto as to be drawn by the elements into such storm drain. 
(3)  Unauthorized accumulations. Any accumulation of municipal solid waste or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public street, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this article, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of municipal solid waste shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(4)  Junk. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling, except as specified in subsection 66-12(g), any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material, junked motor vehicle, or other item which is either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition, and which is not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. Any such item or items which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of ten days after notice of violation of this section shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the city without further notice. This shall not apply to authorized junk dealers or currently licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvaging of equipment or furniture. 
(j)  Holidays. Collections shall not be made on the Thanksgiving or Christmas holidays unless otherwise specified by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-17. - Special refuse disposal. 
(a)  Contagious disease refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for city collection. 
(b)  Hypodermic instruments. No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle, or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof by wrapping or securing such material in a suitable manner (such as a sharps container) so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. Commercial establishments shall not dispose of hypodermic instruments in solid waste carts or bulk containers. 
(c)  Cardboard boxes and cartons. Prior to depositing refuse for collection in authorized carts or bulk containers, the person disposing of any such boxes or cartons, or the person in charge of the premises, shall collapse all cardboard boxes and cartons. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-18. - Collection charges. 
The city, or its franchisee, shall have exclusive and sole right to collect any and all solid waste generated within the city limits by any residential unit, light commercial unit or commercial unit except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter. All residential units or light commercial units utilizing solid waste carts shall be assessed and must pay a monthly sanitation assessment to the city or franchisee. The monthly sanitation assessment shall include the collection of residential solid waste, recyclable materials, bulky waste and yard waste. Commercial units and multiple residential units utilizing bulk containers shall be charged according to the city's or franchisee's bulk container rate service fee. Residential and light commercial unit cart fees are per cart, per residence (or business), per month. Charges shall be paid to the city or its franchisee for the collection of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and bulky waste and such charges shall be approved by resolution of the city council. The city may enter into a franchise or inter-local governmental contracts for sanitation collection services. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-19. - Determination of violations; complaints. 
(a)  Code enforcement officials, the city manager or his designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and shall substantiate complaints of violations of any provisions of this chapter. Code enforcement officials, the city manager or his designee shall determine if there has been a violation and shall initiate requests for compliance with this chapter from the person alleged to be in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Code enforcement officials, the city manager or his designee shall be authorized to issue a citation against a violator of this chapter. The alleged violator shall be prosecuted in the municipal court. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-20. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating or failing, refusing or neglecting to comply with any provision, requirement, or section of this chapter, after conviction in the municipal court, may be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Secs. 66-21—66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISPOSAL SITES 

Sec. 66-61. - Use authorized; regulation. 
All acceptable solid waste shall be delivered and deposited in the Tifton/Tift County Landfill or at authorized disposal sites in accordance with the directions and orders of the city manager, or his representative in charge of operations, and in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; except, however, privately operated sites may be used for the sanitary disposal of industrial wastes or other specified waste upon the approval of the city manager, and upon the issuance of appropriate disposal permits, as required by the regulations of the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division Chapter 391-3-4.02 and other applicable state or federal agencies. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-62. - Disposal sites—Designation. 
(a)  Disposal sites approved for the disposal of municipal solid waste shall be designated by appropriate signs posted near the roadside at the location of the sanitary landfill. 
(b)  Disposal sites shall be maintained in use until permanently closed, at which time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting and through the press. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-63. - Operating hours. 
Authorized disposal sites shall be operated Monday through Friday of each week, with the exception of the Thanksgiving and Christmas (or such other holidays that may from time to time be designated by the city manager), from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Saturdays 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon, and from 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on the following holidays: 
New Year's Day 
Martin Luther King's Birthday (third Monday in January) 
Good Friday 
Memorial Day 
Independence Day 
Labor Day (first Monday in September) 
Christmas Eve 
During such hours, acceptable solid waste generated in the city shall be received for disposal from any resident of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-64. - When use authorized; ownership of waste. 
No person shall enter a disposal site except when an attendant is present and during the hours and days prescribed in section 66-63. All materials delivered and deposited for disposal on the grounds or disposal sites shall be the property of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-65. - Scavenging prohibited. 
No person shall be permitted to scavenge or reclaim any refuse that has been deposited in a solid waste or recyclable cart, bulk container or public waste receptacle, including the landfill or service centers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, employees operating the landfill may reclaim recyclables delivered to the landfill. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-66. - Prohibited types or categories of solid waste. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no unacceptable solid waste as defined herein shall be deposited upon or disposed of in the landfill or disposal site owned or operated by the city, either individually, or jointly with any other governmental entity. The city manager shall have authority to refuse any waste considered unsuitable for disposal in the city's disposal site, or place restrictions on disposal time, volume disposed, advanced notification, delivery methods, testing, certification, separation according to type, etc., to facilitate safer or more efficient disposal. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-67. - Private disposal sites—Permit, acceptance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited on land under his ownership and control any solid waste without first having obtained a disposal area permit as required by the regulations of the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division Chapter 391-3-4 and other applicable state or federal agencies. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-68. - General maintenance. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-69. - Right to enter to inspect. 
The city manager, his designated representative, or authorized representative of the department of public health, shall be permitted to enter any private disposal site at any time during normal business hours for free and unhindered inspections to determine compliance with this chapter and all other pertinent laws and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-70. - Burning. 
The city shall have authority to utilize an air curtain destructor at its disposal sites in accordance with EPD regulations and guidelines. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-71. - Fees; landfills and disposal sites. 
The charges to be made and collected for all deposits and disposals made at or upon all landfills and solid waste disposal sites owned or operated by the city either individually or jointly with any other governmental entity for acceptable solid waste and which are not prohibited for deposit or disposal at such landfills or disposal sites shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-72. - Waste, trash coming from outside county restricted. 
It is prohibited for any waste or trash coming from outside the county to be carried and dumped at the landfill unless such waste or trash from outside the county is covered by; 
(1)  An inter-local government agreement between the city and the applicable local governing body with original jurisdiction over such waste or trash; 
(2)  Contract with any private hauler; or 
(3)  Approval by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-73. - Failure of individual or legal entity not holding permit to deliver solid waste to landfill; civil fines. 
Any individual or entity not holding a permit but disposing of solid waste generated within the geographical limits of the city who fails to deliver such solid waste to the landfill shall be subject to civil fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per offense. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-74—66-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TIFTON-TIFT COUNTY LANDFILL 

Sec. 66-91. - Delivery of municipal solid waste to landfill required. 
All acceptable solid waste generated within geographical limits of the city must be delivered to the Tifton-Tift County landfill for disposal. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-92. - Uniform tipping fee. 
All acceptable solid waste generated within Tift County and disposed of at the landfill shall be subject to a uniform tipping fee, as set from time to time consistent with applicable law, regardless of whether such solid waste is delivered by: 
(1)  A public or private hauler; or 
(2)  An individual or entity who/that generates such solid waste and presents it for disposal at the landfill. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-93—66-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITTING/FRANCHISE COLLECTION 

Sec. 66-100. - Collection and disposal services—Generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall engage in the business, enterprise or commercial activity of providing all or any part of solid waste collection services within the incorporated areas of the city except pursuant to a solid waste collection franchise issued under section 66-101 or a temporary permit issued under section 66-103. Any person who so engages in the business, enterprise or commercial activity of providing any solid waste collection services within the incorporated areas of the city except pursuant to a solid waste collection franchise shall be in direct violation of this chapter and subject to penalties as specified in sections 66-112 or 66-73. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-101. - Solid waste collection franchise. 
In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons, property and the environment in the incorporated areas of the city, and to provide for and regulate uniform collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste in the incorporated areas of the city, the city may issue either an exclusive franchise to a single person or a non-exclusive franchise to multiple persons for the conduct by a business, enterprise or commercial activity of solid waste collection services in the incorporated areas of the city. Each such franchise shall contain such terms and conditions, not inconsistent with this chapter, as the city may deem appropriate. Any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this chapter, other applicable ordinances and resolutions of the city, together with all other applicable federal, state or local laws, statutes, rules and regulations. Prior to issuance of a franchise, the applicant shall provide to the city (i) evidence as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6 that the franchisee is authorized to use the federal work authorization program (or evidence that it is not required by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6 to provide such evidence) and (ii) evidence pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1 that the applicant is lawfully present in the United States. The franchisee shall utilize the federal work authorization program as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-102. - Franchise fee. 
Each person issued and holding a valid franchise pursuant to this chapter shall pay such franchise fee as the city council shall from time to time determine. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-103. - Temporary permit. 
For good cause shown and upon such terms and conditions as the city may reasonably require, a "temporary permit" for engaging in the business of solid waste collection services may be issued by the city manager or his designee for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days from the issuance date thereof. At the conclusion of such initial 30 days term of a temporary permit, up to two additional 15-day extensions may be granted if justification for such extension is presented to and accepted by the city manager or his or her designee. The temporary permit issued pursuant to this section (or a legible copy) must be posted and visible at all times on any vehicle used by the temporary permit holder in its solid waste collection activities. As a condition to the issuance of a temporary permit pursuant to this section, the permit holder shall maintain such insurance, agree to indemnification of the city, and post a performance bond in favor of the city, in each case on such terms and conditions as the city manager may require. Prior to issuance of a temporary permit, the applicant shall provide to the city (i) evidence as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6 that the temporary permit holder is authorized to use the federal work authorization program (or evidence that it is not required by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6 to provide such evidence) and (ii) evidence pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1 that the applicant is lawfully present in the United States. The temporary permit holder shall utilize the federal work authorization program as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-104. - Use of city streets, roads and alleys. 
In furtherance of the city's protection of the health, safety and welfare of persons, property and the environment in the incorporated areas of the city by providing uniform collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste in such incorporated areas, and as an exercise of the city's police powers, a franchisee or holder of a temporary permit shall be permitted and authorized to use and travel upon the public roads and rights of way, together with private streets, roadways and alleys that are customarily and generally utilized by the traveling public located in private developments and subdivisions. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-105. - Exclusive service by franchisees; fees. 
Person(s) holding a franchise (or a temporary permit) shall exclusively provide solid waste collection service in the incorporated areas of the city, and each franchisee shall offer its services to each and every residential premises or commercial enterprise within the entire incorporated areas of the city. A franchisee shall charge its subscribers the same uniform fees for such franchisee's various solid waste collection services, and further shall not charge fees for its solid waste collection services in excess of those fees as are set forth in its franchise. In addition to the specific solid waste collection services and the fees therefore as set forth in the franchise granted by the city, a franchisee may offer to its subscribers such related special services and charge reasonable and uniform fees therefor, in each case as approved in advance in writing by the city manager; provided, however, that no subscriber shall be required to utilize such special services and may contract with third parties for provision thereof. A "special service" is a service that is not required to be provided by the franchisee under the terms of the franchise. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-106. - Residential collection service rules. 
(a)  Collection of residential solid waste. 
(1)  The franchisee shall collect residential solid waste from all residential units utilizing solid waste carts and light commercial units in accordance with section 66-16(b). The franchisee shall provide a 90- to 100-gallon cart to each subscriber. Carts shall remain the property of the franchisee. It shall be the responsibility of the subscriber to properly use and safeguard the carts. Franchisee shall maintain carts in a reasonably good condition. Franchisee shall have the right to charge subscribers for the cost of repair or replacement of carts, if such repair or replacement is required as a result of subscriber's excessive abuse, gross neglect or intentional damage, or due to fire. Franchisee shall replace carts at no additional charge due to theft. The color shall be selected or agreed upon by the city. 
(2)  Subscribers may request one additional cart for the approved contract price between the city and the franchisee for an additional volume of residential solid waste. 
(3)  Franchisee shall not be responsible for the collection of residential solid waste not placed in a cart, from any cart not in the proper location described in the franchise, or waste other than residential solid waste, unless otherwise provided for in the franchise. 
(4)  The franchisee shall dispose of all residential solid waste at the landfill and shall be responsible for the payment of all fees associated with disposal. The franchisee shall be acting under contract with and on behalf of the city and franchisee shall pay the uniform tipping fee. 
(b)  Collection of bulky waste. The franchisee shall collect residential solid waste from all residential premises in accordance with section 66-16(b). Franchisee shall be responsible for the proper disposal of all bulky items. 
(c)  Collection of recyclables. 
(1)  The franchisee shall collect recyclable materials from all residential units, light commercial units and multiple residential units utilizing solid waste carts in accordance with section 66-16(c). Residential recycling shall be collected from a 90- to 100-gallon recyclable cart container supplied by franchisee. Recyclable carts shall remain the property of the franchisee. It shall be the responsibility of the subscriber to properly use and safeguard the recyclable cart(s) provided to him. A franchisee shall maintain its recyclable carts in a reasonably good condition. Franchisee shall have the right to charge subscribers for the cost of repair or replacement of carts, if such repair or replacement is required as a result of subscriber's excessive abuse, gross neglect or intentional damage, or due to fire. Franchisee shall replace carts at no additional charge due to theft. The color shall be selected or agreed upon by the city. 
(2)  Franchisee shall be responsible for the disposal of recyclable waste through agreements negotiated between third party recycling agents. Contractor shall provide the city with a monthly report which calculates the total amount of recyclables delivered to each third party vendor. 
(3)  Subscribers may request one additional recyclable cart for the approved contract price between the city and franchisee for an additional volume of recycling service. 
(d)  Collection of yard waste. 
(1)  The franchisee shall collect yard waste from all residential premises in accordance with section 66-17(d). The franchisee shall be responsible for the proper disposal of all yard waste material at the Tifton/Tift County Inert Landfill. 
(2)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any solid waste disposal site with liners or leachate collection systems or any solid waste landfills which have received a vertical expansion under O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-107. - Collection of light commercial, commercial/industrial waste. 
Franchisee will provide collection of all incorporated commercial customers currently serviced by the city. Franchisee shall collect commercial/industrial waste from apartments, schools, institutional organizations, small businesses, manufacturing concerns, etc. This aspect of the work will be driven by customer demand, but generally may provide for the use of 90- to 100-gallon cans; four-, six- and eight-yard dumpsters; and twenty-, thirty-, and forty-yard roll offs. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-108. - Hours of collection. 
(a)  Collection of residential solid waste and recyclable materials shall not start before 7:00 a.m., shall conclude collection by sunset as recorded by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and shall be conducted on weekdays only; except in the event of holidays or unavoidable equipment issues which prevent compliance with this provision on a short term basis and except to perform emergency work or service required to safeguard the immediate health, safety and welfare of the public. In performing its solid waste collection services, any person providing solid waste collection services (whether or not residential) shall not create undue disturbance or noise in residential areas in performing its collection activities. 
(b)  Collection of commercial units and multiple residential units utilizing bulk containers shall not be collected prior to 7:00 a.m. in residential and residential/professional zoning districts. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-109. - Disposal of solid waste and yard waste. 
Delivery of acceptable solid waste to the landfill: Franchisee shall deliver acceptable solid waste collected in its hauling business to the landfill. Franchisee shall not deliver any unacceptable solid waste to the landfill. Franchisee shall deliver yard waste collected in its hauling business to the Tifton/Tift County Inert Landfill. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-110. - Waste delivery vehicles. 
Franchisee shall deliver acceptable solid waste to the landfill at its expense, in enclosed container vehicles or enclosed compactor vehicles with leak resistant bodies complying in all material respects with all applicable regulations or procedures which are required by any governmental entity, including, but not limited to, any local rules and the permits pertaining to the landfill. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-111. - Excluded services. 
In providing its solid waste collection services hereunder, a franchisee shall not be required to collect, handle, remove or transport materials which exhibit any of the following characteristics: toxic, ignitable, reactive, corrosive or any other item or material of a clearly hazardous, or of a dangerous nature. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Sec. 66-112. - Failure of permitted individual or legal entity to deliver solid waste to landfill; sanctions. 
Any individual or legal entity required to be permitted under the provisions of sections 66-101 and/or 66-103 for collection of municipal solid waste generated within the geographical limits of the city who/which then fails to deliver such solid waste for disposal at the Tifton-Tift County landfill shall be subject to the following sanctions: 
(1)  Revocation of collection permit; and/or 
(2)  Civil fines in the amount of $1,000.00 per offense. Each bulk container or solid waste cart of municipal solid waste generated within the geographical limits of the city and collected but not delivered to the Tifton-Tift County landfill for disposal shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Secs. 66-113—66-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OTHER 

Sec. 66-120. - Severability of provisions. 
If any article, section, part, subpart, subsection, paragraph, item, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter is declared or adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining provisions or portion of this chapter, which shall remain of full force and effect as if such portions so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have enacted the remaining provisions or parts of this chapter had it known that such portion hereof would be declared and adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
( Ord. No. 2014-25 , 12-1-2014) 
Chapter 70 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; moving buildings, § 18-91 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 26; floods, ch. 42; skating on streets, § 46-6; congregating on streets, sidewalks, § 46-65; parks and recreation, ch. 50; planning and zoning, ch. 54; public safety, ch. 58; sewers, ch. 62; maintenance of property; sweeping litter into streets, § 66-7; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 78; bicycles prohibited on sidewalks, § 78-12; driving on play streets, § 78-34; stopping, standing and parking, § 78-76 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; location of street trees, § 86-3; street trees and public utilities, § 86-4; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B; street paving in subdivisions, app. B, § 6-7. 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Obstructions on sidewalks and streets. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to obstruct any sidewalk, street, alley or public road in the city by placing, maintaining or keeping anything in or on any sidewalk, street, alley or public road in the city. In construing this section, where a building abuts a sidewalk it will be presumed that the sidewalk encompasses the land up to the edge of the building. 
(Code 1974, § 23-2) 
Sec. 70-2. - Dangerous conditions to be marked at night. 
All parties making or causing to be made any excavation, or placing or causing to be placed any obstruction of any character of such nature as to endanger the safety of persons or property in any street, alley, unenclosed lot or public place within the city, are hereby required to place and keep continually burning at nighttime, in and around such excavation or obstruction, a sufficient number of red danger signal lights, not exceeding 50 feet apart, to put the public on full notice of such place or thing of danger. 
(Code 1974, § 23-3) 
Sec. 70-3. - Installation of driveways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, install or establish across any sidewalk or sidewalk line within the city any driveway for the passage of vehicles, without first having applied for and obtained from the city manager written permission for the installation of such driveway, and without laying, installing and establishing the driveway in strict compliance with directions given by the city manager concerning the method in which such driveway shall be constructed or installed. 
(Code 1974, § 23-4) 
Sec. 70-4. - Dangerous or unsatisfactory railroad crossings. 
If the city council shall have reason to believe any crossing by a railroad of any street in the city is in dangerous or unsatisfactory condition, it shall give notice to the agent of such railroad of a hearing on the matter, which shall be held not less than ten days after such notice. If, upon such hearing, the council shall find that such crossing is in fact dangerous or unsatisfactory, it shall order it repaired or replaced. Failure of the railroad to obey such order shall be an offense against this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 23-5) 
Sec. 70-5. - Railroads obstructing crossings. 
It shall be unlawful for a railroad to block or otherwise close or obstruct any of the street or public road crossings in the city for a longer time than five minutes; provided, however, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. such crossings, if necessary, may be blocked for a period not exceeding ten minutes. 
(Code 1974, § 23-6) 
Sec. 70-6. - Location of gasoline pumps and filling stations. 
(a)  No gasoline filling stations shall be permitted to be installed on the sidewalks, but all such stations within the city shall be installed as turn-in stations; the pumps shall be installed well within the property line so that vehicles being served will not be an obstruction to traffic, either on the streets or sidewalks. 
(b)  No gasoline pump shall be placed closer than 15 feet to the property line, and in the event a gasoline pump is placed between the property line and the filling station building, the building shall not be placed closer than 25 feet to the property line. 
(Code 1974, § 23-7) 
Secs. 70-7—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BASIC STREET SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 70-31. - Establishment of street, grade lines; compliance therewith. 
The city engineer shall establish grade lines from such points as the city council may decide upon and, from time to time, such street lines as persons and corporations contemplating the erection of buildings may demand. All buildings and structures of any character whatsoever in the city, whenever the buildings and structures are to be erected abutting on any sidewalk or within five feet of any sidewalk in the city, must be erected in conformity to such grade and street lines. 
(Code 1974, § 23-1) 
Sec. 70-32. - Designation of streets. 
All streets in the city will be designated as one of the following: 
(1)  Primary route; 
(2)  Secondary route; 
(3)  Main artery. 
(Code 1974, § 23-9(a)) 
Sec. 70-33. - Manner of designation. 
The designation of a street in the city will be determined by a committee composed of the city manager, the city engineer and the public works director and shall be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 23-9(b)) 
Sec. 70-34. - Right-of-way widths. 
The right-of-way for all primary routes and secondary routes in the city shall be 60 feet and the right-of-way for all main arteries shall be 80 feet. 
(Code 1974, § 23-9(c)) 
Sec. 70-35. - Width of paving. 
(a)  The width of paving or asphalt placed on streets designated as secondary routes shall be 26 feet and the width of the curb and gutter shall be four feet. 
(b)  The width of paving or asphalt placed on streets designated as primary routes shall be 32 feet and the width of the curb and gutter shall be four feet. 
(c)  The width of the paving or asphalt placed on streets designated as main arteries shall be 44 feet and the width of the curb and gutter shall be four feet, but adjoining property owners shall be assessed for only 32 feet of paving plus the curb and gutter. 
(Code 1974, § 23-9(d)) 
Sec. 70-36. - Extension of present rights-of-way. 
All present rights-of-way of streets in the city will be extended as they now exist. 
(Code 1974, § 23-9(e)) 
Sec. 70-37. - Prerequisites to acceptance of street dedication. 
In any area of the city which has not been developed and the streets cut up to the present time, before any street dedicated to the city is accepted by the city, a plat must be submitted by the owner or developer to the city council showing the width of the proposed streets and the width of the proposed paving and proposed width of the curb and gutter. Before the dedication of the street is accepted by the city, all of the following must occur: 
(1)  The city council must approve the right-of-way width, the paving width, and, where applicable, the curb and gutter width. 
(2)  The developer will be responsible for 100 percent of the costs of all materials to establish and construct a street upon rights-of-way dedicated to the city to include paving, stormwater drainage, and, where applicable, curb and gutter. 
(3)  The city may, at its sole option, provide a portion of the labor and equipment costs for preparation of the new street for paving and curb and gutter and stormwater drainage installation. 
(4)  The developer will be responsible for 100 percent of the costs of all materials to install water and sewer utilities and service within the new street. 
(5)  The city may, at its sole option, provide a portion of the labor and equipment costs utilized to install water and sewer utilities within such street. 
(6)  The developer may provide for the paving, curb and gutter, stormwater drainage, and water and sewer utilities separate and apart from any participation by the city. However, the developer must provide an agreement acceptable to the city that all work will be done in accordance with city specifications and that such developer will warrant to the city all work for a period of two years from the date that the committee composed of the city manager, the city engineer, and the public works director approve and accept, subject to the aforesaid warranty, such work. At the expiration of two years from such acceptance date, the paved street and all subject utilities will become the maintenance responsibility of the city. The developer will correct, at his expense, any defects that arise or occur or become manifest within the two-year warranty period. 
(Code 1974, § 23-9(f)) 
Sec. 70-38. - Determination of width of streets and paving for future annexed land. 
For any area of land annexed to the city in the future, the width of the streets, the width of the paving and the width of the curb and gutter will be determined by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 23-9(g)) 
Sec. 70-39. - Street and right-of-way classification map. 
The committee mentioned in this article will prepare a street and right-of-way classification map, which map will depict all streets in the city showing the designations of streets and the widths of paving or asphalt and the widths of curb and gutter required. This map shall be kept up to date by the committee and a copy of such map shall be maintained at all times in the office of the clerk of the city and the office of the city manager. 
(Code 1974, § 23-9(h)) 
Secs. 70-40—70-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS AND STREET CUTS 

Sec. 70-61. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person or entity to: 
(1)  Cut or remove any portion of the surface treatment (whether asphalt, concrete, dirt or other covering or topping) of any public highway, street or alley or any portion of any sidewalk, curb or gutter which is within any public right-of-way located in the city; or 
(2)  Make any excavation within the right-of-way of any public highway, street or alley located in the city; 
without first having obtained a permit from the city therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 23-21) 
Sec. 70-62. - Applications for permits. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit required pursuant to section 70-61, the applicant for such permit shall file with the city a written application in such substance and form as shall from time to time be required therefor and containing at least the following information: 
(1)  The name, business address, social security number or federal tax identification number, business telephone number and home telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  The name, business address, social security number or federal tax identification number, business telephone number and home telephone number of any person or entity who will be performing such work if different from the applicant; 
(3)  The name, business address, social security number or federal tax identification number, business telephone number and home telephone number of the person or entity for whom such work will be performed or installation made; 
(4)  The experience, relative to the types of work proposed to be performed, of the person or entity who will perform such proposed work; 
(5)  The exact location of the proposed excavation and/or cut; 
(6)  The dimensions of the proposed excavation and/or cut; 
(7)  The purpose of the proposed excavation and/or cut; 
(8)  The nature and extent of precautions which will be utilized so as to prevent danger to the public from the proposed excavation and/or cut; 
(9)  The nature and extent of precautions which will be utilized so as to prevent any such proposed excavation from becoming flooded; 
(10)  The nature and extent of any installation to be made following any such proposed excavation and the details of such proposed installation; 
(11)  The anticipated date of commencement of such excavation and/or cut; 
(12)  The anticipated duration of time necessary to complete such work; and 
(13)  The location of site of proposed work, including approximate distances and directions, with respect to nearby streets, alleys, intersections, utilities, and public places and grounds. 
(Code 1974, § 23-22) 
Sec. 70-63. - Filing of application. 
Applications required pursuant to section 70-62 shall be filed with the director of public works of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 23-23) 
Sec. 70-64. - Permit fee. 
All applications for permits required pursuant to section 70-61 shall be accompanied, at the time of the filing thereof, by payment by the applicant to the city of the permit fee therefor in such amount as shall be prescribed from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 23-24) 
Sec. 70-65. - Bond requirements. 
All applications for permits required pursuant to section 70-61 shall be accompanied, at the time of the filing thereof, by a written bond in the amount of $2,000.00 with the surety of a company authorized to transact a surety business in the state conditioned that the applicant for such permit and all persons and entities operating pursuant thereto will fully and faithfully comply with and observe all requirements, conditions and obligations with respect to such permit and will indemnify and hold harmless the city of and from any and all costs, loss, expenses, damages, obligations and liabilities which the city shall sustain or incur as a result of the failure of the applicant for such permit or any person or entity operating pursuant to such permit to fully and faithfully comply with and observe all requirements, conditions and obligations with respect to such permit; provided that in lieu of such surety bond the applicant may elect to post a cash bond with the city for such amount. 
(Code 1974, § 23-25) 
Sec. 70-66. - Posting of cost to cure. 
All applications for permits required pursuant to section 70-61 shall be accompanied, at the time of the filing thereof, by the payment to the city of a deposit in an amount equal to the cost, as reasonably estimated by the director of public works of the city, to the city for the replacing of the surface treatment of any highway, street or alley proposed to be cut or removed and/or for the replacing of any sidewalk, curb or gutter following completion of the work proposed relative thereto. 
(Code 1974, § 23-26) 
Sec. 70-67. - Action on application. 
Upon satisfaction of the requirements of sections 70-62, 70-64, 70-65 and 70-66, the director of public works of the city shall, upon his determination that under all circumstances surrounding issuance of the permit applied for would not be adverse to the interest of the city or the public, issue the permit for such period of duration as he shall deem appropriate for the accomplishment of such work subject to such restrictions, limitations and conditions as he shall determine to be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1974, § 23-27) 
Sec. 70-68. - Expiration of permits. 
All rights and authorizations to perform any activity pursuant to any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, and well as such permit itself, shall expire and terminate upon the earliest of the following: 
(1)  The date of expiration thereof established in such permit except to the extent the date of expiration may be extended because of providential cause; or 
(2)  Sixty days following the date of the issuance of such permit, if the work authorized pursuant to such permit has not commenced on or prior to such date. 
(Code 1974, § 23-28) 
Sec. 70-69. - Notification of utilities. 
No later than 24 hours prior to the commencement of any work authorized pursuant to a permit issued in accordance with this article, the applicant for such permit shall notify the building inspector of the city and all utility companies having wires, conduits, pipes and other facilities which are located with 25 feet of the outside dimensions of the site upon which such work will be performed of the date of commencement of such work as well as the location and nature thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 23-29) 
Sec. 70-70. - Restrictions on work. 
All work authorized by a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall at all times be fully and faithfully performed in a competent and workmanlike manner and in accordance with: 
(1)  All professional, code, and safety standards applicable thereto; 
(2)  All conditions, limitations and restrictions contained in such permit; 
(3)  All rules, regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto; and 
(4)  All directions and requirements of the director of public works of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 23-30) 
Sec. 70-71. - Revocation of permit. 
Upon the failure of the applicant for a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article or any person or entity performing work pursuant to such permit to comply with the provisions of section 70-69 or 70-70, then the director of public works of the city may revoke such permit whereupon all rights and authorizations to perform any work permitted thereby shall total cease and expire. 
(Code 1974, § 23-31) 
Sec. 70-72. - Backfill. 
Promptly upon completion of work for which an excavation permit is issued pursuant to this article, the holder of the permit therefor shall backfill, or at such holder's sole expense cause to be backfilled, the excavation so made with such materials as shall be required by such permit or by the director of public works of the city to a level of density and compactness as shall permit restoration of the surface treatment of the highway, street or alley to the same condition as existed prior to such excavation, all to the satisfaction of the director of public works of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 23-32) 
Sec. 70-73. - Resurfacing and restoration. 
Upon completion of the required backfill of an excavation or upon completion of work which occasioned the cutting or removal of any surface treatment of any highway, street or alley or any portion of any sidewalk, curb or gutter which is within any public right-of-way, the director of public works of the city shall cause such surface treatment, sidewalk, curb and/or gutter to be repaired or resurfaced as necessary to return the surface treatment, sidewalk, curb and/or gutter to the same condition as existed prior to work performed pursuant to such permit. 
(Code 1974, § 23-33) 
Sec. 70-74. - Reimbursement of cost to cure. 
(a)  The city shall refund to the holder of any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article the difference between the deposit posted pursuant to section 70-66 and the cost to cure pursuant to section 70-73, less any and all costs, losses, damages, expenses, obligations and liabilities sustained or incurred by the city due to failure of the holder of such permit to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The holder of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall, within 30 days of notification of the amount thereof, pay to the city the amount of the difference between the amount of cost to cure pursuant to section 70-73 and the deposit posted pursuant to section 70-66 plus any and all costs, losses, damages, expenses, obligations and liabilities sustained or incurred by the city due to failure of the holder of such permit to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 23-34) 
Sec. 70-75. - Execution. 
Failure of the holder of any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article within 30 days of notification thereof to pay all amounts due to the city as required pursuant to the provisions of section 70-74 shall authorize the issuance of execution therefor against the holder of such permit as in the case of execution for taxes due to the city and authorize the city to proceed with respect to the bond posted by the holder of such permit. 
(Code 1974, § 23-35) 
Chapter 74 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-6(2); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(14); administration, ch. 2; businesses and business regulations, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-16, § I, adopted October 16, 2007, in effect repealed the former art. II., §§ 74-31—74-73, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 99-37, adopted October 4, 1999; and Ord. No. 2008-24, adopted November 3, 2008. 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Engaged in business means doing or performing any act of selling any goods or services, or soliciting business, or offering any good or services for sale primarily in attempt to make a profit, including selling or performing services of the character of a wholesaler or retailer, or being involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, or renting real or personal property; all of the foregoing performed either as an owner, operator or agent of any business, trade, profession, or occupation within the city. 
Gross receipts mean the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation, to the following: 
(1)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
(2)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; 
(3)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; 
(4)  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
(5)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
(1)  Sales, use or excise tax; 
(2)  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; 
(3)  Inter-organizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2); 
(4)  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and 
(5)  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by an organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
Landlord means any person, firm, corporation or other business entity that rents or leases realty consisting of at least either three units or 4,000 square feet (regardless of the number of units). In determining residential dwelling units, the structure upon which the landlord claims homestead tax exemption shall be excluded from the computation. In determining commercial units, any structure occupied by the landlord or by an entity that includes the landlord shall be excluded from the computation. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Nonprofit organization means an organization which is formed for a purpose not involving pecuniary remuneration, directly or indirectly, to its shareholders or members as such. Such organizations encompass those, which are truly altruistic as well as those whose aid is limited to its membership. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent or more of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioners of professions and occupations" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees mean payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 1, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-32. - Tax required. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an annual occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or his deputies or to any police officer upon his or their request. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 1, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-33. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. The penalties for delinquency for these businesses are civil in nature and do not include incarceration. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 1, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-34. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; tax structure. 
(a)  A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges in an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall be such sum as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council as is necessary to reasonably cover the city's expense in investigation and/or inspection as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-35. - Levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(b)  The gross brackets classification for each business, trade, profession or occupation shall be as set forth in the following schedule: 
Section 28 - Gross Brackets Classification Schedule 

 
(c)  Refunds. 
(1)  A business, trade, profession or occupation may apply for a partial refund of its previously paid occupation tax when the business ceases to conduct business within the city. A business with multiple locations may apply for a refund when it closes one or more of its locations or offices, and no business dealings are conducted in the city from the closed location(s) or office(s). The previously paid occupation tax shall be prorated from the date certified in the written request for a refund and calculated pursuant to subparagraph (3), below. 
(2)  A written request for a refund shall be submitted to the occupation city clerk within six months after the business, trade, profession, or occupation ceases to exist as a legal entity doing business in the city, and the request shall certify the date the business ceased to exist. If one or more locations or offices are still in operation and conducting business in the city, then the request for refund shall certify the date the location(s) or office(s) for which the occupation tax was paid ceased to conduct business in the city. 
(3)  The occupation tax levied and paid under this section shall be subject to a prorated refund based on the number of full months left in the year for which the occupation tax certificate was issued upon written request as provided herein. Transaction of business during any month or portion thereof, for the purpose of this section, shall be deemed to have continued business for the entire month. Such refund must be applied for within 60 days of the discontinuance of the business or corporation. 
(4)  Administrative and regulatory fees and any penalties paid on behalf of a business, trade, profession or occupation shall not be subject to a refund. 
(d)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have nor shall the city require that a business pay occupational tax for more than 100 percent of the gross receipts. 
(e)  The city shall not require an occupation tax on those receipts that were taxed by occupation tax in other localities or states. 
(f)  The city shall require an occupation tax from those real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the city and sell property inside the limits of the city. 
(g)  For out-of-state businesses with no location in the state, occupation taxes include the gross receipts of the business as defined in O.C.G.A. § 14-13-7 which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-36. - Paying tax of business with no location in state. 
Registration and the assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in this city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-37. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city clerk. The dominant line of business shall be noted by the city clerk upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-38. - Number of businesses considered operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-39. - Licenses or occupational tax receipts not transferable; change of address notification required. 
(a)  Business licenses or occupational tax receipts shall not be transferable, and transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the termination of such business and the establishment of a new business. Therefore, a new occupational license tax shall be required for the new owner of the business. 
(b)  Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the clerk of such move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the clerk no later than the day of moving. A new license or receipt for occupational tax will be issued at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-40. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). 
(a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in section 74-35; or 
(2)  A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(b)  With respect to such election, the following general rules apply: 
(1)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year; and 
(2)  The professions that may elect a flat tax of $400.00 per practitioner are as follows: lawyers; physicians licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34; osteopaths licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34; chiropractors; podiatrists; dentists; optometrists; psychologists; veterinarians; landscape architects; land surveyors; practitioners of physiotherapy; public accountants; embalmers; funeral directors; civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; architects; marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors. Occupation tax, at election of each taxpayer, shall be a flat fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide any of the services listed in this subsection or the tax shall be computed on the basis of gross receipts in accordance with the provisions of section 74-35. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-41. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 1, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-42. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specified. Said occupation tax shall be due and payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by April 1 of each year, be subject to a ten percent penalty for delinquency and shall accrue interest at the rate of one and five-tenths percent per month until said tax, penalties and interest are paid in full. On any new profession, trade, business or occupation begun in the city in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be due and payable immediately upon beginning business, and shall be subject to a ten percent penalty for delinquency if not paid within 90 days of the commencement of such business, and interest shall accrue at the rate of one and five-tenths percent per month until said tax, penalties and interest are paid in full. Penalties provided herein shall be in addition to any other penalties, civil or criminal, which may be applicable. 
(b)  The tax registration provided for in this subsection shall be issued by the city clerk. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained such registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 74-49. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, provided in this article, may be collected by the remedies provided in this article and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-43. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses who have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupational tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. In the case where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-44. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from such registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from such business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-45. - State veterans free license. 
Persons who qualify for a state veterans free license must secure such license from the state and present the license to the city clerk, who, upon receipt of the license, will honor the license and issue a city license without charge. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-46. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-47. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-48. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
Any person subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this chapter shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this chapter, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this section before commencing the business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained such registration, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-49. - Penalty of article violation. 
In addition to the penalties provided for in section 74-41, any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the municipal judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00. Each day the violation continues shall be a separate violation subjecting the offender to a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-50. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law. 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-51. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by state law or laws of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-52. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. 
(a)  The owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for the occupation tax levied for the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before April 1 of the current calendar year, file with the city clerk, on a form furnished by the clerk, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current year. 
(b)  All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on amount of business to be transacted during the calendar year. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, and to avoid the necessity of making numerous returns, those businesses subject to the occupation tax levied pursuant to section 74-35, the return filed with the clerk in accordance with subsection (a) of this section shall be used as an estimate for making payments on the occupation tax for current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in a current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the termination of the current year, in accordance with the procedure set forth in this article. 
(c)  To verify and document the gross receipts of such return, the applicant must submit or produce documentation evidencing gross receipts which may include federal tax return forms listing gross receipts for the most recently completed calendar year or such other proof of actual gross receipts satisfactory to the city. 
(d)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be set forth in such return. Such return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis, which figure shall bear the same ratio to the amount of gross receipts for such part year as the full year bears to such part. Such figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-53. - Procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. 
(a)  Upon the filing of the final return as provided in section 74-52, if the amount of the occupation tax due for the previous year, based on actual gross receipts, is more than the amount of occupational tax paid based on the estimate from the preceding year, the difference in such amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on April 1 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before that date. 
(b)  Upon the filing of the final return as provided in section 74-52, if the amount of the occupation tax due for the previous, based on actual gross receipts, is less than the amount of occupational tax paid based on the estimate from the preceding year, the difference in such amount shall be refundable by city to the taxpayer; or, if the business continues to be conducted in the city during the current year, such difference in amount shall be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by the business for the current year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-54. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-55. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the gross receipts of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and the tax will be calculated at the rate of the dominant line of business conducted by the businesses identified on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-56. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of such return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using such returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees for the purposes of this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state or of the United States, and other local governments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-57. - Insurance companies. 
Insurance companies are hereby declared to be not subject to the schedules of taxation imposed by sections 74-35, but shall be taxed as provided in article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-58. - Specific requirements for certain licenses. 
Before any license is issued under this article, the following terms or conditions must be complied with by the indicated business activity. 
(1)  Air conditioning and heating, installation and service . State license is required before a license is issued. 
(2)  Bonding company . Must be approved by police chief. 
(3)  Bus agent, express company and parcel delivery . This specific occupation tax is levied upon all business done within the city and to and from points in the state. Business done to and from points without the state are expressly excluded from this tax levy. 
(4)  Cafe, restaurant and cafeteria . Must have permits from health department and fire inspector before license is issued. 
(5)  Delicatessen, meat market and meat processor . Must have permit from health department before license is issued. 
(6)  Dancehall . Must be approved by fire chief and police chief. 
(7)  Detective agency . Must have a state license and must also be approved by police chief. 
(8)  Electrician . State license is required before a license is issued. 
(9)  Exterminators . Permit is required from state department of entomology before a license is issued. 
(10)  Gasfitters and plumbers . State license is required before license is issued. Must also provide $2,000.00 bond and obtain permit prior to engaging in any work within any city right-of-way. 
(11)  Junk dealer . Such person shall hold their shop subject to visitation and inspection by the police and on refusal of inspection, his shop shall immediately be closed by the city manager, and license forfeited, and in case any machinery or appliances of any railroad shop or gas company or waterworks fixtures shall be found in such junk dealer's shop without sufficient explanation, it shall be just and conclusive cause for the revocation of each dealer's license. Minors are to have written permits from parents or guardians before selling to dealers. If a junk dealer buys from a minor without a written permit from parents he will be subject to prosecution. 
(12)  Kennels (dog). Must be in area zoned for this type business. 
(13)  Massage therapist . Must show certification. 
(14)  Outpatient clinic . Must have proof of state certification. 
(15)  Pawnbrokers . Each person or firm engaged in the business of a pawnbroker or conducting a pawnbroker shop in the city shall make a report to the chief of police before 10:00 a.m. each day (except Sunday when transactions for Saturdays shall be made the following Monday) of every article or thing pawned to or purchased by him or them for the day and night previous; such report to specify the article or thing giving a full description thereof such as a number, mark and all other details as will make identification of such articles clear and positive, and such person shall hold their shops subject to visitation and inspection of the police, and upon refusal of any pawnbroker to submit to such visitation or inspection of his shop shall be immediately closed by the city manager. All licenses issued to pawnbrokers are subject to this subsection, and violations of this subsection shall be punished with the revocation of the license and license for pawnbrokers shall be transferred from the person to whom it was issued. 
(16)  Precious metal . Must be approved by police chief. 
(17)  Rides only . Provided the machinery and accessory implements shall be located in such place in the city as the city manager may approve. License is subject to be revoked by the city manager after a hearing before the city manager, party at interest having first been served notice of such hearing. 
(18)  Taxicabs, transportation; nonemergency . Provided before any license is granted each applicant must have insurance coverage, property damage and personal liability for a minimum of $15,000.00 in a company acceptable to the city clerk and deposit such policies with the city clerk covering every car used in such taxicab/nonemergency transportation business. Each taxicab is required to have its framed license displayed in view of passengers at all times, with the number of cab corresponding with the number on the license. 
(19)  Telephone company . Telephone company charges will be three percent of the recurring local service revenue of subscribers located within the city. 
(20)  Tree surgery . In addition to business license, must also have proof of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $50,000.00 for bodily injury and $100,000.00 property damage indemnifying the city and any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such activities. 
(21)  Trenching and pipe laying . In addition to business license, must also post $2,000.00 bond and obtain permit prior to engaging in any work within any city right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-59. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the city clerk, through his officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The city clerk or his designee shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city clerk, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city clerk at his discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of ten percent on amounts due beyond 90 days shall be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-60. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay such occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of such returns within the time required in this article, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 74-59, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of such business to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked and shall subject the business to the penalties provided for herein. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 74-59. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-61. - Lien taken and execution for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies as provided in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the city clerk, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of such tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for such tax, which such execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the person, partnership or corporation liable for such tax, all as provided by the ordinances and charter of the city and state law. The lien of such occupation tax shall become fixed on and from the time when such tax thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk or his designee upon the property of the defendant located in the city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of such execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as is provided by ordinances and charter of the city and state law, and the defendant in such execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the charter of the city and state law in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-62. - Administration. 
The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy, assessment and collection of taxes and penalties imposed in this article; provided however, that any person who is of the opinion that this tax has been incorrectly assessed or that his major line classification is incorrect, or that any other requirement or decision of the city clerk is in error, shall have the right to appeal as follows: 
(1)  The aggrieved taxpayer shall first submit the complaint or alleged error in writing to the city manager who shall review the complaint. 
(2)  Should the taxpayer, the city clerk and the city manager fail to resolve the issue, the city manager shall notify the city council and the city council will consider the appeal at its next regular meeting. 
(3)  If the city clerk and the city manager recommend that an audit of the books of a licensee or person is necessary, the city council, upon finding as a fact that it appears desirable to order such an audit, may do so, with the expense of the audit to be borne by the city if the position of the taxpayer is sustained in the audit. If not, the expense of the audit shall be due and payable pursuant to this section as a penalty in addition to taxes due from the licensee or person. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-63. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and state, or the Constitution of the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the license or occupational tax under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-64. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-65. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions of this article, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-66. - Enforcement of article. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk and city police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city clerk, chief of police, and their assistants, to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgement it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-67. - Article to remain in full force and effect until changed by council. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions relating to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-68. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1999, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-69. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-70. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention of this article that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-71. - Severability. 
If any section, provision, or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 74-72. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 10-16-2017) 
Secs. 74-73—74-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE BUSINESSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses and business regulations, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— General assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. Art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c); local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 74-101. - Personal insurance coverage—Personal coverage. 
Each insurance company and association collecting within the city insurance premiums for any life, health, disability, accident or industrial coverage as defined under O.C.G.A. §§ 33-25-1, 33-26-1, 33-27-1 or 33-29-1, shall pay an annual license fee of $75.00 for each location such company and association located within the city; provided that each such company and association so collecting any such premiums shall be deemed, for purposes hereof, to have at least one such location with the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 1, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 99-37, § 29(1)(b), 10-4-1999) 
Sec. 74-102. - Same—Gross premiums tax. 
In addition to the annual license fee set forth in section 74-101, all such companies and associations collecting premiums on such insurance shall pay to the city an annual percentage tax equal to one percent of all gross premiums collected from within the city from such insurance coverages. All such insurance companies and associations shall submit a statement to the city, prior to March 1 of each calendar year, showing gross premiums so collected in the previous calendar year and pay the percentage tax set forth above. If such an insurance company or association discontinues collecting such premiums from within the city during any calendar year, such company or association shall forthwith submit a statement thereof and of gross premiums collected to the date thereof and pay the percentage tax on the basis of premiums collected since the beginning of the then current calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 1, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 99-37, § 29(1)(b), 10-4-1999) 
Sec. 74-103. - Casualty coverage—License fees. 
Each insurance company and association collecting within the city insurance premiums for any fire, liability, collision, casualty, marine, surety, indemnity or bonds coverage defined by O.C.G.A. §§ 33-32-1 and 33-34-2 shall pay an annual license fee of $75.00 for each location of such company or association located within the city; provided that each such company and associationso collecting any such premiums shall be deemed, for purposes hereof, to have at least one such location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 1, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 99-37, § 29(1)(a), 10-4-1999) 
Sec. 74-104. - Same—Gross premiums tax. 
In addition to the annual license fee stated in section 74-103, all such companies and associations collecting premiums on such insurance shall pay to the city an annual percentage fee equal to 2.5 percent of all gross premiums collected from within the city in excess of $10,000.00 for such insurance coverages. All such insurance companies and associations shall submit a statement to the city, prior to March 1, showing gross premiums so collected in the previous calendar year and pay the percentage tax set forth above. If such an insurance company or association discontinues collecting such premiums from within the city during any calendar year, such company or association shall forthwith submit a statement thereof and of gross premiums collected to the date thereof and pay the percentage tax on the basis of premiums collected since the beginning of the then current calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 1, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 99-37, § 29(1)(a), 10-4-1999) 
Sec. 74-105. - Independent agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by this article in the amount of $50.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 3, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 99-37, § 29(2), 10-4-1999) 
Secs. 74-106—74-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 74-131. - Business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of one quarter of one percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 83-21, § 1, 12-5-1983) 
Sec. 74-132. - Filing of return. 
Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Ord. No. 83-21, § 2(a), 12-5-1983) 
Sec. 74-133. - Due date. 
The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 83-21, § 2(b), 12-5-1983) 
Secs. 74-134—74-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses and business regulations, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accomodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 74-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designated for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or portion of a structure (including a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp and tourist cabin) containing guestrooms and in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. As used in this article, the term "hotel" does not include any jail, hospital, orphanage, asylum, sanitarium or medical, mental, drug or alcohol treatment facility or any governmental building. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room, except when such room is being used as a meeting room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for more than ten consecutive days next preceding such date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided in this article. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
(Code 1974, § 24-65) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-162. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There shall be paid a tax of five percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the city. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid upon any occupancy on or after May 1, 2000, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. 
(Code 1974, § 24-66; Ord. No. 2000-008, 3-20-2000) 
Sec. 74-163. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in this city and renting guestrooms in the city not exempted under this article shall collect equal to the amount of tax imposed and levied under this article from the occupant. 
(Code 1974, § 24-67) 
Sec. 74-164. - Exemptions. 
The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to: 
(a)  Charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; 
(b)  The use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge; 
(c)  Any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by Georgia state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card, such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a Georgia state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this paragraph. For purpose of the exemption provided under this paragraph, a local government official or employee shall include officials or employees of counties, municipalities, consolidated governments, or county or independent school districts; or 
(d)  Charges made for continuous use of any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations after the first 30 days of continuous occupancy. 
(Code 1974, § 24-68; Ord. No. 2009-14, § I, 7-6-2009) 
Sec. 74-165. - Registration of operator. 
(a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall immediately register with the finance director on such form as shall be provided by the official. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of the place of business, and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the finance director may from time to time require. The registration shall be signed by the owner in the case of a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; and in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. 
(b)  The finance director shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from occupants. 
(c)  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(Code 1974, § 24-69) 
Sec. 74-166. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  All amounts of taxes due under this article shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the finance director showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the finance director. 
(c)  Operators collecting the tax authorized by this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for, and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from the state sales and use tax under the Georgia Retailer's and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 48-8-1—48-8-66). 
(Code 1974, § 24-70) 
Sec. 74-167. - Persons liable for tax. 
(a)  The taxes imposed pursuant to this article are imposed upon the operator and shall be collected by the operator from the occupant. The operator shall collect the tax imposed under this article from the occupant and shall pay the tax over to the city as provided in this article. 
(b)  Each operator shall add the amount of the tax imposed under this article to the room rental charge, which shall be a debt from the occupant to the operator until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. Any operator who shall neglect, fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed pursuant to this article upon all rent due for occupancy shall be personally liable for payment of the tax so imposed. 
(c)  No operator shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner that such operator will absorb all or any portion of the tax imposed pursuant to this article or that such operator will relieve the occupant of the payment of all or any portion of the tax imposed pursuant to this article. 
(d)  Any operator liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this article who shall sell the hotel business of such operator or shall quit the hotel business shall make a final return and payment of all amounts due to the city pursuant to this article, all within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(Code 1974, § 24-71) 
Sec. 74-168. - Failure to pay tax. 
(a)  The tax imposed pursuant to this article shall for each month become delinquent on the 21st day of each succeeding month. The finance director shall, when any tax becomes delinquent under this article, pursue any remedy or right allowed by law for enforcement of the collection and payment of taxes imposed by the city as may be allowed under state law and the ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Any operator who fails to pay the tax imposed pursuant to this article to the city or fails to pay to the city any amount of such tax required to be collected pursuant to this article within the time required for payment thereof shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax, or the amount of the tax not so paid within such time period, in addition to the tax or amount of tax not so paid within such time period, plus interest on the unpaid tax or portion thereof at a rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or portion thereof should have been returned until date of payment. 
(Code 1974, § 24-72) 
Sec. 74-169. - Deficiency determination. 
(a)  If the finance director is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required by this article to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  The finance director shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If made by mail, such service shall be made by certified mail and shall be addressed to the operator at the address of the operator as it appears in the records of the city. 
(d)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(Code 1974, § 24-73) 
Sec. 74-170. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  If any person fails to make a return, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rents of such persons within the city which are subject to the tax required by this article. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon information which is or may come into the possession of the finance director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 74-169(c). 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(Code 1974, § 24-74) 
Sec. 74-171. - Administration of article. 
(a)  The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed under this article. 
(b)  Every operator shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the finance director may require from time to time. 
(c)  The finance director or any person authorized by the finance director may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator to ascertain and determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(d)  In administration of the provisions of this article, the finance director may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax imposed under this article. The reports shall be filed with the finance director when required by him and shall set forth the rents charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, and such other information as the finance director may from time to time require. 
(Code 1974, § 24-75) 
Sec. 74-172. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
(a)  At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required by this article to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any such tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the finance director may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect amounts delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient sum from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the finance director showing that the city has been paid in full or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required under this article such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by such purchaser but only to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset by the finance director. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the finance director, the operator will have three years from date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the finance director, the excess amount paid to the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators, representatives, successors or assigns. 
(Code 1974, § 24-76) 
Sec. 74-173. - Retention of records. 
It shall be the duty of every operator required to make a report and pay any tax levied under this article to keep and preserve suitable records of rents taxable under this article, such other books of accounts and records as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due hereunder, and any other information as may be required by the finance director. It shall be the duty of every operator to keep and preserve for a period of three years all invoices and other records of occupancy and rents for occupancy which are taxable under this article with all such books, invoices, and other records to be open to examination by the finance director or any person authorized by him at all reasonable hours. 
(Code 1974, § 24-77) 
Chapter 78 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Driving animals, § 14-14; court, ch. 30; noise control, § 38-31 et seq.; noise control of powered motor vehicles, § 38-40; motor vehicles a nuisance, § 38-191 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; reckless driving destroying vegetation in parks, § 50-11; speed of vehicles in parks, § 50-13; public safety, ch. 58; littering, scattering refuse prohibited; transporting loose materials, § 66-6; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; vehicles for hire, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(Code 1974, § 15-01) 
Sec. 78-2. - Parental responsibility. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, such minor to violate any provision of this Code or state law regarding the operation of vehicles. 
Sec. 78-3. - Obedience required. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Code 1974, § 15-3) 
Sec. 78-4. - Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of a police officer or fire department official when directing traffic. 
(Code 1974, § 15-5) 
Sec. 78-5. - Obedience by public employees. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the federal government, this state, any county or city. It shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
(Code 1974, § 15-6) 
Sec. 78-6. - Vehicles with blue lights. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle in the city to display or have attached thereto blue warning lights, other than motor vehicles owned by the federal government, motor vehicles owned by the state, motor vehicles owned by a municipality, motor vehicles owned by a county or motor vehicles owned by any department or agency of the aforesaid governments. 
(Code 1974, § 15-8) 
Sec. 78-7. - Intoxication. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an automobile or other motor-driven vehicle in a drunken or intoxicated condition within the police jurisdiction of the city upon the streets, avenues, roads, highways or other public commons. 
(Code 1974, § 15-11) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 78-8. - Duty to give information and render assistance in accident. 
Every person driving a motor vehicle which strikes or hits any person or another vehicle, shall stop such motor vehicle at once and render such assistance as he can, and shall give his name and post office address and the license number of his motor vehicle to the other person or to the owner of the other vehicle; he shall also immediately notify the police department of the accident. 
(Code 1974, § 15-14) 
Sec. 78-9. - Harmful materials on highways. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such highway. 
(b)  Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the destructive or injurious material or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such vehicle. 
(Code 1974, § 15-15) 
Sec. 78-10. - Obstruction to driver's view or driving mechanism. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons exceeding three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front, rear or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position so as to interfere with the driver's view ahead, to the rear or to the sides or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Code 1974, § 15-16) 
Sec. 78-11. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, scooter, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the bicycle, motorcycle, scooter, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1974, § 15-21) 
Sec. 78-12. - Bicycles prohibited on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on any of the sidewalks in the city. 
(Code 1974, § 15-17) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
Sec. 78-13. - Extra passengers on bicycles, cycles. 
The operator of any bicycle, scooter or motorcycle, when upon a street of this city, shall not carry any other person upon the handlebars, frame or tank, nor shall any person ride upon such vehicle unless riding on an extra seat provided for each extra person. 
(Code 1974, § 15-19) 
Sec. 78-14. - Motorized children's vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place in or upon the streets, sidewalks, lanes or alleys of the city, or to operate or drive thereon, a motor-propelled children's car, a motor-propelled cart or a motor-propelled children's vehicle. 
(Code 1974, § 15-20) 
Sec. 78-15. - Operation of mopeds. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place in or upon the sidewalks of the city, or to operate or drive thereon, a moped. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place in or upon the streets, lanes, or alleys of the city, or to operate or drive thereon, a moped unless such person is 16 years of age or older. 
(Code 1974, § 15-22) 
Secs. 78-16—78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-31. - Driving motor vehicles in careless manner. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle on streets, alleys, byways, parking lots or driveways in such a manner as to cause the motor vehicle to spin its tires, fishtail in a zigzag manner or spin around in a circle. 
(Code 1974, § 15-61) 
Sec. 78-32. - Traffic, speed, etc., zones; signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)  Upon approval of the mayor and council, the chief of police is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)  Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians. 
(3)  Traffic lanes. 
(4)  Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones. 
(5)  Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices. 
(6)  Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the city. 
(b)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(c)  The city clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate official map setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic control devices. The map and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by the mayor and council and the map shall be known as the official traffic control map of the city. An official copy thereof shall be kept in the office of the city clerk; shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the city clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device. 
(d)  No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this chapter shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1974, §§ 15-4, 15-34—15-47, 15-71, 15-73—15-81, 15-95—15-101, 15-105, 15-106, 15-108—15-110, 15-116, 15-117; Ord. No. 98-24, 10-5-1998) 
Sec. 78-33. - Truck routes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City is the City of Tifton. 
Deviating truck means a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling inside the city. 
Persons is any person, firm, partnership, association, cooperation, company or organization of any kind. 
Truck means any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, and whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight exceeds 10,000 pounds. 
Truck route means a way over certain streets, as designated herein, over and along which trucks moving in the city shall operate. 
(b)  Application of regulation. All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along the truck routes herein established and designated by the following named streets: 
Tift Avenue—North city limits to U.S. Highway 82 East. 
8th Street—West city limits to Tift Avenue. 
U.S. Highway 41—Love Avenue to north city limits. 
U.S. Highway 41—U.S. Highway 82 East to south city limits. 
12th Street—Love Avenue to Tift Avenue. 
20th Street—U.S. Highway 41 North to east city limits. 
U.S. Highway 82—East city limits to west city limits. 
Ferry Lake Road (4th Street)—Goff Street to east city limits. 
Goff Street—Ferry Lake Road (4th Street) to U.S. Highway 82 East. 
U.S. Highway 319—South city limits to U.S. Highway 82 West. 
Central Avenue—Second Street to 17th Street. 
Second Street—Central Avenue to west city limits. 
(c)  Exceptions. Subsection (b) of this section shall not prohibit: 
(1)  Operation on street for loading and unloading. The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary for loading or unloading at a destination point, provided streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point and provided that any deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest way. 
(2)  Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city. 
(3)  Public utilities and building contractors. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or material man, while engaged in repair, maintenance, or construction of buildings, homes, streets, street improvements, or public utilities within the city. 
(4)  Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Clerk maintains maps. The city manager of the city shall have prepared a map or drawing showing thereon the said truck routes. Such map or drawing shall be designated "Truck Routes of the City of Tifton" and a copy of same shall be kept and maintained by the city clerk at city hall for inspection by the general public. 
(2)  Traffic engineering division maintains signs. The city, through its traffic engineering division, shall place appropriate signs along the streets designated as truck routes. Any streets not posted as a truck route shall not be considered a truck route for purposes of this section. 
(e)  Hazardous cargoes; overnight parking. No truck or other motor vehicle containing or loaded with volatile material, gas, combustible material or fluids, sewage, pollutants, chemicals or waste material shall be parked on any street in the city over one hour day or night. No truck shall be parked in a residential district overnight. 
(f)  Penalty for violation. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of an offense against the city, and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(g)  Warning and prosecution. Notwithstanding subsection (f) hereinabove, a written warning shall be issued upon the first violation of this section. The second or subsequent violation by the same person shall be prosecuted in the municipal court of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 15-81; Ord. No. 2004-030, § I, 12-6-2004) 
Sec. 78-34. - Obedience to quiet zones. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of the vehicle, except in an emergency. 
(Code 1974, § 15-82) 
Sec. 78-35. - Driving on play streets. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 15-83) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
Sec. 78-36. - Following, parking near fire apparatus. 
The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1974, § 15-12) 
Sec. 78-37. - Crossing fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1974, § 15-13) 
Sec. 78-38. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the roads of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the chief of police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them, shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
Sec. 78-39. - Public safety; restrictions on use of public streets, roads and alleys. 
The mayor and council shall, by ordinance or resolution, after conducting appropriate studies and investigations, adopt such regulations as deemed necessary to control traffic, as that term is defined within O.C.G.A. §40-1-1, on the public roads, streets, alleys, walkways, crosswalks and rights-of-way of the city as deemed necessary to protect to the health, welfare and safety of the citizenry. 
( Ord. No. 2014-04 , 1-16-2014) 
Secs. 78-40—78-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED REGULATIONS 

Sec. 78-56. - Reasonable, prudent rule. 
No person within the city shall drive a vehicle at any time at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under then existing conditions and circumstances, all taking into consideration actual and potential hazards then existing. 
(Code 1974, § 15-59(a)) 
Sec. 78-57. - General speed limit. 
Subject to the restrictions contained in this division, no person within the city shall drive a vehicle within the city at a speed greater than: 
(1)  Fifteen miles per hour on any alley; and 
(2)  Thirty miles per hour on any roadway other than an alley. 
(Code 1974, § 15-59(c)) 
Sec. 78-58. - Specific speed limits. 
The following speed zones in the city are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law. 
(1)  On-System: 

 
Signs to be installed by Ga. D.O.T. 
(2)  Off-System: 

 
Signs to be installed by City of Tifton. 
*** School zones hours are effective: 
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time - School days only 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time - School days only 
(Ord. No. 2001-007, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 2008-04 , 1-30-2008; Ord. No. 2012-02 , 2-6-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, 10-3-2016 ) 
Sec. 78-59. - Speed detection devices. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to use speed detection devices for the purpose of traffic control on the roads and streets in the city. 
(b)  Such speed detection devices shall be used only for the purpose of public safety and traffic control, and shall not be used for the purpose of raising revenue. 
Sec. 78-60. - Obstruction of traffic. 
No person within the city shall drive a vehicle at any time at such a slow rate of speed as to impede the lawful, normal and reasonable movement of traffic except to the extent existing conditions and circumstances require the reduced speed for the reasonable and prudent operation of the vehicle. 
(Code 1974, § 15-59(b)) 
Secs. 78-61—78-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Parking requirements for adult entertainment establishments, § 10-39; loading and unloading areas for refuse, § 66-18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; off-street parking and service requirements, app. A, § 7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 78-76. - Obstructing streets, alleys. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signals or signals of a police officer. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1974, § 15-102) 
Sec. 78-77. - Prohibition against left turns into parking spaces. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in such a way as to attempt or to complete a left turn into either parallel or angle parking on any roadway designed and authorized for traffic traveling in opposite directions. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § I, 2-1-1999) 
Sec. 78-78. - Parking trucks carrying flammable liquids. 
No person shall park a transport truck which is loaded with gasoline or other inflammable liquid and leave the transport truck unattended on any street or alley of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 15-103) 
Sec. 78-79. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway or sidewalk for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1974, § 15-104) 
Sec. 78-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-19, § I , adopted Aug. 4, 2014, repealed § 78-80, which pertained to removal of chalk mark on tire and derived from Code 1974, § 15-107. 
Sec. 78-81. - Standing for loading and unloading. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of passengers or material in any place marked as a loading zone, during the hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes or for loading and unloading of passengers exceed five minutes. 
(b)  No vehicle shall take on or discharge passengers when such vehicle is on a street, except at the right margin of the roadway; provided, however, on a one-way street a vehicle may take on or discharge passengers at either margin of the roadway. 
(Code 1974, § 15-111) 
Sec. 78-82. - Unlimited parking for loading, unloading, taxicabs, etc. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the city from permitting unlimited parking time for loading and unloading, for taxicab stands and for other matters of a similar nature. 
(Code 1974, § 15-112) 
Sec. 78-83. - Duties when leaving vehicle unattended. 
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, or when standing upon any perceptible grade, without effectively setting the brake thereon and turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. 
(Code 1974, § 15-113) 
Sec. 78-84. - Report, ticketing or violations; payment in lieu of penalty. 
(a)  When a parking enforcement officer or police officer shall find a vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article, a notice shall be attached to such vehicle indicating such vehicle has been parked in violation of the provisions of this article, the time of such violation, notice with respect to the manner of payment of the appropriate fine and a court date. 
(b)  If the fine is paid before the court date, the owner or operator will not be required to appear in court. If the fine is not paid before the court date, the owner or operator of the vehicle will be required to appear in municipal court to respond to the parking violation. Fine payments shall be paid to the city at the Tifton Police Department. 
(Code 1974, § 15-114; Ord. No. 2014-19, § I , 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 78-85. - Parking in deceleration or acceleration lanes prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any automobile, truck, bus, truck tractor, trailer, tractor, trailer combination, motorcycle, moped, or other motor vehicle within or upon the deceleration or acceleration lanes lying in the unincorporated areas of the city. 
(b)  Deceleration and acceleration lanes shall be defined for the purpose of this section as those strips of pavement lying adjacent to and to the east of the northbound lanes of traffic and adjacent to and to the west of the southbound lanes of traffic which are not part of the regular roadway but afford access into and out of the driveways and side roads along the highway. 
(c)  Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a violation of a city ordinance and shall be prosecuted in the municipal court. A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 78-86. - Criminal trespass by motor vehicle. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass by motor vehicle when the person, after having been requested not to do so by a law enforcement officer or by the owner or an authorized agent of the owner, parks or stands an occupied or unoccupied motor vehicle in, or repeatedly drives a motor vehicle through or within, a parking area which is located on privately owned property and is provided by a merchant, a group of merchants, or a shopping center or other similar facility for customers if: 
(1)  The parking area is identified by at least one sign as specified in this subsection, and if the parking area contains more than 150 parking spaces, then by at least one such sign at each entrance to the parking area, each such sign containing the following information in easy to read printing: 
a.  Notice of the elements of the crime of criminal trespass by motor vehicle; 
b.  Identification of the property which is reserved for customers' use only; 
c.  Identification of the merchant, group of merchants, or shopping center or other similar facility providing the parking area; and 
d.  Warning that violators will be prosecuted; and 
(2)  The motor vehicle is parked, is standing, or is being operated other than for the purpose of: 
a.  Transporting some person to or from the interior of the place of business of a merchant identified by the sign or signs in the parking area or to or from the interior of the shopping center or other facility so identified; 
b.  Making use of a telephone, vending machine, automatic teller machine, or other similar facility located in the parking area; 
c.  Meeting the requirements of a situation in which it has unexpectedly become impossible or impractical for the motor vehicle to continue to travel on the public roads; or 
d.  Carrying out an activity for which express permission has been given by the owner of the parking area or an authorized representative of the owner. 
(b)  A person who commits the offense of criminal trespass by motor vehicle shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine: 
(1)  Not to exceed $50.00 for the first such violation; 
(2)  Not to exceed $100.00 for the second such violation; and 
(3)  Not to exceed $150.00 for the third or subsequent such violation. 
(Code 1974, § 16-35) 
Sec. 78-87. - Downtown parking. 
Due to the commercial emphasis of the downtown business area and the need for consumers to obtain on-street parking reasonably close to businesses, the following on-street parking restrictions shall apply to the downtown business area: 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term weekday downtown area shall be defined as: 
(1)  Love Avenue/Main Street south of Fourth Street and north of Fifth Street (U.S. 82); 
(2)  Second Street east of Central Avenue and west of Tift Avenue; 
(3)  First Street and First Street Extension; 
(4)  3 rd Street east of Central Avenue and west of Tift Avenue; 
(5)  Commerce Way north of 5 th Street and south of Central Avenue; 
(6)  Brumby Way. 
On-street parking shall not be allowed for owners and employees of businesses in the weekday downtown area nor for residents or their guests in residential units (apartments, condominiums, etc.) located in the weekday downtown area between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. For the purposes of this section, owners shall include any person or entity that leases a building or any portion thereof in the weekday downtown area. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term Saturday downtown area shall be defined as Main Street south of Third Street and north of Fifth Street (U.S. 82). 
On-street parking shall not be allowed for owners and employees of businesses in the Saturday downtown area nor for residents or their guests in residential units (apartments, condominiums, etc.) located in the Saturday downtown area between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. For the purposes of this section, owners shall include any person or entity that leases a building or any portion thereof in the Saturday downtown area. 
(c)  Free public parking is hereby made available to such persons during the above-described prohibited times for on-street parking at the Cato Knight Parking Lot and the public parking lots adjacent to Commerce Way. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, these parking regulations and restrictions shall not apply to the following holidays: 
(1)  New Year's Day. 
(2)  Independence Day. 
(3)  Thanksgiving. 
(4)  Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § I, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 2011-04, § I, 4-4-2011; Ord. No. 2014-19, § I , 8-4-2014) 
Secs. 78-88—78-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FIRE LANES 

Sec. 78-91. - Fire lanes. 
It is the declared purpose of this division to provide for the designation and identification of fire lanes; for the manner, method and language for the posting of signs; to establish the penalty for violation of this division; to identify and designate the persons who have authority to enforce the division and the limits of such authority; to prohibit parking in fire lanes; to provide for the method of submitting properties to this division; to repeal all ordinances in conflict herewith; and for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § I, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 78-92. - Definitions. 
The words used in this division shall have the normal accepted meanings except as set forth below: 
Authorized emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle belonging to a public utility corporation and designated as an emergency vehicle by the department of public safety; a motor vehicle belonging to a fire department or a certified private vehicle belonging to a volunteer fireman or a firefighting association, partnership, or corporation; an ambulance; or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, or local law enforcement agency, provided such vehicle is in use as an emergency vehicle by one authorized to use it for that purpose. 
Enforcement officer(s) shall refer to any duly authorized law enforcement officer or civilian parking enforcement officer employed by the city. 
Fire lane(s) are areas designated by the fire official providing access for fire department vehicles to buildings, fire department connections and fire hydrants. This includes all alleys, driveways or lanes devoted to public use where the parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions can interfere with the ingress or egress of fire department vehicles for the protection of persons and properties including, but not limited to, shopping centers, theaters, hospitals, bowling lanes, churches, multifamily housing, and office buildings. 
Fire official means the fire officer or other designated authority, or their duly authorized representative, charged with the administration and enforcement of the fire prevention code. 
New building(s) means any commercial structure or public facility whose certificate of occupancy was issued after the effective date of this division. 
Property owner(s) shall refer to each person, firm, corporation, or entity possessing any estate, or leasehold right in the property being designated as fire lane(s). 
Ticket shall mean an order issued out of court by an enforcement officer of the city directing a violator of this division to comply with all civil fines as set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § I, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 78-93. - Designation; identification. 
(a)  The fire official shall designate signs and markings to delineate fire lanes. These signs shall be installed and maintained by the owner in a manner approved by the fire official. 
(b)  Every existing building and all new buildings shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way of designated fire lanes. 
(1)  Fire lanes shall have a minimum width of 20 feet and shall conform to the specifications issued by the fire official. 
(2)  The fire official shall have the authority to require an increase in the minimum access widths where they are inadequate for fire or rescue operations. 
(c)  Areas designated as fire lanes shall have signs posted meeting the following criteria unless otherwise directed by the fire official: 
(1)  Signs to read "No Parking Fire Lane." 
(2)  Letters shall not be less than two inches in height. 
(3)  One sign shall be posted at the beginning of the fire lane and one at the end of the fire lane; each sign shall be erected not more than 75 feet apart with the bottom of the sign no less than seven feet from the ground and shall not be more than four feet from the edge of the curb. 
(4)  The signs shall be installed so that the front of the sign is facing toward the direction from which traffic would normally be approaching. 
(5)  Where fire lanes run through parking areas where there is no adjacent curbing and posting of an approved metal sign is not practical, "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" may be required to be painted on the pavement in letters at least two feet high. 
(6)  The creation, deletion, or modification of a fire lane shall be done in the best professional judgment of the fire official. 
(d)  The fire official may order curbs to be painted yellow or other distinctive colors. 
(1)  When curbing is not provided, a yellow line may be required to be painted on the pavement along the perimeter and within the limits of the fire lane. 
(e)  Any owner of a building aggrieved by the decision of the fire official under this section may appeal from the decision of the fire official to the city manager within 30 days from the date of the fire official's decision. All appeals to the city manager shall be in writing setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The city manager shall issue a written decision to the owner within 30 days from the receipt of the written appeal from the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § I, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 78-94. - Approval; subsequent maintenance. 
All fire lanes shall be approved by the fire official pursuant to these regulations, and thereafter these fire lanes shall be maintained by the property owner. Designated fire lanes or roads deemed necessary for fire department access by the fire official shall be maintained in a passable condition. Private property owners or their representatives shall be responsible for keeping all fire lanes on their property free from obstructions. Public property owners, the City of Tifton, or their representatives shall be responsible for keeping all fire lanes within the city's jurisdiction free of obstructions. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § I, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 78-95. - Unlawful erection of sign. 
No person or property owner shall place, erect or maintain any sign for control of parking or traffic which includes the words "Fire Lane" unless such location has been designated a fire lane by the fire official. Any failure to meet the applicable requirements specified in subsection 78-93(c) shall be subject to a fine of $150.00 for each violation; provided, however, that the fine will be waived if the required specifications are made within 14 days from the date of citation. If that private or public property owner fails or refuses to meet said requirements on his property within such 14 days he shall, on the 15th day after receiving the citation, be subject to the $150.00 fine for each violation and an additional $10.00 fine for each violation for each day that the owner fails to comply with the provisions of this section until the area is properly designated and constructed. Each additional day shall be construed as an additional violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § I, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 78-96. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, to park in, stop in, allow a vehicle to stand in or to otherwise obstruct an area designated and marked as a fire lane; provided, however, this section shall not apply to the parking of an authorized emergency vehicle on official business. 
(1)  Fire lanes within residential, educational, industrial and commercial areas may be used for temporary stopping to pick up or discharge passengers or supplies provided that such vehicles be stopped parallel and immediately adjacent to the curb, and provided that a licensed operator occupy and be in control of the vehicle while it is so stopped. 
(2)  In any prosecution under this section, proof that the vehicle described in the ticket, summons or warrant was parked in violation of this division, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute a rebuttable evidentiary presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place and at the time such violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § I, 4-6-09) 
Secs. 78-97—78-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 

Sec. 78-121. - Consent of manager required. 
All parades or processions in the city are hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful unless, prior thereto, the written consent of the manager of the city is secured in the manner set out in this article. 
(Code 1974, § 15-128) 
Sec. 78-122. - Application required; contents. 
Any person desiring to have a parade or procession on the streets or sidewalks of the city shall first make a written application to the city manager, which shall set out the organization or body desiring to have the parade or procession, the route of the parade or procession, the time and date of the parade or procession and the approximate number of individuals and vehicles to be in the parade or procession. 
(Code 1974, § 15-129) 
Sec. 78-123. - Time for presentation of application and action thereon. 
The application for a parade or procession shall be presented to the city manager at least 48 hours prior to the proposed parade or procession, and the city manager, during the next 24 hours, shall either give his written consent for such parade or procession to be held or refuse such consent. 
(Code 1974, § 15-130) 
Sec. 78-124. - Rejection of application. 
Should the city manager refuse to give his written consent for the parade or procession, the parade or procession shall not be held, and any person or persons participating in a parade or procession, which has not been consented to by the city manager in the manner set out in this article, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1974, § 15-131) 
Sec. 78-125. - Identification of funeral processions. 
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by burning lights. 
(Code 1974, § 15-132) 
Sec. 78-126. - Manner of driving. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand edge of the roadway as practical and follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Code 1974, § 15-133) 
Sec. 78-127. - Driving through processions prohibited. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or other authorized procession while they are in motion. 
(Code 1974, § 15-134) 
Sec. 78-128. - Remaining in funeral procession. 
No driver, once his vehicle is in a funeral procession, shall leave it except when it disburses. 
(Code 1974, § 15-135) 
Secs. 78-129—78-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOTORIZED CARTS 

Sec. 78-151. - Findings; definitions. 
The city council finds that the municipal streets located within the corporate limits of the city, other than the streets hereinafter specifically excepted, are designed and constructed so as to safely permit their use by motorized carts (as hereinafter defined) in combination with regular vehicular traffic. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driver means the person driving and having physical control over a motorized cart. 
Motorized cart means any motor vehicle that has no less than three wheels, capable of a maximum level ground speed of less than 20 miles per hour with a maximum gross vehicle unladen or empty weight of 1,300 pounds, and is commonly referred to as golf carts. Specifically excluded from this definition are those motorized conveyances commonly referred to as ATVs (including four-wheelers, mules, gators) and mobility aids. 
Owner means the person holding title to the motorized cart or who has a majority ownership interest of the motorized cart. 
Parking area means those areas accessible to the public by motor vehicular traffic and which are designated for the temporary parking of motor vehicles, usually in places referred to as parking lots. 
Authorized street means the public roadways of the city by whatever name (e.g., road, alley, avenue, highway, route, boulevard, etc.) that: 
(1)  Has a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less; 
(2)  Provides for no more than one lane of vehicular traffic per direction; 
(3)  Is not designated as part of either the state or federal highway system; 
(4)  Has not been designated as an unauthorized street by ordinance or resolution by the city council. 
Unauthorized street means the public roadways of the city by whatever name (e.g., road, alley, avenue, highway, route, boulevard, etc.) that has been designated by the city council by ordinance or resolution as an unauthorized street. 
( Ord. No. 2013-08 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 78-152. - Registration. 
Before any motorized cart may be operated over an authorized street or parking area of the city it shall be registered with and inspected by the Tifton Police Department. If the motorized cart is compliant with local and state law, then a decal shall be issued from that department signifying its registration. The registration requirements include the following specifics: 
(1)  Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a motorized cart; 
(2)  The person registering the motorized cart is the owner of the motorized cart. 
(3)  The decal received from the Tifton Police Department upon registration shall be attached and displayed upon the motorized cart so as to be plainly visible. 
(4)  The registration application shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of owner. 
b.  Model, make, name and motorized cart identification number. 
c.  Current driver's license number of owner and all authorized drivers. 
d.  Such other information which the city may require. 
(5)  The registration application shall be accompanied by a fee of $15.00. 
(6)  The registration application shall be accompanied by evidence of personal liability insurance coverage consistent with the minimum requirements of Georgia law for operational motor vehicles. 
(7)  The registration shall be effective until such time as revoked or the motorized cart is transferred to a new owner. If the registered owner transfers ownership of the motorized cart, the registered owner must notify the Tifton Police Department of the transfer. 
(8)  It shall be the owner of the motorized carts responsibility to ensure the information on the application remains current and accurate. 
The Tifton City Council may, at its discretion, waive registration requirements for city sponsored special events of a limited duration. 
( Ord. No. 2013-08 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 78-153. - Revocation. 
The registration permit may be revoked if: 
(1)  The permit holder no longer has a valid driver's license. 
(2)  The owner or driver of a motorized cart fails to abide by the rules and regulations of this article. 
(3)  The owner or driver of a motorized cart fails to abide by the traffic laws in the use of a motorized cart on an authorized street or parking area. 
( Ord. No. 2013-08 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 78-154. - Transfer. 
Upon transfer of ownership of the motorized cart to a person who intends to operate it over the authorized streets and parking areas, the new owner must register the motorized cart as outlined hereinabove in section 78-152. Such registration by the new owner must occur within ten days of the transfer of ownership. 
( Ord. No. 2013-08 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 78-155. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized cart on any street within the city that is not an authorized street. 
(b)  Only those persons who hold a valid motor vehicle driver's license and who are on the approved driver's list provided by the owner to the Tifton Police Department at the time of registration may drive a motorized cart on the authorized streets and parking areas of the city. 
(c)  All drivers of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the authorized streets and parking areas of the city. 
(d)  A motorized cart shall not be operated on the sidewalks at any time. 
(e)  A motorized cart may be operated over those authorized streets and parking areas only during daylight areas unless such motorized cart is equipped with functional headlights, taillights and turn signals. 
(f)  Every driver of a motorized cart shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the rules of the road and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under this chapter except as to special regulations in this article and to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application. 
(g)  All motorized carts are entitled to a full use of a lane on the authorized streets and parking areas of the city and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any motorized cart of the full use of a lane. 
(h)  The driver of a motorized cart shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken. 
(i)  No driver shall operate a motorized cart between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines of rows of vehicles. 
(j)  The driver of a motorized cart operating on an authorized street may cross a multi-lane road only at a signalized intersection designated for such purpose. 
(k)  The driver of a motorized cart operating on an authorized street may cross a state or federal route only at intersections that have been designated for such purpose by the state department of transportation. 
(l)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city shall also apply to drivers and occupants of motorized carts. 
(m)  All drivers and passengers must remain seated at all times during the operation of the motorized cart. No person may sit on the driver's lap during the operation of the motorized cart. 
( Ord. No. 2013-08 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 78-156. - Equipment. 
Each motorized cart shall display an amber strobe light so as to warn approaching travelers to decrease their speed because of the danger of colliding with such vehicle. Such amber strobe light shall be mounted in a manner so as to be visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet from the front and rear of such vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 2013-08 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 78-157. - Liability. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the city for any injuries to persons or property which may result from the operation of a motorized cart or by the failure of the city to revoke said permit. 
( Ord. No. 2013-08 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 78-158. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be punished as follows: 
In addition to whatever violations the driver of the motorized cart may be subject to pursuant to Georgia law and elsewhere found within the Code of Ordinances and the City Charter, the registered owner of the motorized cart shall be subject to the following civil penalties: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of not less than $50.00; and, if not timely paid, revocation of the permit. 
(2)  For the second offense, a fine of not less than $100.00; and, if not timely paid, revocation of the permit. 
(3)  For the third offense, the registration for the motorized cart shall be revoked. In the event the registration is revoked under this section, the motorized cart cannot thereafter be re-registered by the same owner or any family member for a period of two years. Further, such other penalties shall be applied as provided in the Code of Ordinances and City Charter in the sound discretion and judgment of the presiding Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Tifton. 
Sec. 78-159. - Vehicle for hire. 
Under no circumstances whatsoever can a motorized cart be used as a vehicle for hire as such term is described and used in chapter 90 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2013-08 , 7-1-13) 
Chapter 82 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; construction codes for public utilities, § 18-36; water supply and sewage disposal facilities, § 18-37; stormwater management plans, § 18-171 et seq.; businesses and business regulations, ch. 22; floods, ch. 42; advertising—posting on utility poles, § 42-31; planning and zoning, ch. 54; historic preservation, § 58-131 et seq.; sewers, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; street trees and public utilities, § 86-4; subdivisions, app. B; water supply and sanitary sewerage in subdivisions, app. B, § 6-5; stormwater drainage, app. B, § 6-8; utilities, app. B, § 6-9. 
State Law reference— Water Resources Center, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; authority to provide stormwater, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Right of entry of personnel. 
The officers and employees of the city shall have the right to enter the premises of any consumer at any reasonable time to examine the pipes and fixtures, the quantity of water, sewer or gas used and the manner of its use; and in case of any fraudulent representation on the part of any consumer or evidence of the unnecessary waste of water or gas, the supply of such service shall be stopped. 
(Code 1974, § 26-13) 
Sec. 82-2. - Tapping mains, using, tampering with curb cock. 
No person shall tap any main or connect any service pipe therewith, nor turn on or shut off the water at any corporation curb cock without authority from the city on regular form; provided, however, in the event of an accident or freezing weather, the user of city water or gas is authorized to shut off the water or gas at the curb cock. 
(Code 1974, § 26-16) 
Sec. 82-3. - Users to pay for service pipes and fixtures. 
Water and gas service users shall pay for all tap service pipes and fixtures. 
(Code 1974, § 26-17) 
Sec. 82-4. - City to make connections; fee. 
The city shall cause all connections to be made from the main to the curb cock, for which all consumers of water or gas service shall pay the uniform or agreed rate in advance. 
(Code 1974, § 26-18) 
Sec. 82-5. - Approval of pipes and fixtures. 
Water or gas pipes or fixtures shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent before the water or gas service shall be turned on. 
(Code 1974, § 26-19) 
Sec. 82-6. - Reconnection without authority. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to turn his water or gas service back on after such service has been cut off by the city for failure to pay any bill. 
(Code 1974, § 26-23) 
Sec. 82-7. - Notice to fire department when main shut off. 
No main or valve conducting water through the streets shall be closed without notice having first been given to the fire department. 
(Code 1974, § 26-26) 
Sec. 82-8. - Duty to maintain plumbing. 
All pipes and fixtures on any premises shall be kept in good repair by the user of city water. 
(Code 1974, § 26-27) 
Sec. 82-9. - Furnishing service to others. 
No water, sewer or gas service user shall be allowed to supply such service to other persons or families, except by special consent of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 26-28) 
Sec. 82-10. - Waste prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully waste or cause to be wasted any water or gas from the municipal supply system. 
(Code 1974, § 26-29) 
Sec. 82-11. - Damaging system. 
No person shall, without legal right or authority, misplace, injure, deface, damage or interfere with, in any manner, any hydrant, pipe or fixture belonging or in any manner relating to the water, sewer or gas service system of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 26-30) 
Secs. 82-12—82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 82-31. - Water and sewer rates and charges. 
The deposits, rates, fees and charges imposed by the city for water, sewer and gas service furnished by the city shall be as established by the city council from time to time and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. All of such charges, to the extent applicable, shall be charged by the city and shall be payable by each person and entity who or which utilizes water, sewer and gas services and facilities of the city. 
(Code 1974, §§ 26-1, 26-1.1) 
Sec. 82-32. - Application for service required. 
Application for the use of water, sewer or gas shall be made to the city clerk on the form prescribed and shall be signed by the owner of the property to be supplied or by his authorized agent. 
(Code 1974, § 26-14) 
Sec. 82-33. - Application constitutes agreement. 
The application for water, sewer or gas service shall be held to bind the applicant to pay the established rates and comply with this chapter and all applicable rules and regulations. 
(Code 1974, § 26-15) 
Sec. 82-34. - Meters—Required. 
All water or gas services shall be provided with meters of suitable size, to be furnished and installed by the city under the direction of the superintendent. Water or gas shall not be turned on at any new service until a meter is installed and paid for. 
(Code 1974, § 26-20) 
Sec. 82-35. - Same—Prices. 
The prices to be charged for meters installed by the city shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1974, § 26-21) 
Sec. 82-36. - Deposits for tenant-occupied multifamily property. 
(a)  When water, sewer or gas services [utility services] are supplied to property not occupied by the owner, which property is rented or leased to more than one family unit (multifamily), and these units do not have individual meters, but each family is supplied from one meter, the owner of such property shall be responsible to the city for payment of all utility services provided to the property. Prior to any utility being supplied to such property, the owner of such property shall place with the city a deposit as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for each family, apartment, residence unit, or mobile home connected to the meter and being supplied with water through the meter. 
(b)  If any utility bill is not paid within 30 days from the date of its being due, the deposit provided for in this section of this section shall be applied on the payment of the bill. 
(c)  Should such deposit not be sufficient to pay in full any utility bill incurred, the city shall discontinue the utility services to the property and the owner of the property shall pay in full such bill before such utility services shall again be cut on to such property by the city, and in addition a restoration fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall be paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20 , § I, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 82-37. - Prerequisites to resuming service. 
Should the city cut off the water or gas service being supplied to a person for failure to pay his bill, which bill is subsequently paid in full, such service shall then be cut on again by the city upon such person paying a fee as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1974, § 26-24) 
Sec. 82-38. - When bills due. 
All bills for water, sewer, garbage and gas are due to the city upon receipt of the bills. 
(Code 1974, § 26-2) 
Sec. 82-39. - Discontinuance of services for nonpayment of bill. 
Should any person or other entity fail or refuse to pay in full all of their bills for water, sewer, garbage and gas within 30 days after receipt of the bills, the city may discontinue all utilities and services as set out in this section without further notification to those parties who are delinquent. 
(Code 1974, § 26-3) 
Sec. 82-40. - Right of hearing prior to disconnection of utilities; records; nonpayment by tenants. 
(a)  The city shall not terminate any utility service, whether it be water, gas or other utility, for nonpayment of the bill without first affording the customer a hearing if a hearing is desired. 
(b)  No person shall have his utility cut off by the city for the nonpayment of a bill not incurred by him, or by the owner of the property in the event the user is a tenant and the owner is the customer. 
(c)  All of the provisions set out in this section shall apply both to the customer and to the user of the utility in the event the customer is the owner of the property and the user is a tenant occupying the property where the utility is being used. 
(d)  Prior to terminating any utility for the nonpayment of a utility bill, the user and/or the owner shall be served and have delivered to him in person or at his home or place of business a notice advising that for the nonpayment of the bill, his utility is to be terminated on a certain date, but that prior to this a hearing will be afforded him at which time he may present his protest, challenge to the bill, or objections, such notice to specify the time, date and place of the hearing with the notice also setting out that the hearing will either be before the city manager or his designated agent. Such hearing will not be held less than four days from the date this notification is given the user and/or the owner. 
(e)  At such hearing the user and/or the owner, as the case may be, may present any complaint, protest, or challenge to the bill that he may have in opposition to the termination of the utility. 
(f)  A record will be kept by the person holding the hearing of each hearing and of the specific complaint, protest or challenge to the bill made by the user and/or the owner. 
(Code 1974, § 26-4) 
Sec. 82-41. - Tampering with meters; diversion of services. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to destroy, damage or tamper with any meter owned or controlled by the city or by any company or corporation engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied or intentionally to divert any of the services of the city or such company or corporation, or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the city or such company or corporation, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the city or such company or corporation. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly receive the benefit of acts of diversion of or tampering with any meter owned or controlled by the city or by any company or corporation engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service without the proper charge. 
(d)  Proof that any of the acts specified in this section was done on premises in possession of an accused, or that the accused received the benefit of any such act, shall be prima facie evidence that the accused committed such act or aided and abetted in the commission thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 26-5) 
Sec. 82-42. - Utility bond required for hotels, motels and restaurants. 
Prior to the city supplying gas, sewage, water, and garbage services to any motel, hotel or restaurant, such motel, hotel or restaurant shall have and file with the city a utility bond payable to the city conditioned upon the principal and surety paying to the city all bills for gas, sewage, water and garbage service which are incurred by the principal and not paid. 
(Code 1974, § 26-6) 
Secs. 82-43—82-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Acquisition, construction and operation of water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 82-71—82-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 82-86. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved means accepted by the city. 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances under pressure into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any source or sources other than its intended source. 
Backflow by back-pressure means the reverse flow of water caused when the downstream pressure becomes greater than the pressure in the potable water supply system. 
Backflow by back-siphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
Backflow preventer means a device or means designed to prevent backflow. 
(1)  Air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of such vessel. An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the vessel; and, in no case less than one inch. When an air gap is used at the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water system, an emergency bypass shall be installed around the air gap system and an approved reduced pressure principle device shall be installed in the bypass system. 
(2)  Reduced pressure principle device means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve between the two check valves, tightly closing shutoff valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at a level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In case of leakage of either of the check valves, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must be readilyaccessible for in-line maintenance and testing and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged. 
(3)  Double check valve assembly means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and approved testing agency for backflow prevention devices. To be approved these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing. 
Building inspector means the building inspector of the city. 
Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
Cross connection means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the potable water system. A water service connection between a public potable water distribution system and a customer's water distribution system which is cross connected to a contaminated fixture, industrial fluid system or with a potentially contaminated supply or auxiliary water system, constitutes one type of cross connection. Other types of cross connections include connectors such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices, sliding multiport tube, solid connections, etc. 
Cross connection control by containment means the installation of an approved backflow prevention device at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water system; or it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention device on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of cross connection. 
Cross connection control coordinator means the cross connection control coordinator of the city. 
Cross connections, controlled, means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
Hazard, degree of, means an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system of the city located both within and without the city limits. 
(1)  Hazard, contamination, means any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgment of the city, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. An example of a health hazard is a structural defect, including cross connections, in a water supply system. 
(2)  Hazard, plumbing, means a plumbing type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker, airgap separation or backflow prevention device. Unprotected plumbing type cross connections are considered to be a health hazard. 
(3)  Hazard, pollutional, means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system, but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
(4)  Hazard, system, means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
Industrial fluids system means any system located either within or without the city limits containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies, circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquids and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes. 
Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use. 
Water, nonpotable, means water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. 
Water, potable, means any water which, according to recognized standards is safe for human consumption. 
Water purveyor means the city. 
Water service connections means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connections shall also include water service connections from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
Water, used, means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
(Code 1974, § 19-12) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-87. - Regulations governing cross connection control. 
To protect the water supply system of the city both within and without the city limits, the following regulations are adopted: 
(1)  No installation of potable water supply piping or part thereof shall be made in such a manner that it will be possible for used, unclean, polluted or contaminated water, mixtures or substances to enter any portion or such piping from any tank, receptacle, equipment or plumbing fixture by reason of back-siphonage, or any other cause, either during normal use and operation thereof or when any such tank, receptacle, equipment or plumbing fixture is flooded, or subject to pressure in excess of the pressure in the hot or cold water piping. 
(2)  No person shall make a connection or allow one to exist between pipes of conduits carrying domestic water supplied by any public or private water service system, and any pipes, conduits or fixtures containing or carrying water from any other source or containing or carrying water which has been used for any purpose whatsoever, or any piping carrying chemicals, liquids, gases, or any substances whatsoever, unless there is provided an approved backflow prevention device. The approval of the city must be obtained before any connection is made between the domestic supply and any contaminated, polluted or auxiliary water system. 
(3)  No plumbing fixture, device or construction shall be installed or maintained or shall be connected to any domestic water supply, when such installation or connection may provide a possibility of polluting such water supply or may provide a cross connection between a distributing system of water for drinking and domestic purposes and water which may become contaminated by such plumbing fixture device or construction unless there is provided an approved backflow prevention device. 
(4)  No water piping supplied by any private water supply system or industrial piping system shall be connected to the public potable water system without the approval from the city. 
(5)  No person shall construct, maintain or operate a physical arrangement whereby a public water system is or may be connected directly or indirectly with a nonpotable water system or nonpermitted water system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, liquid gases, sewage or other waste of unknown or unsafe quality, which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as the results of backflow, bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other temporary, permanent or potential connections through which or because of which backflow or back-siphonage could or would occur. 
(6)  A supplier of water of any person having possession or control of facilities which may cause the contamination of the public water system has the responsibility to prevent water from unapproved sources or any contaminants from entering the public water system by such physical arrangements cited in subsection (5) of this section. 
(7)  Any person connecting to and purchasing water from a public water system and reselling it to others is considered a supplier of the water so purchased as well as a consumer, and is also responsible for the quality of such water. 
(8)  A supplier shall, when requested by the city or the United States Environmental Protection Agency, develop a control program for the elimination and prevention of all cross connections. A written plan for the program shall be submitted to the city for review and approval within one year or less in accordance with a written request by the city. When the plan is approved, the supplier shall implement the program immediately. 
(9)  The procedures for backflow and back-siphonage prevention and cross connection control shall conform to those recommended by the American Water Works Association, Manual 14, and the United States Environmental Protection Agency Cross-Connection Manual. 
(10)  Potable water supply piping, water discharge outlets, backflow prevention devices or similar equipment shall be so located as to make impossible their submergence in any contaminated or polluted liquid or substance. 
(11)  The building inspector shall enforce the provisions of this article so as to ensure the potability of the consumer's water supply, from the point of entrance of the public water supply to the extremities of the consumer's water system. The building inspector has primary enforcing responsibility of new installations, alterations or repairs of water supply systems. The building inspector shall provide the cross connection control coordinator and the water purveyor with the assistance required to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(12)  The water purveyor is primarily responsible for the prevention of contamination and pollution of the public water mains. Such responsibility begins at the point of origin of the public supply and includes adequate treatment facilities and water mains, and ends at the point of entrance to the consumer's water system, provided adequate backflow and back-siphonage protection is maintained on all water supply systems directly connected to the water purveyor's public system. 
(Code 1974, § 19-13) 
Sec. 82-88. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The cross connection control coordinator shall enforce the provisions of this article so as to ensure the potability of the consumer's water supply from the point of entrance of the public water supply to the extremities of the consumer's water system. The cross connection control coordinator has primary enforcing responsibility of new installations, alterations or repairs of water supply systems. The cross connection control coordinator shall also provide the water purveyor with the assistance required to enforce the provisions of this article on existing water supply systems. 
(b)  The water purveyor is primarily responsible for the prevention of contamination and pollution of the public water mains. Such responsibility begins at the point of origin of the public water supply and includes adequate treatment facilities and water mains, and ends at the point of entrance to the consumer's water system, provided adequate backflow and back-siphonage protection is maintained on all water supply systems directly connected to the water purveyor's public system. 
(c)  The cross connection control coordinator is responsible for supervising the prevention of contamination and pollution of the public water main, all water supply systems and all water sources. Such responsibility extends from the point of origin of the public water supply to and including all extremities of the consumer's supply and its actual use. The cross connection control coordinator has prime supervisory responsibility for administration and enforcement of those portions of the cross connection control and backflow prevention program applicable to existing water supply systems and water sources. 
(d)  The consumer has the prime responsibility of preventing contaminants and pollutants from entering the water supply system, and from his water supply system. The consumer shall protect his water supply system against actual or potential cross connection, and possible backflow conditions as required by this article and other applicable regulations. He shall ensure the necessary plumbing permits are obtained for new water supply system installations, and for alterations or repair to existing systems, as required by this article, with all work and inspections done by an approved plumbing contractor. 
(Code 1974, § 19-14) 
Sec. 82-89. - Existing facilities. 
(a)  All premises of the type where cross connections are suspect shall be surveyed by the city to determine if a detailed inspection will be required. 
(b)  The owners of the suspected premises shall be notified in writing 30 days in advance to secure an appointment for inspection of the premises. The owner or his authorized representative will be required to accompany the inspector during the tour of the premises. 
(c)  An inspection form will be completed by the inspector and signed by the owner or his representative. The owner shall be made aware of any corrective measures that need to be made. 
(d)  All official letters of notification shall be sent to the owner indicating what corrective measures must be taken. 
(e)  Upon conformance of the requirements in the notification letter, the owner shall immediately notify the city to schedule a date for reinspection. 
(Code 1974, § 19-15) 
Sec. 82-90. - New facilities. 
(a)  Each applicant for a county or city building permit that will connect to the public water system of the city will be required to complete a questionnaire. 
(b)  The building inspector shall forward a copy of the questionnaire along with blueprint of proposed construction to the cross connection control coordinator. 
(c)  The cross connection control coordinator will notify the new customer in writing and arrange a meeting to discuss the requirements for backflow prevention. Procedures for inspection of the device will be discussed at this meeting. 
(Code 1974, § 19-16) 
Sec. 82-91. - Certification of backflow prevention device testers. 
(a)  A person wishing to become certified as a backflow prevention device tester must complete a comprehensive training program approved by the city. If an individual wishes to be placed on the city's list of approved backflow prevention device testers, he must submit his request in writing to the cross connection control coordinator with a copy of his certificate of completion. The city shall notify the individual in writing as to his approval or denial. 
(b)  The cross connection control coordinator may, from time to time, establish additional or alternate requirements for an individual's name to be placed on the city's list of approved backflow prevention device testers. The additional or alternate requirements shall be consistent with the intent of the program. 
(Code 1974, § 19-17) 
Sec. 82-92. - Records and maintenance. 
(a)  The owner of a backflow prevention device shall be notified 30 days in advance by the cross connection control coordinator as to when his device will require inspection. 
(b)  Attached to the notification letter shall be a test and maintenance form which must be completed by the owner's certified backflow prevention tester. This form, once completed, shall be submitted to the city no later than 30 days from the inspection date. Failure to do so may result in discontinuance of water service. 
(c)  Every person required to have a backflow prevention device shall have it inspected at least once each year by an approved backflow prevention device tester who will file his report on the inspection with the city within ten days following the inspection. 
(Code 1974, § 19-18) 
Sec. 82-93. - Noncompliance; violations; abatement. 
(a)  Service of water to any premises shall be disconnected by the city when the installation of a backflow prevention device as required by this article or other rules or regulations of the city, is not installed, tested and maintained; or, if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if unprotected cross connections exist on the premises and there is inadequate backflow protection at the service connection. Water service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. All turnoff and turn-on service charges shall be paid by the consumer. 
(b)  Whenever the cross connection control coordinator determines that there has been a violation of this article, he shall notify the owner in writing of such violation, and within 30 days the owner will submit a plan for correcting the violation. 
(c)  The city manager may cite the owner to the municipal court of the city for a violation of any provision of this article. 
(d)  The city manager may in the name of the city file in county superior court a suit seeking the issuance of an injunction, damages, or other appropriate relief to enforce the provisions of this article or other applicable law or regulation. Suit may be brought to recover any and all damages suffered by the city as a result of any action or inaction of any customer of the water system or other person who causes or suffers damages to occur to the water system of the city due to a violation of this article. Suit may be filed by the city against any customer of the water system or owner for any expenses, losses, or damages of any kind or nature suffered by the city as the result of a violation of this article. 
(e)  The city manager may issue a show cause notice to any customer or owner directing him to appear before the city manager at a specified date and time to show cause why water service should not be discontinued for a violation of this article. The customer or owner may present his defense at such hearing. The notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the customer or owner or delivered personally to him at least ten days prior to the hearing date. 
(Code 1974, § 19-19) 
Secs. 82-94—82-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER PROVISION EXTENSION POLICIES 

Sec. 82-111. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide uniform policies and procedures relative to the provision and extension of water service by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1998-19, § 26-300, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 82-112. - Application required. 
Any person desiring water service shall make application for such service at the office of the utilities department on a form to be furnished by the department. The form must be executed by the property owner or his authorized agent or provide the size of tap requested and a proper street address. 
(Ord. No. 1998-19, § 26-301, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 82-113. - Deposits. 
Applicants for water service who are commercial establishments shall be required, at the time of application for service, to make a deposit equal to the three-month bill of the average customer in that class. Tenants in a single-family residence or mobile home shall be required, at the time of application for service, to make a deposit as determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1998-19, § 26-302, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 82-114. - Meter installation fees. 
At the time of application for water service, the applicant shall also pay a meter installation fee in accordance with the rates set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1998-19, § 26-303, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 82-115. - Impact fee. 
The city council may, at its discretion, assess an impact fee by resolution on new water service customers at the time of application for service at such future date. The impact fee, which will be equal to or less than the equity in the water system established by existing customers through the payment of water rates, will be based upon a system of equivalent residential units (ERU). 
(Ord. No. 1998-19, § 26-304, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 82-116. - Basin specific fee. 
If the city undertakes at its expense a water system project to provide service for an unserved area, the city manager may require a basin specific fee to be assessed against each new customer who connects to the system to recoup a portion of the capital costs of the project. The fee shall be based upon the number of equivalent residential units (ERU) the project was designed to serve. 
(Ord. No. 1998-19, § 26-305, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 82-117. - Irrigation meters. 
Any person desiring the installation of a water meter for irrigation purposes shall make application for such water meter in accordance with the provisions of section 82-112. At the time of application, the applicant will be required to pay the meter installation fee to be set by resolution as set forth in section 82-114. 
(Ord. No. 1998-19, § 26-306, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 82-118. - Water main extension. 
(a)  All applications for water service that require the extension of a water main will be evaluated by the director of utilities department to determine the estimated cost of the proposed extension for submittal to the city manager for his approval. Based upon the availability of funds, the city manager is authorized to approve or disapprove any application for water service requiring a water main extension. A fee as set by resolution of the city council shall be required of the applicant at the time of application for water service requiring a water main extension. This fee is to defray the costs associated with the development of the estimated costs of the extension. The fee will be applied to the costs of the extension should it be undertaken; otherwise, the fee shall be forfeited. Cost estimates are not binding upon the city. 
(b)  Within the corporate limits, the city will extend the water main to the applicant's property line a distance of no more than 300 feet at no cost to the applicant. For extensions in excess of 300 feet, the applicant shall be required to pay the costs of the additional material required plus ten percent to defray the city's costs of purchasing, inventory and handling of the material. 
(c)  Outside the corporate limits of the city, applicants are responsible for 100 percent of the costs of the main extension including all planning, engineering, material, labor, equipment and pavement replacement costs. Construction of the water main extension shall be done by a licensed contractor in strict accordance with city standards for material and workmanship. The work will be inspected by utilities department personnel before being accepted into the city system. The city manager may approve an exception to this policy based upon the applicant's binding agreement to have his property annexed into the city at its convenience, in which case the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall apply. 
(d)  All costs of easements, jacking and/or boring, fire hydrants or other related costs which may be required for the water main extension are the responsibility of the applicant. The city shall have no obligation or responsibility for the costs of any on-site facilities either inside or outside the corporate limits. 
(e)  All water main extensions shall include the installation of fire hydrants at a distance of not more than 600 feet apart. The cost of the hydrants and related appurtenances shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of this section and any applicable resolutions of the city council relating thereto. 
(f)  All water main extensions shall be of a minimum of eight inches. The city may, in its discretion, require the installation of water mains larger than eight inches, in which case the city will be responsible for the additional costs directly resulting from the oversizing. 
(g)  Prior to any application being approved by the city manager and the work authorized, the applicant shall pay all estimated costs required under the provisions of these regulations. Any difference between the actual and estimated costs of the extension, either upward or downward, shall be reconciled as necessary upon completion of the project. 
(h)  In the event that a water main extension makes water available to other property owners abutting such extension, such other property owners shall be required to pay to the city their proportionate share, if any, of the costs of the extension borne by the original applicant on a front foot basis before being permitted to connect to such extension. The charges collected will be refunded by the city to the original applicant, but in no case will the refunds exceed the amount paid by the original applicant. Any refunds due to the original applicant will be paid, without interest, on March 31 and September 30, as appropriate. 
(i)  All liability for payment of refunds by the city shall cease seven years from the date of payment by the applicant for water main extension. The assignment by the applicant of any money due under the provisions of this refund policy without the written consent of the city is prohibited. 
(j)  In the event that a water main is extended, either inside or outside the corporate limits, the costs of which is paid in part or in full by the city, applicants who wish to connect to the main shall be required to pay a connection charge in addition to the meter installation fee as referenced in section 82-114. The connection charge shall be applicant's proportionate share, on a footage basis, of the city's share of the cost of the extension. If the water main installed is larger than eight inches, the applicant shall be required to pay only its proportionate share of the cost of an eight-inch main. 
(k)  All water mains extended under the provisions of these regulations, whether inside or outside the city, shall become the sole property of the city upon the connection with the city water system and shall thenceforth be maintained by the city. 
(l)  Anything in these regulations to the contrary notwithstanding, the city in its sole discretion shall have the right to disapprove any application for water service when it determines that it is not in its best interest to do so based on monetary or manpower constraints or on other considerations such as the unavailability of water supply. Furthermore, the city reserves the right to extend its water system on a planned basis in the best interest of orderly community-wide growth. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 26-307, 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 82-119. - Turnoff/turn-on policy. 
All of the provisions set forth in this article shall apply to the user of the utility service and to the owner of the property being served. The term "customer" shall mean the name on the account to which the service is charged and the user of the service at the physical location. Termination of service shall follow these procedures: 
(1)  Customers with unpaid balances on their water bill will receive a delinquent notice 30 days after their regular monthly bill has been mailed. The delinquent notice will provide a due date that is seven days after the notice is issued, after which date service will be terminated. 
(2)  The delinquent notice will also advise that prior to service being terminated, a hearing will be afforded at which time the user and/or owner may present his protest or challenge to the bill. The notice will specify the date, time and place of the hearing and whether the hearing will be held before the city manager or his designated agent. The hearing will be held not less than four days after the notice is given. A record will be kept by the person holding the hearing and of the specific protest and/or challenge made by the user and/or owner. 
(3)  Service turned off for nonpayment of a water bill will be turned on only after payment of the delinquent bill plus a fee to be set by resolution of the city council to cover the cost of the additional trips to the service location by utilities department personnel. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 26-360, 6-1-1998) 
Secs. 82-120—82-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WATER SHORTAGE MEASURES 

Sec. 82-136. - Purposes. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for emergency procedures to prevent threats to public health and safety arising from periods of water shortage and drought and to prevent acts that cause, or can be reasonably expected to cause, significant imminent harm to the public health, safety and welfare or to limited water resources. 
(Code 1974, § 26-100) 
Sec. 82-137. - Public notification. 
The public shall be notified of the implementation of emergency procedures in accordance with this article and those steps which are being implemented pursuant thereto by providing notice thereof to the local news media and by posting notice thereof upon the city's bulletin board in city hall and upon the bulletin board located at the county courthouse at least 24 hours prior to any implementation of emergency procedures in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1974, § 26-101) 
Sec. 82-138. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business using high volumes of water means water customers of the city using more than 25,000 gallons of water per day. 
Essential services means health care, sanitation, cooking needs, wastewater disposal, fire protection, and other essential services specified from time to time by administrative order of the city manager. 
Low pressure means less than 20 pounds per square inch (psi). 
Outdoor water usage means lawn and garden watering, noncommercial car washing, water for private swimming pools, and other activities specified from time to time by administrative order of the city manager. 
Step I restrictions means no outside water usage between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. prevailing time on Monday through Friday and no outside water usage at any time on Saturday or Sunday. The city water department must approve all use of water from the city water distribution system to fill a tank-truck or to directly fill a swimming pool from a fire hydrant. The standards to be used by the water department in the exercise of this discretion shall be: 
(1)  To protect both storage volumes and system pressures from dropping below the levels specified in section 82-139; and 
(2)  To protect the water supply so that public health, safety and welfare shall not be imminently threatened. 
Step II restrictions means all outdoor use of water shall be banned. Businesses using high volumes of water may be placed on significant restrictions by the city manager. The standards to be utilized by the city manager in the exercise of his discretion shall be: 
(1)  The effect that a high-volume user has on causing the levels specified in section 82-139; 
(2)  Whether limiting a business's hours or days of operation will allow water levels to exceed the levels provided in section 82-139; and 
(3)  Any increased water supply generated by imposed restrictions, all in such manner as to best promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
Step III restrictions means water shall be rationed pursuant to administrative order issued by the city manager so as to provide for essential purposes only. Commercial and industrial users shall be restricted in accord with a plan therefor adopted by administrative order of the city manager. All outdoor use of water shall be banned. 
(Code 1974, § 26-102) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-139. - Implementing Step I restrictions. 
Step I restrictions shall be implemented if the city exceeds 90 percent of its permitted water withdrawal amount or maximum safe production level for one day or if low pressure or loss of service is experienced. Step I restrictions shall remain in effect until all factors are relieved and shall cease upon city council determination that an adequate supply to fulfill public needs exists. City council determination shall be made following recommendation of the city manager and the water superintendent and shall be subject to modification by the council at the council's next meeting. The public shall be notified of the termination of Step I restrictions through the notification thereof to local news media and by removing prior notices thereof from the city and county bulletin boards. 
(Code 1974, § 26-103) 
Sec. 82-140. - Implementing Step II restrictions. 
Step II restrictions shall be implemented if Step I restrictions are not effective in restoring water levels above levels described in section 82-139. Step II restrictions shall remain in effect until factors that invoked Step I restrictions are relieved for a period of two weeks following the last date on which one or more factors occurred. Upon termination of Step II restrictions, Step I restrictions shall be automatically reimplemented. 
(Code 1974, § 26-104) 
Sec. 82-141. - Implementing Step III restrictions. 
Step III restrictions shall be implemented if Step II restrictions fail to prevent loss of water service. Step III restrictions shall remain in effect until loss of water service ceases. Upon termination of Step III restrictions, Step II restrictions shall be automatically re-implemented. 
(Code 1974, § 26-105) 
Sec. 82-142. - Extreme cases. 
(a)  In extreme cases of loss of service the city manager may authorize the closing of valves in the water distribution system. When exercising this discretion the city manager shall: 
(1)  Make water available to private consumers from fire hydrants that are equipped to dispense water to the private containers of consumers; 
(2)  Fully consider the needs of medical facilities; and 
(3)  If possible avoid the interruption of fire protection. 
(b)  When determining extreme cases, the city manager shall consider: 
(1)  Loss of service; 
(2)  Available water supply; and 
(3)  The threat posed to public health, safety and welfare by continued water usage without imposition of the restrictions authorized pursuant hereto. 
(Code 1974, § 26-106) 
Sec. 82-143. - Surcharges. 
Surcharges as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for the violation of Step I, Step II or Step III restrictions shall be imposed and water service shall be terminated. Water supply shall not be restored until payment of the surcharge and of a reconnection fee. 
(Code 1974, § 26-107) 
Sec. 82-144. - Enforcement procedures. 
The city manager shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this division by discontinuance of water service in the event any person or entity violates any provisions of this division or any restrictions imposed pursuant to this division after receiving oral or written notice from the city of violations of this division. 
(1)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in any and all events that the city manager determines that a person or entity is violating or has violated any provisions of this division or any restrictions imposed pursuant to this division and that the violation or violations endanger the public health, safety, or welfare, the city manager shall have the power and authority to immediately terminate the water service of that person or entity. 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by having the water supply terminated by the city manager shall have the right to appeal the termination to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken within three days from the date of the termination by notifying the clerk of the city in writing specifying the grounds of appeal. The city clerk shall fix a date and time for the hearing of the appeal by the city council within two days after the receipt of the notice of appeal and after due notice to the parties at interest the city council shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within five days of the date the notice of appeal was received by the city clerk and proceed to decide the appeal within three days of the date of the hearing. 
(3)  In the filing of any appeal, the city manager shall have the power and authority to reinstate the water supply of the appellant until the city council renders a decision in order to avoid undue hardship in the event that the city manager is reasonably assured that violations for which the water supply was terminated will not continue. 
(Code 1974, § 26-108) 
Sec. 82-145. - Application. 
This division shall apply to all users of the city water system whether inside the city or outside the city. 
(Code 1974, § 26-109) 
Sec. 82-146. - Metering of water. 
(a)  All water that is pumped from aquifers by the city shall be metered by the city. Such metering shall be monitored by the water department of the city on a daily basis with records thereof to be maintained by the department. 
(b)  All water service connections to the city's water system shall be metered through an approved metering station with water consumption readings to be taken periodically by the appropriate department of the city. 
(c)  Water metering devices shall be checked for accurate calibration periodically as required and as recommended by manufacturers thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 26-110) 
Sec. 82-147. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall be entitled to issue rules and regulations relative to the administration of this division which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this division subject to the right of the city council to revoke or modify any such rule or regulation within 60 days following the submission thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 26-111) 
Sec. 82-148. - Compliance with other requirements. 
Compliance with the provisions of this division shall not excuse or relieve any person or entity from complying with the requirements and provisions of all other laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations applicable to water and water usage or to the conduct of any activity. Such additional laws, ordinances, rules and regulations include, but are not limited to, all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations and all other applicable ordinances and resolutions of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 26-112) 
Sec. 82-149. - Knowledge. 
Each person and entity who or which is a water customer of the city as well as all employees, agents and servants of such water customers shall be conclusively presumed, for purposes of this division, to have at all times complete and full knowledge of all provisions of this division. 
(Code 1974, § 26-113) 
Sec. 82-150. - Criminal conviction not required. 
Any proceeding or action which may be taken with respect to the suspension or termination of water pursuant to this division shall be and are administrative in nature with respect to the privileges of water customers of the city. No conviction, dismissal, acquittal, other plea or other disposition with respect to any criminal violation involving any alleged criminal conduct shall be necessary for any action pursuant to the provisions of this division or otherwise affect any action taken by the city or city officials relative thereto. 
(Code 1974, § 26-114) 
Sec. 82-151. - Violations and penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of this division or any restrictions implemented pursuant to this article with such violations being subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 26-115) 
Secs. 82-152—82-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAS SERVICE 

Sec. 82-181. - Owner responsible for connection. 
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner where a natural gas meter is located to provide for his own connection from the meter to his gas installation. 
(Code 1974, § 26-42) 
Sec. 82-182. - Request for change in line required. 
Every person who desires a natural gas service line of the city to be changed or moved shall file a written request for such change or movement with the natural gas department of the city at least five working days prior to the date such change or move is desired. 
(Code 1974, § 26-43) 
Sec. 82-183. - Deposit required when requesting line change. 
A deposit shall be made with the city at the time of the filing of the written request referred to in section 82-182, such deposit to be used by the city natural gas department for paying the cost of labor and materials in the moving of the natural gas service line. Upon the completion of the moving of the line, any portion of the deposit not expended for labor and materials in the moving of the line shall be refunded to the person who has deposited it. 
(Code 1974, § 26-44) 
Sec. 82-184. - Minimum charge for changing line. 
A charge as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for labor and materials for the moving of a natural gas service line shall be paid. Such charge shall be, in all cases, deducted from the required deposit. 
(Code 1974, § 26-45) 
Sec. 82-185. - Owner to cooperate in line changes. 
When a natural gas service line is moved or the location of the natural gas service line is changed, the property owner shall grant to the city all rights, easements, permits and privileges necessary for the moving of the gas line to the new location. 
(Code 1974, § 26-46) 
Sec. 82-186. - Distribution of natural gas owned by the ultimate user. 
The natural gas department of the city is authorized to transport and distribute through the natural gas system of the city on an interruptible basis natural gas which is owned by a customer of such system who is the ultimate user thereof and which is received by the customer from the city's natural gas system at the point of use thereof by such customer upon payment of such fees and charges relative thereto as may be established from time to time by ordinance of the city, all subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Such transportation and distribution shall be authorized only for nonresidential customers having facilities permitting the use of customer owned natural gas on an interruptible basis and having daily average consumption of natural gas on an annualized basis of 500,000 cubic feet per day or greater; 
(2)  Approval and clearance by all appropriate regulatory entities and authorities; 
(3)  Such transportation and distribution shall be contingent upon and subject to transportation of customer's natural gas via Southern Natural Gas Company and South Georgia Natural Gas Company pipelines to the natural gas facilities of the city and the availability of customer's natural gas at the natural gas facilities of the city; 
(4)  No natural gas subject to such transportation and distribution shall be resold by the customer or transported to other premises of the customer without the prior written consent of the city manager; 
(5)  Distribution charges imposed by the city shall be in addition to all transportation costs and penalties incurred by the customer with Southern Natural Gas Company, South Georgia Natural Gas Company and others; 
(6)  Availability of transportation and distribution through the city natural gas system shall be subject to curtailment and interruption due to demand upon the city's natural gas system by noninterruptible customers thereof and to allocation of available distribution capacity between interruptible customers of the city's natural gas system; 
(7)  Payment by customers of all applicable sale taxes and all standby charges relative to such transportation and distribution; and 
(8)  Entry into a transportation and distribution agreement between the customer and the city which is specifically approved by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 26-48) 
Chapter 86 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; vegetation a nuisance, § 38-141 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 50; damaging vegetation generally, § 50-10; reckless driving destroying vegetation in parks, § 50-11; landscape requirements for certain vehicular use areas, § 54-81 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Crown means the main point of branching or foliage of a tree or shrub, or if none then the upper portion of a tree or shrub. 
Crown spread means the horizontal width of a tree or shrub measured across the tree or shrub at its greatest diameter. 
Danger tree means any tree or shrub: 
(1)  Which because of its condition constitutes a reasonable potential hazard to: 
a.  Improvements or utilities located within the right-of-way of any street; 
b.  Vehicular or pedestrian traffic within the right-of-way of any street; or 
(2)  Which harbors any insect, fungus, pest or disease which constitutes a potential hazard to other trees located within the city which is not eliminated by treatment thereof within 30 calendar days following written notification thereof to the owner of the property upon which such tree is located. 
Park tree means any tree or shrub trunk of which is located within any public area and which is other than a street tree. 
Public area means any real property owned by the city or which is utilized by the city for public purposes. 
Public tree means any tree or shrub the trunk of which is located within a public area. 
Shrub means a woody plant normally characterized by persistent woody stems, low stature and branching near its base. For purpose of this article the word shrub also includes all woody plants of all species which have developed (or which under normal conditions in the city will develop) trunks of a caliper diameter of less than two inches at a height of six inches above ground level. 
Small tree means a self-supporting woody plant of a species which under normal conditions in the city will develop a single trunk of a caliper diameter of at least two inches at a height of six inches above ground level and a maximum height at normal maturity in the city of 25 feet or less. 
Street means any and all public rights-of-way located within the city which are utilized for public vehicular or pedestrian right-of-way purposes including streets, alleys and other ways. 
Street tree means any tree or shrub the trunk of which is located within the right-of-way of a street. 
Topping means the act of cutting back the limbs or branches in the crown of a tree or shrub to stubs thereof which are larger than three inches in caliper diameter at the point of such cut. 
Tree means a self-supporting woody plant of a species which has developed (or which under normal conditions in the city will develop) a single trunk of a caliper diameter of two inches or more at a height of six inches above ground level. 
(Code 1974, § 23-63) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-2. - Location of shade trees. 
(a)  All shade trees in the city shall be planted no closer than ten feet from the property lines, so that vision at intersections will not be obstructed. 
(b)  Any person being notified of this section by the chief of police and failing to comply with the this section, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1974, § 23-8) 
Sec. 86-3. - Location of street trees. 
No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner as measured from the point of nearest intersecting curb or curbline provided that shrubs maintained at less than 18 inches in height may be planted and maintained within such distances. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet to any fire hydrant. 
(Code 1974, § 23-64) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
Sec. 86-4. - Street trees and public utilities. 
No street tree other than a small tree shall be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead public utility wire or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, power line or other public utility. 
(Code 1974, § 23-65) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82. 
Sec. 86-5. - Care of public trees. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article the city shall have the right to plant, prune, cut, maintain and remove, or to cause to be planted, pruned, cut, maintained and removed, any public tree to the extent necessary to ensure public safety, to provide for public utilities, to ensure convenient utilization of streets, or to preserve or enhance the symmetry or beauty of public properties. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article the city shall have the right to prune, cut or remove, or cause to be pruned, cut or removed, any public tree which is a danger tree or any portion of a public tree which: 
(1)  Is in an unsafe condition; 
(2)  Interferes with public utilities or other public improvements convenient utilization of streets; or 
(3)  Is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, pest, or disease. 
(Code 1974, § 23-66) 
Sec. 86-6. - Topping of public trees. 
Except to the extent otherwise permitted under this article, no person or entity shall engage in any act or conduct involving the topping of any public tree except to the extent necessary due to damage by storms or other such casualty or due to its location relative to utility wires where other pruning practices are impractical. 
(Code 1974, § 23-67) 
Sec. 86-7. - Maintenance by owners of private trees. 
(a)  The owner of each tree or shrub any portion of which shall overhang into or over any street shall prune, and to the extent necessary remove, such tree or shrub to the extent that the tree or shrub shall: 
(1)  Not obstruct the light from any street light or obstruct the view of any street intersection; and 
(2)  Be maintained so as to provide a clear space of eight vertical feet above the surface of both the paving of such street and any sidewalk located within the right-of-way of such street. 
(b)  The owner of each tree or shrub which is located upon property which is located within the city shall promptly remove all danger trees and all broken or decayed limbs which may constitute a menace to the safety of the public while utilizing any street. 
(Code 1974, § 23-68) 
Sec. 86-8. - Removal of stumps. 
All stumps of public trees shall, as soon as practicable, be removed below the surface of the ground by the persons or entity responsible for creation of such condition so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground and such persons or entities shall promptly thereafter render the premises to a clean, safe and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1974, § 23-69) 
Sec. 86-9. - Conditions constituting nuisances. 
Conditions and circumstances existing or arising from the failure of those responsible therefor to comply with the provisions of either section 86-7 or section 86-8 shall constitute a nuisance which shall both authorize the abatement of such nuisance by the city pursuant to the provisions of this Code with respect thereto and, in connection therewith, to the assessment of a lien against such person, such entity and the premises for the cost of the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Code 1974, § 23-72) 
Secs. 86-10—86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREE BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 86-31. - Creation. 
There is hereby created and established a tree board in and for the city. 
(Code 1974, § 23-50) 
Sec. 86-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the tree board shall be to perform the duties specified in this chapter and to perform such other duties as shall be provided from time to time by ordinance adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 23-51) 
Sec. 86-33. - Membership. 
The tree board shall consist of five members appointed and removable by the council by majority vote thereof. Members of the tree board shall be residents of the county, but need not be residents of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 23-52) 
Sec. 86-34. - Term of office. 
The term of office of each member of the tree board shall be on a calendar year basis for a two-year period with members subject to removal either with or without cause by the council prior to the end of their term of office; provided that in the appointment of the first board two members shall be appointed for an initial one-year term and three members shall be appointed for an initial two-year term. 
(Code 1974, § 23-52) 
Sec. 86-35. - Compensation, expenses. 
Members of the tree board shall receive no compensation for their services except that they may be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by them in direct connection with the performances of their services and duties subject to approval thereof by the city council by resolution thereof in accordance with such requirements as shall be imposed by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 23-53) 
Sec. 86-36. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the tree board shall be held from time to time as necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. All meetings of the tree board shall be open to the public and shall be held in accordance with the requirements of state law relative to meetings of local governmental entities. 
(Code 1974, § 23-54) 
Sec. 86-37. - Disqualification of members of board. 
(a)  Should any member of the tree board have any personal or financial interest or relationship with respect to any person, matter or issue pending before the board or otherwise be closely associated with any person, matter or issue pending before the board, then such member shall be disqualified to participate in connection with such matter or issue. 
(b)  Any member of the tree board shall be entitled to raise a question of a potential disqualification of any other member who has not disqualified himself whereupon, following such consideration as the board shall deem appropriate, the tree board shall determine by majority vote of those members who are not subject to potential disqualification in connection with such matter or issue whether each such member is or is not disqualified. 
(Code 1974, § 23-55) 
Sec. 86-38. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The tree board shall generally investigate and advise officials of the city regarding the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal and disposition of trees and shrubs located within public areas in the city. 
(b)  The tree board shall develop lists of trees, small trees, shrubs and vines recommended for planting in the city. 
(c)  The tree board shall, upon the request of the city manager, investigate and advise city officials, regarding specific matters relative to trees and shrubs located within the city. 
(d)  The tree board shall hear and determine such issues and matters as it shall be authorized to determine from time to time by ordinance of the city. 
(e)  The tree board shall have such additional duties, responsibilities and powers as shall be specifically provided from time to time by ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 23-56) 
Sec. 86-39. - Rules and regulations. 
The tree board shall adopt such rules, policies, procedures and regulations for the transactions of its business and for consideration and determination of issues and matters before the board as it deems necessary, subject to the prior approval thereof by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 23-57) 
Sec. 86-40. - Chair and vice-chair. 
The tree board shall select from among its members a chair who shall preside at meetings and hearings of the board and a vice-chair who shall preside at meetings and hearings of the board in the absence of the chair or the disqualification of the chair. 
(Code 1974, § 23-58) 
Sec. 86-41. - Secretary designated. 
The secretary of the tree board shall be the city clerk or such other person as shall from time to time be so designated by the city manager to perform the functions of secretary of the tree board. 
(Code 1974, § 23-59) 
Sec. 86-42. - Duties of secretary. 
The secretary of the tree board shall provide administrative assistance to the board and shall perform such duties on behalf of the board as the city manager shall from time to time direct. 
(Code 1974, § 23-60) 
Sec. 86-43. - Authority of tree board. 
The tree board shall have no authority or power other than as specifically provided from time to time by ordinance of the city. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing the board shall have no authority, right or power to expend any funds, to direct the activities of any employee or official of the city or to contract for or on behalf of either itself or the city. 
(Code 1974, § 23-61) 
Sec. 86-44. - Legal assistance. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and legal representative of the tree board and shall render such legal assistance to the board as shall be necessary. 
(Code 1974, § 23-62) 
Chapter 90 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses and business regulations, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 90-1—90-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, adopted Oct. 1, 2012, deleted the former Art. II, §§ 90-31—90-41, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to taxicabs and derived from the Code of 1974, §§ 25-1—25-11. 

Sec. 90-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City clerk shall mean the city clerk for the City of Tifton, Georgia. 
City manager shall mean the city manager for the City of Tifton, Georgia. 
Company means the holder of a license to operate a taxicab business under the provisions of this chapter, whether a person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
Driver means any person who drives or operates a taxicab on the streets of the city for a licensed taxicab company. 
Police chief or chief of police means the individual employed by the city as the chief of the police department of the city. 
Street means any street, alley, lane, avenue, court or public place in the city. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, or offering to carry persons for hire, except motor vehicles used as ambulances, sightseeing cars and buses, and except for limousines and buses operated on a fixed route. 
Taxicab business license means the written authority and privilege granted by the city for the operation of a taxicab business incorporating the company's ownership and use of at least one taxicab. 
Taxicab driver's permit or permit means the written authority granted by the city for an individual to drive or operate a taxicab within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-32. - Owner's compliance with chapter 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a taxicab business license, its agents or employees, to allow any vehicles to be used in the conveyance of passengers or property for hire unless such vehicle has met the requirements set forth in this chapter, and continues to meet to the requirements as set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a taxicab business license, its agents or employees, to allow any person to drive, use, or operate any vehicle as a vehicle for hire unless that person has met the requirements set forth in this chapter and has been issued a taxicab driver's permit to drive a taxicab within the city limits of Tifton. 
(3)  Any person holding a taxicab business license issued pursuant to this chapter or any employee or agent of such person who violates any provision of this chapter, or directs, consents to, permits, or acquiesces in such violation either directly or indirectly shall, by such conduct, subject the taxicab business license to suspension, revocation or probation upon conditions. For purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, any act committed by an employee, agent or representative of a holder shall be deemed to be an act of such holder. A violation of any provisions contained within this chapter shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-33. - Indemnity for benefit of city. 
Any taxicab company operating under this chapter shall hold the city harmless against any and all liability, loss, costs, damages or expenses which may accrue to the city by reason of the negligence, default or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company under this article. Nothing in this chapter shall be considered to make the city liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any taxicab company, its servants, agents, drivers or other employees, during the operation by the company of a taxicab business or service, either in respect to injuries to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-34. - Identification and markings generally. 
Every taxicab shall have a sign plainly indicating on the door on each side of the vehicle, in letters not less than four inches high, the full name of the taxicab company operating the vehicle, including words such as "taxicab," "taxi," or "cab." Such sign shall be professionally applied and shall be either painted or permanently affixed to each side of the vehicle in clearly visible colors. There shall be no outside advertising of any kind on taxicabs. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-35. - Numbers generally. 
There shall be shown on each side of the vehicle and on the rear of each taxicab a number at least four inches high, such number to be separate and distinct from that on any other public vehicle or taxicab in the city. Such number shall be assigned to such taxicab and its owner by the city clerk. Such number shall be professionally applied and shall be either painted or permanently affixed on the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-36. - Registration of number and names of owner and operator. 
The number assigned a taxicab in accordance with this chapter, together with the names of the owner and operator of the taxicab, shall be registered with the city clerk in a book to be kept for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-37. - Safe mechanical condition of taxicabs required. 
Every taxicab operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety and pollution control equipment remaining intact and operative, at all times when the taxicab is in service. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-38. - Cleanliness of taxicabs required. 
Each vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept painted, and in a clean, sanitary condition, free of litter and debris, and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. The chief of police or his designee, upon observing violations of this section or any other provision of this chapter which deals with the physical condition of taxicabs, shall place a "deadline decal" on the windshield of the vehicle, such decal to list all observed violations. No driver or other unauthorized person shall remove or deface a deadline decal. No driver shall use a vehicle to transport passengers for hire while a deadline decal is in place. The deadline decal will be removed after correction of all listed violations. The deadline decal shall be legible and of sufficient size and color to be easily recognizable and shall be attached the driver's side window of the vehicle. The form for the deadline decal shall be approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-39. - State license tag for taxicabs required. 
Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle as a taxicab under the provisions of this chapter, the owner of such vehicle shall secure and display on the vehicle a current state license registration tag. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-40. - [Authority to remove vehicle used as taxicab in violation of this chapter]. 
The chief of police or his designee shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the city any vehicle used as a taxicab which is in violation of this chapter and to prohibit operation of such taxicab until all deficiencies have been corrected. An order of the chief of police or his designee to remove a vehicle from the city streets may be appealed to the city council through the administrative hearing process. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-41. - Manifest. 
Each taxicab driver, operator or company shall maintain a daily manifest upon which shall be recorded all trips made by each vehicle each day, showing time and place of origin, destination of each trip, and amount of fare. All such completed manifests shall be returned to the taxicab company by the driver at least weekly or shall be maintained by the company at its offices at the conclusion of each driver's daily tour of duty. Each taxicab company shall retain and preserve all drivers' manifests for at least 12 months; and such manifests shall be made available to the city, to any officer of the police department, or to the chief of police at all reasonable times. All manifests shall be kept in a legible condition. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-42. - Required. 
No person shall operate a business involving the use of one or more taxicabs on the streets of the city unless a license for such business has first been granted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-43. - Application. 
Application for a license required by this chapter shall be made on the form provided by the city clerk and shall provide for such information as is required for other business license applicants. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-44. - Fee. 
Each person operating a taxicab business license shall pay an annual license fee to the city as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. Such annual fee shall be prorated for the remainder of the initial year. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-45. - Duration. 
For purposes of this section, the license year shall begin on January 1 of each calendar year and end December 31 of the same year. Each license issued under this article shall be effective only for the calendar year stated in the license unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-46. - Issuance. 
Upon the payment of the required license fee, the filing of the proper application and the issuance of a license, the city shall issue to the applicant named in the application a decal for each vehicle described in such application and with respect to which such fee has been paid, which decal shall describe the vehicle for which it is issued and state for what license year it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-47. - Display. 
It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any taxicab for hire in the city without having conspicuously displayed on the taxicab a valid current decal accurately describing the taxicab in which it is displayed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-48. - Fixed place of business required. 
Each taxicab company, as a condition for holding a city business license, shall establish and maintain a fixed headquarters on private property for the operation of the company's business. Such headquarters shall conform to the requirements of the city zoning ordinances and other applicable ordinances of the city or county (if located in the unincorporated area of the county), and shall provide adequate off-street parking space for all taxicabs not in service. Such company headquarters shall not be moved except by the approved transfer of the company's business license to another location. 
No taxicab company operating a taxicab shall use the streets of the city as a place of business or be allowed to use any parking space in the city other than while actually taking on or letting off passengers. All taxicabs shall be parked on a parking lot off of streets within the business district and shall not use business property as a depot of operation unless all taxicabs can be parked behind the depot off of such street. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-49. - Coverage required. 
Any taxicab company desiring to do business within the city shall give and maintain a policy of indemnity insurance with an indemnity insurance company authorized to do business in the state for each vehicle in use as a taxicab, or a self-insurance certificate issued under state guidelines and regulated by the state insurance commission. The minimum coverage shall be $25,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, $50,000.00 for injury to more than one person which is sustained in the same accident, and $10,000.00 for property damage resulting from one accident. Such indemnity insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who is injured or who sustains damage to property caused by the negligence of a taxicab company, its servants or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-50. - Blanket policy. 
Any company or person operating a taxicab in the city shall give a separate policy of indemnity insurance or certificate of self-insurance for each separate taxicab for hire, except where such company or person actually owns or holds legal title to more than one taxicab, in which event, such company or person may give one policy of indemnity insurance covering all the taxicabs actually owned. This latter provision, however, shall not apply to any group of persons separately owning taxicabs who may be jointly operating or doing business under a licensed taxicab company name. The taxicab company is responsible for ensuring that individual persons operating taxicabs under such license shall comply with all state laws and local ordinances governing insurance coverage. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-51. - Notice when voided. 
Before any policy of insurance or certificate of self-insurance required by this chapter is voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice shall be given, in writing, to the city clerk at least 30 days before it shall be effective. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-52. - Application. 
Any person desiring a Tifton taxicab driver's permit required by this chapter shall submit an application in writing, on a form to be furnished by the city. Such application shall be made under oath and shall state: 
(1)  The age of the applicant; 
(2)  Applicant's address; 
(3)  Length of time applicant has resided in the city; 
(4)  Applicant's knowledge of the streets and traffic laws of the city and how obtained; 
(5)  Whether applicant has any physical infirmities that may affect applicant's ability to operate a moving vehicle safely; and 
(6)  Whether applicant has been convicted of a violation of any of the laws of the state or of this Code or other ordinances of the city and, if so, when and of what offense, and the sentence of the court. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-53. - Qualifications of applicant. 
(1)  Application. Any person seeking to obtain a Tifton taxicab driver's permit must first complete an application provided by the city clerk and must pay the application fee to the city clerk upon submitting the application to the city clerk. The application must be completed in full and the following documents must be included: 
a.  Fingerprints. The city police department shall fingerprint each new applicant which expense must be paid by the applicant. 
b.  Passport photos. Each applicant shall submit with the application, two photographs that are 2½" wide by 2¾" in height, one of such photographs to be retained by the city clerk in the files at the city clerk's office and the other to be attached to the taxicab driver's permit if the same shall be granted to the applicant. The photos shall be taken within the immediately preceding three months. 
c.  Driver's history. Applicants are required to provide a motor vehicle driver's history as prescribed by the chief of police or designee. 
d.  Citizenship documentation required. Provide documentation, as requested by the city clerk, that applicant is a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or otherwise granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
e.  Receipt for payment. A copy of the receipt indicating that the taxicab driver's permit application fee has been paid. 
f.  Recommendation from employer. A signed recommendation from the holder of the taxicab business license who is the employer of the driver is required prior to issuance of a taxicab driver's permit. 
(2)  Taxicab driver's permit requirements. Each applicant seeking to obtain a city taxicab driver's permit shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Applicant must be at least 18 years of age. 
b.  Possess a valid Georgia driver's license, and the license must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-5-64. 
c.  The Applicant must be in good physical and mental health. 
d.  Applicant must meet all of the other requirements for taxicab drivers contained in this chapter. 
(3)  Required information on application. Each applicant seeking to obtain an Tifton taxicab driver's permit shall provide the city clerk the following information under oath on the application: 
a.  The full name, date of birth and age of the applicant. 
b.  Home address of the applicant for the previous ten years. 
c.  The applicant's home telephone number. 
d.  A statement and detailed explanation regarding any convictions of crimes specified in this chapter. 
e.  Further information reasonably related to the qualifications for a taxicab driver's permit as may be required. 
(4)  Investigation of applicant. The chief of police or designee shall conduct a criminal history investigation and background check of each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit in order to determine the moral character and fitness of the applicant. A report of these investigations and a copy of the driver's history of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application. A Tifton taxicab driver's permit shall not be issued if the applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses: 
a.  Any criminal offense involving the operation of a motor vehicle resulting in the death of any person. Driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
b.  Been declared a habitual violator by the department of driver services or its successor. 
c.  Any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle is used. 
d.  Leaving the scene of an accident involving an occupied or attended vehicle as specified by the laws of this state for a period of 15 years preceding the date of application. 
e.  Leaving the scene of an accident involving an unoccupied vehicle or property damage as specified by the laws of this state for a period of ten years preceding the date of application. 
f.  Perjury or false swearing or making a false statement in any statement under oath in connection with the application for a taxicab driver's permit. 
g.  Convictions, or forfeiture of bail, not vacated, upon three charges of violation of the motor vehicle laws of this state arising out of separate transactions within the 12-month period immediately preceding the application for a permit. 
h.  Involvement in more than two automobile accidents in which it could be reasonably determined that the applicant was at fault, within the 12-month period immediately preceding the application for a permit. 
i.  Except as otherwise specifically provided in subsection (11) below, four or more convictions of this chapter, relating to vehicles for hire, arising out of separate transactions within the current calendar year. 
j.  Two or more convictions of failure to obtain a taxicab driver's, failure to obtain liability insurance required under this chapter, and/or compliance with laws and ordinances relating to taxicabs, arising out of separate transactions within the current calendar year. 
k.  Any felony, criminal intent to commit or the commission of any crime involving theft, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, public lewdness, or a drug-related offense, unless five years have elapsed since the date of termination of any sentence, parole, or probation. 
l.  Any criminal attempt to commit or the commission of a sexual offense or a violent felony, unless 20 years have elapsed since the date of termination of any sentence, parole, or probation. 
m.  Conviction relating to alcohol or drugs within a taxicab, within the 12 months preceding the application for a permit. 
n.  If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses listed in this section, consideration of the application will be suspended until entry of plea or verdict or dismissal. For the purposes of this section, a plea of nolo contendere to any of the offenses set out in this subsection shall constitute a conviction. 
(5)  Certification prior to issuance of the taxicab driver's permit. Applicants will certify that they have been furnished a copy of this chapter, City of Tifton, Georgia by the city clerk, and that they have read and understand these sections and agree to abide by the provisions of said chapters. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-54. - Required information on permit. 
Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver's permit, the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant, which shall be signed by the city manager and shall contain the name, address, sex, race, and signature of the applicant. The taxicab driver's permit shall also state the name of the company employing the driver as stated in the application. If the driver changes employment, then the application and permit must be amended to show the change in employment. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-55. - Permit renewal required annually. 
Each permit granted under this chapter shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-56. - Denial of taxicab driver's permit. 
If the application for a taxicab driver's permit is denied, it shall be the responsibility of the city manager or designee within ten days from the date of the denial to provide written notification to the applicant of the reason(s) that the application was denied. Said notice shall be mailed to the applicant's home address as listed in the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-57. - Appeals. 
Any person who has been denied a Tifton taxicab driver's permit or taxicab business license shall have ten days from the date on the notification of denial to file a petition for appeal with the city council. The city council shall consider the petition and within 45 days of the filing of the petition decide whether to uphold or reverse the denial of the application. Any decision rendered by the city council shall be mailed to the applicant within ten days of the decision at the address listed on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-58. - Permit to be displayed. 
Every driver granted a taxicab driver's permit under this chapter shall post the taxicab driver's permit in a conspicuous manner in such a place as to be in full view at all times to all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-59. - Alteration of permits prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate or destroy a taxicab driver's permit or cause or allow such behavior. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-60. - Not transferable. 
Any taxicab driver's permit issued under this division is not transferable from one company to another and is to be used solely by the person to whom it is issued. It is unlawful for any driver to operate a taxicab in the city without a valid taxicab driver's permit or for any owner of a company to permit a taxicab under its license to be operated by a driver who does not possess a valid taxicab driver's permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-61. - Renewal. 
Permits may be renewed on a calendar year basis, upon application and payment of the annual fee, unless the permit for the preceding period has been revoked or is under suspension. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-62. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the authority to suspend a taxicab driver's permit for the following reasons: 
(1)  The driver is charged with operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs, or reckless driving; 
(2)  Making any false statement in the application for the permit; or 
(3)  Operating a taxicab in violation of any provisions of this chapter or applicable state law. 
(b)  The suspension of a taxicab driver's permit for the above reasons, may be appealed as provided for in this chapter. 
(c)  Upon the suspension of a taxicab driver's permit, notice thereof shall be provided to the taxicab company employing the taxicab driver. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-63. - Driving after suspension or revocation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle for hire or taxicab for the carriage of passengers during any period in which his permit to do so is suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-64. - Administrative hearing. 
(1)  Upon information and belief there are reasonable grounds to believe that the holder of a taxicab driver's permit or taxicab business license has violated or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter, the city manager, shall have the authority to suspend a taxicab driver's permit or taxicab business license up to sixty days or to revoke a permit. 
(2)  In the event the city manager suspends or revokes a permit or license under this chapter, the city manager will be required to send notification of the suspension or revocation to the licensee or permittee by certified mail to the licensee to the address on the licensee's application. 
(3)  Any appeal of a suspension or recommendation for revocation by the city manager shall require an administrative hearing. Such hearing shall be informal and shall be heard by the city council. The decision of the city council shall be provided to the taxicab driver or licensee in writing to the to the address listed on the application within ten days of the hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(4)  If a taxicab driver is suspended three times within any three-year period, and if each appealed suspension is upheld, the fourth such suspension with such three-year period shall be for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-65. - Carrying additional passengers. 
No driver of a taxicab shall pick up or carry any passenger, other than the passenger first employing the taxicab, without the consent of the first passenger. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-66. - Rates must be available in vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any taxicab in the city without having available for inspection by the passenger the schedule of rates under or by which such taxicab is being operated. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-67. - Charging for hand baggage prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, operator or driver of any taxicab being operated in the city for hire, to charge any of its passengers any sum for hand baggage or hand luggage. The only charge to be made to such passengers for transportation shall be such passenger fares. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-68. - Transporting alcoholic beverages. 
Any driver or owner of a taxicab found guilty of hauling, transporting or delivering alcoholic beverages in any quantity anywhere inside of the city limits shall be guilty of an offense and his city taxicab driver's license shall be revoked at the discretion of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, § I, 10-1-2012) 
APPENDIX A—LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-09, adopted July 2, 2012, repealed the former Appendix A, §§ 1—9, § 9A, § 10, § 10A, §§ 11—15, and enacted a new Appendix A as set out herein. The former Appendix A pertained to zoning and derived from the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted by the city council on October 6, 1986, codified and readopted June 1, 1992, and further amended by Ord. No. 2001-011, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 2002-005, § I(Exh. A, §§ A—J), 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2002-012, § I(Exh. A), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 2003-022, § IA—C, 10-9-2003; Ord. No. 2005-012, § I, 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 2005-013, § I, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 2006-16, Pt. I, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 2006-20, § I, 9-11-2006; Ord. No. 2006-21, § I, 9-11-2006; Ord. No. 2006-22, § I, 9-11-2006; Ord. No. 2006-23, § I, 9-11-2006; Ord. No. 2006-25, § I, 9-11-2006; Ord. No. 2007-18, § I, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 2007-30, § I, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 2011-15, § I, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 2012-05, § I, adopted 4-2-2012. For a complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 

CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.01.00 - Title. 
This code shall be known as and entitled the "City of Tifton Land Development Code" and may be referred to as the "LDC." 
Sec. 1.02.00 - Authority. 
This LDC is enacted pursuant to the requirements and authority of Article IX, Section 2, Paragraph 4, of the Georgia Constitution and the amendments thereto. 
Sec. 1.03.00 - Applicability. 
1.03.01   Generally.
A.  This LDC shall apply to the City of Tifton. 
B.  No buildings, structures, or land shall be used or occupied; and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this LDC. 
C.  A change of use shall conform to the standards, criteria, requirements, and procedures of this LDC. 
1.03.02   Exemptions and exceptions.
The following general conditions or circumstances are exempt from the provisions and requirements of the LDC: 
A.  Buildings or structures that are legally under construction on the date of adoption of the LDC; 
B.  Buildings or structures for which a building permit has been issued as of the effective date of this LDC, provided that construction commences prior to the expiration of the building permit, and continues until completed; 
C.  Development pursuant to an approved development plan or subdivision plat approved prior to the effective date of this LDC; or 
D.  The use of property lawfully approved prior to the effective date of this LDC. 
Sec. 1.04.00 - Purpose and intent. 
1.04.01   Intent.
These regulations are enacted to promote the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, sizes of yards, courts, and the use of other open spaces, density and distribution of population, and the use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, and public activities. 
1.04.02   Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to: 
A.  Lessen congestion in the streets; 
B.  Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; 
C.  Promote health and the general welfare; 
D.  Provide adequate light and air; 
E.  Prevent the overcrowding of land; 
F.  Avoid undue concentration of population; 
G.  Prevent urban sprawl; 
H.  Assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services; 
I.  Assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian; 
J.  Assure the provision of space for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; 
K.  Promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; 
L.  Protect against blight and decline; 
M.  Secure economy in governmental expenditures; 
N.  Conserve the value of buildings; 
O.  Encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and structures; and 
P.  Assure that land is developed in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 1.05.00 - Relationship to the comprehensive plan. 
The Greater Tift County Comprehensive Plan is the official development policy and implementation guide for the City and County to coordinate and direct physical and economic development, related public investment, and, to provide reasonable regulations for the development of private property in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare. This LDC is designed to implement all provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for the development and use of land. 
Sec. 1.06.00 - Manager. 
The City Manager is the chief administrative official of the City of Tifton. For the purposes of this LDC, the term "Manager" is used to refer to the City Manager. The City Manager is assigned to administer, interpret, and implement the standards, criteria, and procedures of this LDC. The City Manager may delegate such responsibilities in writing to City staff as he/she feels appropriate. Throughout this LDC, the term "Manager" is used to indicate the responsibility for specified actions, except where specified actions are reserved or specifically delegated by law to another official. In all instances, "Manager" means the City Manager, or their "designee." 
Sec. 1.07.00 - Documents adopted by reference. 
1.07.01   City of Tifton Zoning Map.
The City of Tifton Zoning Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this LDC. 
1.07.02   City of Tifton-Tift County thoroughfare plan.
The City of Tifton-Tift County Thoroughfare Plan, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this LDC. 
1.07.03   Georgia Stormwater Management Manual.
The Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this LDC. The GSMM provides the data and requirements to be implemented in Tift County and the City of Tifton to control stormwater runoff and protect water quality. 
1.07.04   Building and construction codes.
Each building and construction code listed in Sections 1.07.04 (A) through (I) is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in its entirety. The following standard building codes as required by the State of Georgia include any attachments, future editions, and amendments. 
A.  ICC International Building Code with Georgia Amendments and including [Appendix 1 of this LDC]; 
B.  National Electric Code with Georgia Amendments; 
C.  ICC International Fuel Gas Code with Georgia Amendments; 
D.  ICC International Mechanical Code with Georgia Amendments; 
E.  ICC International Plumbing Code with Georgia Amendments; 
F.  ICC International Residential Code with Georgia Amendments and including [Appendix 1 of this LDC]; 
G.  ICC International Energy Conservation Code with Georgia Amendments; 
H.  ICC International Fire Code with Georgia Amendments; and 
I.  International Property Maintenance Code 
1.07.05   Water resource protection districts.
The map depicting groundwater and water resource protection districts in Tift County and the City of Tifton is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this LDC. 
1.07.06   Reserved.
1.07.07   Technical Standards Manual.
The Technical Standards Manual containing the engineering and design standards for the City of Tifton, GDOT, and other agencies is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this LDC. 
Sec. 1.08.00 - Rules of interpretation. 
1.08.01   Generally.
A.  Specific provisions of this LDC shall be followed in lieu of general provisions that may be in conflict with the specific provision. 
B.  In the interpretation and application of this LDC all standards, provisions, and requirements shall be liberally construed in favor of the objectives and purposes of the City of Tifton and shall not be construed to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
C.  Where provisions of this LDC conflict with other regulations, the more stringent restrictions shall be applied. 
1.08.02   Responsibility for interpretations.
A.  In the event that any question arises concerning the application of regulations, standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of this LDC, the Manager shall be responsible for interpretation. In the interpretation of this LDC, the Manager shall be guided by the Greater Tift County Comprehensive Plan, as appropriate, and applicable State law. 
B.  Responsibility for interpretation by the Manager as set forth in this section shall be limited to standards, regulations, and requirements of this LDC, and shall not be construed to include interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in this LDC. Interpretation shall not be construed to override the authority assigned to the City Council, the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Historic Preservation Commission, or to any other commission, board, or official named in other sections or chapters of this LDC. 
1.08.03   Rules for boundary interpretations.
Interpretations regarding boundaries of zoning districts shall be made in accordance with the following: 
A.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any street shall be construed as following the centerline of the street. 
B.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any platted lot line or other property line shall be construed as following such line. 
C.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following section lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
D.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the shoreline of a river, stream, lake or other water body shall be construed as following such shoreline. 
1.08.04   Rules of construction.
A.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
B.  Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
C.  The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter. 
D.  The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, company, corporation, or association as well as individuals. 
E.  The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
F.  "Or" may be read "and," may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
G.  The term "written" or "in writing" shall include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
H.  The term "day" means a calendar day. 
I.  The term "month" means a calendar month. 
J.  The word "week" shall mean seven (7) days. 
K.  The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
1.08.05   Computation of time.
When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first or last day shall not be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the person having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as provided for in O.C.G.A., section 1-4-1, the person having the privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty; however, when the following day is a Saturday or Sunday, the person shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. 
Sec. 1.09.00 - Acronyms and definitions. 
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. The following terms are specifically defined for purposes of this LDC. 
1.09.01   Acronyms.
ADA - Americans with Disabilities Act 
ASHTO - American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
BMP - Best Management Practices 
DBH - Diameter at Breast Height 
DHR - Department of Human Resources 
DNR - Department of Natural Resources 
DRI - Development of Regional Impact 
EPD - Georgia Environmental Protection Division 
FAA - Federal Aviation Administration 
FCC - Federal Communications Commission 
FEMA - Federal Emergency Management Agency 
FHBM - Flood Hazard Boundary Map 
FIRM - Flood Insurance Rate Map 
GIS - Geographic Information System 
GDOT - Georgia Department of Transportation 
GSMM - Georgia Stormwater Management Manual 
HVAC - Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning 
ICC - International Codes Council 
ITE - Institute of Transportation Engineers 
MSL - Mean Sea Level 
NOI - Notice of Intent 
NWI - National Wetland Inventory 
O.C.G.A. - Official Code of Georgia Annotated 
SDRC - Staff Development Review Committee 
SGRDC - South Georgia Regional Development Center 
TMA - Henry Tift Myers Airport 
LDC - Land Development Code 
USACE - United States Army Corps of Engineers 
ZBA - Zoning Board of Appeals 
1.09.02   Definitions.
Abutting. Immediately adjacent or contiguous. 
Acceleration/deceleration lanes. Paved exits and entrances off of a major thoroughfare onto private property for the purpose of expediting the free flow of traffic. 
Accessory. A use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure, and which is located on the same lot as the principal use or structure. 
Addition to an existing building. Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load bearing walls is new construction. 
Adult entertainment establishments. Any commercial establishment, which has as its primary purposes or business the offer for sale of any book, publication, or film which depicts nudity, or sexual conduct or engages in services such as bath houses, massage parlors, wrestling parlors or like activity, including a night club, restaurant, cabaret, lounge, or other establishment which features adult entertainment. 
Adult entertainment. Performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances are characterized by the display or exposure of specific anatomical areas. 
Agriculture. The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease, or personal use, of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops, grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, goats, or any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all such animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program. Retail selling of products raised on the premises shall be considered a normal accessory activity provided that space adequate for the parking of customer's vehicles shall be provided off the public right-of-way. 
Airport definitions. 
Control zone. Airspace extending upward from the surface of the Earth which may include one or more airports and is normally a circular area of five statute miles in radius, with extensions where necessary to include instrument approach and departure paths. 
Decision height. The height at which a decision must be made during an ILS instrument approach to either continue the approach or to execute a missed approach. 
Instrument runway. A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities or area type navigation equipment for which an instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
Minimum descent altitude. The lowest altitude, expressed in feet above mean sea level, to which descent is authorized on final approach or during circle-to-land maneuvering in execution of a standard instrument approach procedure, where no electronic glide slope is provided. 
Minimum enroute altitude. The altitude in effect between radio fixes which ensures acceptable navigational signal coverage and meets obstruction clearance requirements between those fixes. 
Runway. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
Visual runway. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan, a military service's approved military airport layout plan, or by any planning document submitted to the FAA by a competent authority. (Ord. of 6-2-75, § 5) 
Alley. A public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting property, but used for service access to the rear or side properties otherwise abutting a public street. 
Animals. Animals useful to man, including but not limited to: dairy animals; poultry; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, goats or any mutation or hybrid thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all such animals; bees; and small fur animals, except dogs and cats. 
Animal Hospital, Veterinary Clinic. An establishment in which a licensed veterinarian provides diagnosis, treatment, or prevention of animal diseases, which may include overnight care limited to convalescence. An animal hospital does not include a kennel or boarding of well animals and is limited to domestic pets. 
Appeal. A request for a review of the City's interpretation of any provision of the LDC. 
Architect. A qualified person registered and currently licensed or otherwise authorized to practice architecture in the State of Georgia. 
Architectural planter. A decorative container within which plantings may be placed. 
Basement. The portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground-level) on all sides. 
Best management practices (BMPs). A practice or combination of practices, including structural improvements and nonstructural actions, based on sound science and professional judgment, to be the most effective and practicable means of achieving the identified goal. 
Boarding or rooming house. A building dedicated to the lodging, with or without meals, of non-transient persons for compensation. 
Bond. A written instrument issued or executed by a bonding, surety, or insurance company licensed to do business in the state, guaranteeing that the person bonded shall faithfully fulfill and satisfy all requirements of this LDC, made payable to the City for costs and expenses which result from nonperformance or failure of the person bonded to satisfy the requirements of this LDC. 
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.. 
Buffer (Waterway). The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Buffer area; Buffer strip. A landscaped open area and/or screened area designed to separate incompatible uses. 
Building. Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Building height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
Building line. A line beyond which no foundation wall or part of the structure of any building shall project, except as set forth in Chapter 4 of this LDC. 
Business entity. Any corporation, partnership, limited partnership firm, enterprise, franchise, association, or trust. 
Care home. An orphanage, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, or similar use established to render domiciliary care, but not including facilities for the care of mental patients, alcoholics, drug addicts, and not including nursery schools. 
Congregate personal care home. A home for adults which offer care to sixteen (16) or more persons. 
Family personal care home. A home for adults in a family-type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to two (2) through six (6) persons. 
Group personal care home. A home for adult persons, in a residence or other type building(s), which offers care to seven (7) through fifteen (15) persons. 
Personal care home. A building or group of buildings, a facility, or place in which is provided two (2) or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals and personal care for non-family, ambulatory adults for compensation. 
Certificate of appropriateness. A document approving a proposed material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district. 
City. The term "the city" shall mean the City of Tifton in the County of Tift and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
Club, or lodge, private. An incorporated or unincorporated association which regularly assembles for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
Comprehensive Plan. The most recent adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Tifton. 
Condominium. A building containing three (3) or more individually owned dwelling units and related, jointly owned common areas as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Conservation easement. An agreement between a landowner and a governmental agency or land trust that permanently protects the land by limiting the amount and type of development that is permissible, while leaving the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Construction. Any activity which either: 
(1)  Is of a type for which an application for a building permit must be made prior to the commencement of any improvements; or 
(2)  Involves soil preparation for and pavement of any vehicle use area; or 
(3)  Constitutes any activity for which a land disturbance permit is required pursuant to Chapter 3 of this LDC. 
County. The County of Tift, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
Crosswalk. A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use for pedestrian use only and so designed as to provide access to adjacent streets or lots. 
Curb Cut. The providing of ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below the original ground surface to the excavated surface; and also known as excavation. 
Day care/nursery. An agency, organization, or individual providing daytime care, training, education, treatment, or supervision for children under fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to an owner or operator of the facility. 
Density. The total number of dwelling units divided by the gross site area. 
Developed area. The portion of a lot, excluding public rights-of-way, upon which buildings, structures, pavement, landscape materials, and/or their other improvements have been, or are to be, located. 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH). A forestry term that takes the thickness measurement of a tree at four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground. 
Director shall mean the Director of Environmental Management or his designee. 
Drainage structure. A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Dwelling unit. An enclosure of one (1) or more rooms, including kitchen and bathroom facilities, designed or constructed as a unit for residential occupancy by one (1) family. 
Dwelling, manufactured home. A new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, when erected on site, is 400 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, seq. For the purpose of the administration of this LDC, the term manufactured home shall not be interpreted to include mobile homes. For the purposes of this definition, singlewide shall be construed as any manufactured or mobile home having a width of between eight (8) and sixteen (16) feet and is transported entirely in one section. 
Dwelling, mobile home. A new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode when erected on site, is 400 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. These were built prior to June 15, 1976 and do not meet current Department of Housing and Urban Development manufactured home codes. 
Dwelling, multi-family. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for more than two adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a fire rated party wall or party floor connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the building. This includes apartments, condominiums, or any other type of multi-family structure. 
Dwelling, single family attached. One of a series of two (2) or more single family dwelling units built on separate lots attached to another dwelling unit on an adjoining lot by a fire rated common wall. 
Dwelling, single family. A detached building used and either designed or constructed for one dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, two family, or duplex. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for two adjoining dwelling units that are connected by a fire rated common wall and/or if two stories in height, by a fire rated common floor. 
Easement. A grant by the owner of land for the use of such land by others, including public usage, for a specific purpose or purposes. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Exterior architectural features. The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material; the type and style of all windows, doors, and signs; and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Facade. Any face of a building. The dominant facade of the building is where its principal entrance is located and which may not face the street upon which its legal address is located. 
Farm. A bona fide farm is the primary or principal use of land and buildings for the purpose of conducting agricultural activities including raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock; or the production of plants, trees or timber. The term farm includes the residence of the owner or operator of the farm. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Flood and flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow in inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the federal emergency management agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community. 
One-Hundred-Year Floodplain. The area that will be inundated by a flood event having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. This event is also referred to as the base flood or 100-year flood. 
Base Flood elevation. The computed elevation to which the floodwaters are anticipated to rise during a base flood or 100-year flood. Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) are shown on FEMA's Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM). 
Elevated building. A nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), and shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction. Pertaining to the regulation of structures as set forth in Section 3.02.00, means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before April 3, 1978. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. Pertaining to the regulation of structures as set forth in Section 3.02.00 a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before April 3, 1978. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the federal emergency management agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study. The official report provided by the federal emergency management agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
New construction. Pertaining to the regulation of structures as set forth in Section 3.02.00, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after April 3, 1978. 
Floor. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood construction. The term "floor" does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Floor area, gross. The total number of square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls, excluding basement areas, attic, porches, carports, and garages. 
Governing authority. The City Council of the City of Tifton 
Grade. The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground immediately surrounding the building or structure. 
Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition. This includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground cover. Natural mulch or low growing plants other than deciduous varieties installed for the purpose of providing a continuous cover over the surface of the ground. 
Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Hazardous waste. Any solid waste, by reason of its toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive, or otherwise injurious properties, which may be detrimental to the health of any person handling or otherwise coming into contact with such material or substance. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has developed a list of hazardous wastes based upon corrosively, reactivity, and toxicity. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the United States Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Historic Preservation District. An overlay district featuring design criteria to ensure the preservation and protection of historic sites and structures. Additional definitions are in the Historic Design Manual as described in Chapter 4 of this LDC. 
Home occupation. Any business occupation or profession customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by an occupant thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
Hospital. Any institution receiving in-patients, or a public institution receiving out-patients, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical, and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of senile psychotics, drug addiction or alcohol treatment, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
Industrialized Building: Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. 
Junkyard. Use of property for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking, and structural steel materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Kennel. Any location where boarding, caring for, and keeping of more than a total of three (3) dogs or cats, or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six (6) months of age) is carried on for compensation, and also raising, breeding, caring for, or boarding of dogs, cats, or other small animals for commercial purposes. 
Kennel, non-commercial. Any location where the boarding, caring for and keeping of more than three (3) but not more than ten (10) dogs or cats or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six (6) months of age) is carried on, not for commercial purpose, but as a hobby such as the raising of show and hunting dogs. 
Land disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including bona fide agricultural practices. 
Landscape. The placement of plant material(s) in an area, including trees, shrubs, vines, lawn grasses, ground cover, and other living plant material. 
Landscape architect. A design professional registered and currently licensed or otherwise authorized to practice landscape architecture in the State of Georgia, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-23-1, providing the services therein defined. 
Landscape designer. A person engaged in the design of landscaping for residential and nonresidential sites, but not a licensed profession authorized to practice landscape architecture. 
Lot. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds or by reference to a recorded plat of survey in instrument or instruments recorded in the deed records in the office of the Clerk of the County Superior Court, and which is held in a single ownership by one (1) person or in common ownership by more than one (1) person. 
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Tift County, or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of this LDC. 
Lot width. The distance between the side lot lines, measured along the front yard setback line as established by this LDC, or if no setback line is established, the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the street right-of-way line. 
Lot, corner. A lot having frontage on two (2) or more public streets at their intersection. 
Lot, through. A lot other than a corner lot, having frontage on more than one (1) street; or a corner lot having frontage on three (3) or more streets. 
Lumen. A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light emitted by a light source. 
Manufactured housing park. An area, under single ownership and not subdivided into customary lots planned for individual ownership, containing three (3) or more manufactured homes used as living facilities having a defined space, or an area containing three (3) or more spaces designed or intended for parking of manufactured homes to be used as living facilities for rent or lease. 
Material change in appearance. A change that will affect only the exterior architectural features of a historic property or of any structure, site, or work of art within a historic district and may include any one or more of the following: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details, or elements; 
(2)  Demolition of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public way on any historic property; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building or other structure within a historic district, including walls, roofs, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Mean sea level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elections within the floodplain. For purposes of this LDC, the term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD). 
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD). A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance-in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Newspaper or periodical production, sales, and distribution. The operation of newspaper or periodical business including the production, sales, and distribution thereof, including all necessary presswork. Such term includes but is broader than newspaper or periodical publishing. 
Newspaper or periodical publishing. This term is narrower in scope than newspaper or periodical production, sales and distribution. The term does not include presswork, sales, or distribution and is limited to the composition, layout, and non-presswork printing of a newspaper or periodical. 
Night club (lounge). A place of entertainment open at night, usually serving food and alcoholic beverages, and providing music and space for dancing. 
Open space. Undeveloped land suitable for passive recreation, conservation, or fallow land. 
Permit. The authorization necessary to carry out construction or a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this LDC. 
Person. The term "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, trust, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Planning Commission. As utilized in this LDC, the Planning Commission shall mean the City of Tifton Planning and Zoning Commission as duly appointed by the city council. 
Plat. A map, generally of a subdivision, showing the location, boundaries, and ownership of individual properties. 
Plat, preliminary. The first stage of plat or subdivision plan review as described in Chapter 4 of this LDC. 
Plat, final. The final stage of plat or subdivision plan review as described in Chapter 4 of this LDC. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places. 
Principal building. The building containing, or to contain, the predominant use of a lot. 
Principal use. The primary purpose for which a lot, or the main building thereon, is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied, or maintained. 
Protective covenant. A private contract existing between the land sub-divider or developer and subsequent property owners of a particular defined area limiting design and usage of similarly situated properties. These instruments are generally publicly recorded with a particular land subdivision, and maintenance and enforcement of the contract is between the private parties. 
Real property (property). Any tract or parcel of land and, if developed, any buildings or structures located on the land. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Religious facility. A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
River/stream bank. The rising ground, bordering a river or a stream, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device, such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Rural. All areas designated as SA Zones. 
School. A facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education including any playgrounds, stadiums, or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. This shall include, but not be limited to, public and private schools used for primary, secondary, or post-secondary education. 
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
Setback. The shortest distance between the defined boundary and the principal building or structure on a lot. 
Shopping center. Two (2) or more commercial establishments planned and managed as a single unit. 
Shrub. A woody plant normally characterized by persistent wood stems, low stature and branching near its base. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curb line and improved walkways. 
Sign. Any surface, fabric, or device bearing lettered, pictorial, or sculptured matter designed to convey information visually and exposed to public view; or any structure (including billboard or poster panel) designed to carry the above visual information. 
A-frame sign. Any upright, rigid supporting frame in the form of a triangle with steeply angled sides that meet at the top in the shape of the letter "A" located on the ground, not permanently attached and easily movable, and usually two-sided which conveys a message. Sandwich board signs are included in this definition. 
Aggregate sign area. The area of all signs on a parcel, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs. 
Animated sign. A sign with action, motion, or changing colors which requires electrical energy. This definition includes any signs that electronically change the sign face, whether by substitution of copy or scrolling. An electronic sign that maintains a steady sign face without change for no less than six (6) hours is not considered an animated sign. However, any deviation from the minimum six (6) hour change of unchanged copy results in the sign being considered an animated sign. 
Area of a sign/ Sign area. The smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses one face of the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
Awning sign. A sign located on a roof-like cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign. 
Banner. A sign, with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation, applied to cloth, paper or fabric of any kind, with only such material as backing. 
Billboard sign. Shall mean any sign with a sign area exceeding 300 square feet. 
Double-faced sign. A sign which has two (2) display areas placed back to back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is sixty (60) degrees or less and where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Flag. Any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used to signify a government or other entity or organization. 
Freestanding sign. A sign securely affixed to a support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, such as monument or stanchion signs. 
Historic District. The entire area designated by ordinance as a historic district. 
Illuminated sign. A sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Monument sign. A freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to, or be a part of or supported by, the building in or to which the sign applies. 
Non-conforming sign. Any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance that was legal at the time of its erection. 
Parcel. A separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records. 
Roof sign. A sign attached to, or supported by, the roof of a building which extends above the immediately adjacent roofline of the building. 
Stanchion sign. A freestanding sign mounted on one or more steel poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertisement portion of such structure which rests upon, or is supported by, such poles. 
Wall sign. A sign fastened, placed or painted upon, or parallel to, the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear or side of the structure. 
Window sign. A sign installed flush with or on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
Slope. The relationship between a vertical distance and a horizontal distance perpendicular to the horizontal distance at the extremity thereof, e.g., a slope of twenty to one (20:1) expresses the relationship of a horizontal line of twenty units measure (feet, yards, etc.) to a vertical line perpendicular thereto of one unit of the same measure (feet, yards, etc.). 
Small tree/understory tree. A self-supporting woody plant of a species which under normal conditions will develop a single or multiple trunks of a caliper diameter of at least two (2) inches at a height of six (6) inches above ground level and a maximum height at normal maturity of twenty-five (25) feet or less. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Start of construction. The date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit data. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as a garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State general permit (stormwater). The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., and subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30. 
State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
State. The terms "state" and "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. Any and all public or private rights-of-way located which are utilized for public vehicular or pedestrian right-of-way purposes including streets, highways, roads, avenues, parkways, boulevards, alleys, and their approaches. 
Arterial street. A street which is designated as such on the Major Thoroughfare Plan and which is intended to provide swift and safe movement of traffic through the city and county. 
Collector street. A street which is designated as such on the Major Thoroughfare Plan and which is intended to collect traffic from local streets and direct it safely to arterial streets. 
Cul-de-sac. A street having only one (1) end open for access to another street, the other end being terminated by a turnaround. 
Local street. A street used for local circulation in areas providing access to abutting property. 
Public street. Right-of-way dedicated to the city, county, state, or federal government or owned by the city, county, state, or federal government for public street purposes. 
Street tree. Any tree or shrub the trunk of which is located within the right-of-way of a street. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control measures or practices. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating, or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, and land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the structure is the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction(s), rehabilitation, or improvement of the streets, utilities, and pads that equals or exceeds forty percent (40%) of the value of the streets utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement commenced. 
Telecommunications facilities. The providing or offering for rent, sale, or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphics and video programming information between or among points of wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwaves, radio, satellite or similar facilities, including towers and tall structures, with or without benefit of any closed transmission median. 
Tourist home. A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided or offered to transient visitors for compensation. 
Tree. A self-supporting woody plant of a species which has developed (or which under normal conditions will develop) a single or multiple trunks of a caliper diameter of two (2) inches or more at a height of six (6) inches above ground level and an overall height at maturity of at least twenty (20) feet. 
Trout streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the state water quality control act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown, or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. 
Urban. All areas not designated as SA Zones. 
Utility. Public, private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this LDC which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this LDC where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging, or planting producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial, sod-forming grass. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Vehicle use area. Any ground surface area, except public rights-of-way, used by any type of vehicle whether moving or at rest, including, but not limited to, driving, parking, loading and unloading, including vehicular uses under, on, or within buildings. 
Vines. Any of a group of woody or herbaceous plants which may climb by twining or which normally requires support to reach mature form. 
Visibility triangle. The area of land described as either of the following: 
(1)  The triangular area of property on each side of a driveway formed by the intersection of the driveway and the public right-of-way line and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two (2) other sides; or 
(2)  The triangular area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way with two (2) sides of the triangular area along the abutting public right-of-way lines, measured from their point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two (2) other sides. 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation, and hydrological conditions involving a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. For the purposes of this LDC, the l987 National Wetlands Inventory shall serve to define these potential areas. 
Yard, front. That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way line and the principal building of the lot and extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. 
Yard, rear. That area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building on the lot. 
Yard, side. That area of a lot between the side lot line and the principal building on the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
( Ord. No. 2015-09 , 6-1-2015) 
CHAPTER 2. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND USES 

Sec. 2.00.00 - Generally. 
The use of buildings, structures, and land in accordance with the Tifton-Tift County Comprehensive Plan shall comply with the use requirements for zoning districts set forth in this chapter. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth in this LDC for the district in which the buildings, structures, or land are located as well as state and federal codes. 
Sec. 2.01.00 - Establishment and purpose of zoning districts. 
2.01.01   City of Tifton Zoning Map.
A.  The boundaries of each district are shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of Tifton, Georgia". 
B.  The map shall be dated and certified by the Mayor of the City of Tifton and the City Clerk. 
C.  The official copy of the zoning map shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk for the City of Tifton, and shall be accurate including maps, amendments, and the date of approval of such amendments. 
D.  The map may be amended according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 10. 
2.01.02   Zoning districts applicable within the City of Tifton.
The following zoning districts are hereby established and shall apply in the City of Tifton. 
R-20 single-family residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 20,000 square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
R-14 single-family residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 14,000 square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
R-12 single-family residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 12,000 square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
R-10 single-family residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 10,000 square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
R-8 residential. The purpose of this district is to provide residential areas with a minimum lot size of 8,000 square feet, said areas being protected from uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
M-R multiple residential. The purpose of this district is to provide orderly development of higher density residential areas for one (1), two (2), and multifamily dwellings, with minimum lot sizes of 6,000 square feet, said areas being protected from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
R-P Residential-professional. The purpose of this district shall be to create an area in which residential, limited business, professional, educational, and institutional uses can be compatibly mixed while maintaining a healthful living environment for the residents of the district and at the same time preventing the development of blight and slum conditions. The minimum lot size in this district shall be 6,000 square feet. 
MHP manufactured housing park. The purpose of this district is to provide for the development of property that is suitably located and planned for manufactured housing park use. Property developed in this district is to remain in single ownership for rental or leasing purposes only. Manufactured housing parks shall be developed only in strict accordance with the manufacturing housing park provisions of this ordinance. 
N-C neighborhood commercial. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect convenient areas for neighborhood shopping facilities consisting of a wide variety of sales and service. 
G-B general business district. The purpose of this district shall be to provide for and encourage the proper grouping and development of uses which include a wide variety of sales and services that will best accommodate the needs of the city and the traveling public in order to reduce highway traffic congestion, traffic hazards, and blight along the public streets of the city. 
C-D downtown commercial. The purpose of this district shall be to provide a higher density commercial development which will include a wide variety of sales which should locate in the central business district. 
WLI wholesale-light industrial district. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those wholesale and light industrial uses which do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust, and which do not possess other objectionable characteristics which might be detrimental to surrounding neighborhoods, or to the other uses permitted in the district. 
H-I heavy industrial district. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those industrial uses which cannot comply with the regulations of the WLI district. 
S-A suburban agriculture. The purpose of this district is to permit low-intensity agricultural uses in those areas where the city has yet to extend urban services and encourage development for needed urban area expansion. The preferred land uses in the district are agricultural, either active in the form of crops or passive in the form of forest management or pasture lands. The S-A district should be utilized as a land use designation where a more intensive urban use of the land is unlikely to occur in the near future. The requirements of the district are designed to encourage the continuing low-intensity agriculture use of the property and protect active urban uses found in adjacent districts of the city. 
2.01.03   Rural Planned Development District (PDR).
The purpose of the PDR District is to provide for planned, mixed use development within rural areas. This district is established to encourage creative and resourceful projects that include compatible, interrelated uses and related public facilities unified by a development plan that demonstrates compatibility between the rural planned development and adjacent rural, agricultural, and low density development. The PDR District is a zoning district and requires approval of a site development plan. Refer to Section 4.06.00 for design requirements applicable to the PDR zoning district. 
2.01.04   Urban Area Planned Development District (PDO).
The purpose of the PDO District is to provide for create planned development, which may include mixed use development, and is located within the urban service area of Tifton. The district is intended to ensure that uses are compatible, interrelated, and are supported by adequate public facilities. A unified site development plan is required for the PDO zoning district. A PDO District proposed in rural areas within the urban service area should also ensure sustainability due to locations that are away from supporting facilities in the urban areas. Refer to Section 4.07.00 for design requirements applicable to the PDO zoning district. 
Sec. 2.02.00 - Establishment and purpose of overlay districts. 
2.02.01   Generally.
The purpose of overlay districts is to provide a means of modifying the site design requirements that are otherwise applicable to the underlying zoning district(s). Such design requirements are set forth in Chapter 4. When the site design standards for a base zoning district, overlay district, or supplemental standards are in conflict, the stricter standard applies. 
2.02.02   Historic Preservation Overlay District (HPO).
The Historic Preservation District is shown on the Official Zoning Map and the legal description of the boundary is on file with the City Clerk of the City of Tifton. The purpose of the overlay district is to describe the area where additional design criteria are imposed in order to ensure the preservation and protection of historic sites and structures in Tifton. The area within the district contains structures, sites, works of art, or a combination thereof which have special character or special historical or aesthetic interest or value, or which represent one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the City, County, the State or the region. 
2.02.03   Henry Tift Myers Airport Overlay District (TMA).
The Henry Tift Myers Airport Overlay District is shown on the Official Zoning Map. The purpose of the district is to establish and ensure development standards and height restrictions which will afford reasonable protection of Henry Tift Myers Airport for the use of commercial, general, and recreational aviation. In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, there are hereby created and established certain overlay zones within the TMA Overlay District which include all the land lying beneath the approach and transitional ways related to aviation at the Henry Tift Myers Airport. Each zone has a set of standards for development. Refer to Section 4.02.02 for specific site design standards. 
2.02.04   Reserved.
Sec. 2.03.00 - Land uses permitted in each zoning district. 
2.03.01   Generally.
The table in Section 2.03.03 identifies those uses that are permissible within each zoning district. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which they are located. 
2.03.02   How to read the table of uses.
A.  Within the table the letter "P" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district. 
B.  The letter "S" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district, and the supplemental standards specified for the use. Supplemental standards are primarily contained in Section 4.03.00. Some standards are also contained in Chapter 5. The section where standards are provided is cited in the table. 
C.  A blank cell indicates the land use is prohibited. 
D.  Any land use that is not identified in the table is prohibited unless it is found to be substantially similar by the Manager. 
1.  A requested use shall be considered substantially similar when the characteristics of the requested use are equivalent in type, intensity, degree, or impact when compared to a use named in the table. Such characteristics include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Typical hours of operation; 
b.  Use of outdoor storage; 
c.  Trip generation rates; 
d.  Generation of noise, light pollution, odor, smoke, electromagnetic interference, or vibration; and 
e.  Customary functions of the use. 
2.  The administrative interpretation shall be subject to appeal, as set forth in Section 10.05.00 
2.03.03   Table of uses.

 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 2014-01 , 1-6-2014; Ord. No. 2015-09 , 6-1-2015) 
2.03.04   Table of accessory uses.

 
1 PDR and PDO classifications must conform to the approved site development plan 
CHAPTER 3. - PROTECTION OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND FEATURES 

Sec. 3.00.00 - Generally. 
The provisions set forth in Chapter 3 are intended to protect the natural features and natural resources within the City of Tifton and Tift County, and to implement policies in the Greater Tift County Comprehensive Plan. The natural features and natural resources included in Chapter 3 are soil erosion and sedimentation control, flood damage prevention, water resource districts, and wetlands. 
Sec. 3.01.00 - Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control.[2] 
3.01.01   Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
1.  Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
2.  Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
3.  Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
4.  Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
5.  Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282. 
6.  Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
7.  CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
8.  Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
9.  Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
10.  Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
11.  Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
12.  District: The Region 5 Soil and Water Conservation District. 
13.  Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
14.  Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
15.  Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
16.  Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in Section 3.01.03 (C) of this section. 
17.  Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
18.  Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
19.  Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
20.  Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
21.  Ground Elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
22.  Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in Section 3.01.02 Paragraph 5. 
23.  Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
24.  Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
25.  Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et.seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
26.  Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
27.  Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
28.  NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
29.  NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
30.  Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
31.  Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
32.  Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this section. 
33.  Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
34.  Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
35.  Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
36.  Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
37.  Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
38.  Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
39.  Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
40.  Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Middle South Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
41.  Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
42.  State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
43.  State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
44.  Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
45.  Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
46.  Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
47.  Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
48.  Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. No. 2016-16, 11-7-2016 ) 
3.01.02   Exemptions.
This section shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
1.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
2.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
3.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
4.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
5.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
6.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of Section 3.01.03 (C) of this section, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
7.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
8.  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
9.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
10.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
11.  Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. No. 2016-16, 11-7-2016 ) 
3.01.03   Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices.
A.  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this section shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of Section 3.01.03 (B) and (C) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this section and the NPDES general permit. 
B.  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in Section 3.01.03 (B) and (C) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
2.  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land- disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
5.  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in Paragraph C15,16 and 17 below, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
C.  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
3.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
12.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in Section 3.01.03 (B) 2 of this section; 
15.  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
16.  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed ; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
17.  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code Section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code Section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
D.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in Section 3.01.03 (B) and (C) of this section. 
E.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 2016-16, 11-7-2016 ) 
3.01.04   Application/permit process.
A.  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this section, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
B.  Application requirements. 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Tifton without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Environmental Management Department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Environmental Management Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in Section 3.01.04 (C) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of Section 3.01.03 (B) and (C) of this section will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
3.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a Local Issuing Authority in the jurisdiction. 
4.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by Section 3.01.03 (C) 15, 16 and 17 have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per Section 3.01.04 (B) 6 have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
5.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
6.  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
C.  Plan requirements. 
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Section 3.01.03 B and C. of this section, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this section. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
2.  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
D.  Permits. 
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this section, any variances required by Section 3.01.03 (C) 15, 16 and 17 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per Section 3.01.04 (B) 6 are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3.  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this section, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
4.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
5.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this section. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
6.  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
( Ord. No. 2016-16, 11-7-2016 ) 
3.01.05   Inspection and enforcement.
A.  The Department of Environmental Management will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this section, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
B.  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
C.  The Director of Environmental Management shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
D.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
E.  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
F.  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to Code Section 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
( Ord. No. 2016-16, 11-7-2016 ) 
3.01.06   Penalties and incentives.
A.  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this section without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
B.  Stop-work orders. 
1.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this section, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
2.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
3.  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
C.  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this aection and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of Section 3.01.04 (B) 6. The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this section, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this section, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this section shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this section under county ordinances approved under this section shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. No. 2016-16, 11-7-2016 ) 
3.01.07   Education and certification.
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this section. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. No. 2016-16, 11-7-2016 ) 
3.01.08   Administrative appeal/judicial review.
A.  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the zoning board of appeals within thirty (30) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. The provisions of Chapter 10, Section 10.05.03 (A) of the LDC shall not apply to appeals pursuant to this section. 
B.  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Tift County, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2016-16, 11-7-2016 ) 
3.01.09   Validity and liability.
A.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this section shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this section. 
B.  Liability. 
1.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this section, nor the compliance with provisions of this section shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
2.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
3.  No provision of this section shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
( Ord. No. 2016-16, 11-7-2016 ) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-16, adopted Nov. 7, 2016, repealed former § 3.01.00 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 3.01.00, subsections 3.01.01—3.01.09 pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Ord. No. 2012-09, adopted July 2, 2012. Subsection numbering of § 3.01.00 has been modified by the editor to eliminate conflicts in numbering. 

Sec. 3.02.00 - Flood damage prevention. 
3.02.01   Statutory authorization.
State law has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
3.02.02   Findings of fact.
A.  The flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
3.02.03   Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
3.02.04   Objectives.
The objectives of this section are to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas. 
3.02.05   Applicability.
This section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Tifton and Tift County, Georgia. 
3.02.06   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
A.  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in its most current flood insurance study (FIS), with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this LDC. 
B.  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a flood insurance study. 
3.02.07   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section and another ordinances conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
3.02.08   Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this section that all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing authority; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
3.02.09   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A.  The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. 
B.  Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. 
C.  This section does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
D.  This section shall not create liability on the part of the governing authority or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made under this section. 
3.02.10   Penalties for violation.
A.  Violation of the provisions of this LDC or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
B.  Any person who violates this LDC or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. 
C.  Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
D.  Nothing contained in this LDC shall prevent the governing authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
3.02.11   Administrator.
The Manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this section. 
3.02.12   Permit procedures.
Application for a development permit shall be made as established in Chapter 10 of this LDC. 
3.02.13   Construction stage.
A.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, on structures located in the Special Flood Hazard Area (AFHA) the permit holder shall provide to the Manager an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing certification after the lowest floor is completed. 
B.  Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer. 
C.  When flood-proofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, such certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by a professional engineer or architect. 
D.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
E.  The Manager shall review the certification data submitted. 
F.  Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. 
G.  Failure to submit certification or failure to make such required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
3.02.14   Duties and responsibilities of the manager.
The duties of the Manager shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of the section have been satisfied. 
B.  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with development permit. 
C.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 3.02.06, the administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources. 
D.  Notify adjacent communities and the state flood coordinating office prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
E.  Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
F.  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor including basement of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with Section 3.02.15. 
G.  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level to which the new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with Section 3.02.15. 
H.  When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Manager shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with Section 3.02.18(B). 
I.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Manager shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this LDC. 
J.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this section shall be maintained in the Manager's office and shall be open for public inspection. 
3.02.15   General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
A.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
B.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. 
1.  Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
2.  This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
C.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
D.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
E.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
F.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
G.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
H.  Any alteration, repair, construction, or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of this section, shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this section. 
3.02.16   Specific standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in Sections 3.02.06 or 3.02.16(C), the provisions of this section are required. 
A.  New residential construction and substantial improvements. 
1.  Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
2.  Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwater shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 3.02.18(D) regarding elevated buildings. 
B.  Nonresidential construction. 
1.  New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the level of the base flood elevation. 
2.  Structures located in all A-Zones may be flood proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
3.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that these standards are satisfied. 
C.  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
Where base flood elevation data are available: 
1.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on: 
a.  Individual lots or parcels; 
b.  In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivision; 
c.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivision; or 
d.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
2.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent height of no less than two (2) feet in height above grade. 
3.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
4.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of Section 3.02.17(B). 
D.  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
1.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
2.  Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevation; 
3.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and 
4.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
E.  Floodway. 
1.  Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 3.02.06 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a. Prohibit  encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge; 
b.  If these provisions are satisfied and certified, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section; 
c.  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes and mobile homes, except in an existing manufactured home or mobile home park or subdivision. 
2.  A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of Section 3.02.17(B), and the elevation standards of Section 3.02.18(A) are met. 
3.02.17   Streams without established base flood elevations or floodways.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 3.02.06, where small streams exist but where no base flood data have been provided or where no floodways have been provided, the following provisions apply: 
A.  No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within a distance of the stream bank equal to two (2) times the width of the stream at the top of bank or twenty (20) feet of bank, whichever is greater, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with the provisions of this LDC. 
C.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 3.02.19(D) regarding elevated buildings. 
3.02.18   Subdivision proposals.
A.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
B.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
D.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions that are greater than the lesser of fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres. 
3.02.19   Areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 3.02.06 are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
A.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. 
B.  If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
C.  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. 
2.  If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement shall be elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
3.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood-proofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
D.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
Sec. 3.03.00 - Water resource districts. 
3.03.01   Purpose.
The intent of this section is to establish minimum development standards and criteria that will afford reasonable protection of environmentally sensitive natural resources found throughout the City of Tifton. Based on the findings of the 2010 Greater Tift County Comprehensive Plan, it has been determined the wise management of these resources is essential to maintaining the health, safety, general welfare and economic well being of the public. 
3.03.02   Establishment of water resource districts.
A.  Tift County's Water Resource Districts shall include the following: 
1.  Groundwater Recharge Area Districts; 
2.  River Corridor Protection Districts; and 
3.  Wetlands Districts. 
B.  Boundaries. The boundaries of these Water Resource Districts are shown on a set of maps designated as "Water Resource Districts" and are included as part of the Official Zoning Map, which is on file with the Manager's office. 
3.03.03   Groundwater recharge area district.
A.  Findings of fact. Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Pesticide, herbicides sprayed on crops, animal waste and septic tank effluents contribute to deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to establish criteria to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, application of chemicals, injections and other development pressures. 
C.  District delineation. The groundwater recharge area protection map is delineated according to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' "Most Significant Groundwater Recharge Areas of Georgia, Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 Edition)" and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources "Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 Edition". Standards for this district shall comply with the DNR Rule 391-3-16-02, Criteria for the Protection of Groundwater Recharge Areas. 
D.  Permitted uses. All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts are permitted in the Groundwater Recharge Area Protection District. The following are additional requirements for specific uses: 
1.  All above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall meet the requirements of U.S. EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 1121. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all Federal requirements. 
2.  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
a.  A high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.  A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed fifteen (15) acre-feet in size; and 
c.  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed fifty (50) acre-feet in size; 
d.  As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one (1) foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x l0-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. 
3.  New homes served by septic tank/drain field systems shall be on lots having the following minimum size limitations as identified on Table MT-l of the Department of Human Resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems ("DHR Table MT-l"): 
a.  150% of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.  125% of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
c.  110% of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area; 
4.  New manufactured home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having the following size limitation as identified on Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resources' (DHR) manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems ("DHR Table MT-2"): 
a.  150% of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.  125% of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
c.  110% of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
d.  Local governments at their option may exempt any lot of record on the date of their adoption of these lot size standards from the minimum lot size requirements. 
5.  No construction may proceed on a building or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank unless the Tift County Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the standards of the DHR Manual and minimum lot size requirements. 
6.  New facilities which handle hazardous materials, of the types (listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local fire prevention code requirements. 
7.  Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
8.  Any new wastewater treatment basin shall have an impermeable liner. 
9.  All agricultural operations subject to 391-3-6-21, Georgia DNR Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria. 
Sec. 3.04.00 - Wetlands resource overlay district. 
3.04.01   Intent.
The intent of this section is to establish minimum development standards and criteria that will afford reasonable protection of environmentally sensitive wetland areas found within the City of Tifton. Based on the findings and recommendations of the 2010 Greater Tift County Comprehensive Plan, and the established Part V Environmental Planning Criteria, it has been determined that the wise management of these wetlands resources is essential to maintaining the health, safety, general welfare, and economic well-being of the current and future inhabitants of the City of Tifton and Greater Tift County. 
3.04.02   Findings of fact.
A.  The wetlands within the City of Tifton are indispensable and fragile nature resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soil limitations. 
B.  In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. 
C.  They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation, water quality maintenance and pollution control, flood control, natural resource education, scientific study, and recreational opportunities. 
3.04.03   Purpose.
The purpose of this overlay district is to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations which will significantly affect or reduce the primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas, and wildlife habitat areas. 
3.04.04   District delineation.
A.  These regulations shall apply to all potential wetlands located within the City of Tifton. 
B.  The Wetland District Overlay Map, adopted as part of this LDC, shows the potential location of wetlands, according to the 1987 National Wetlands Inventory, and should be consulted by persons considering activities in or near wetlands before engaging in a regulated activity. 
C.  The standards for this district shall comply with Department of Natural Resources Rule 391-3-16-03, Criteria for Wetlands Protection. 
3.04.05   Wetland development permit requirements.
A.  No activity or use except those identified in Section 3.04.06 shall be allowed within the wetland overlay district without a permit issued by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. 
B.  If the area proposed for development is located within fifty (50) feet of any potential wetland district boundary, the applicant must document receipt of a nationwide, regional, general or individual permit or a letter of clearance that jurisdictional wetlands are not located on the subject property from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act before a development permit will be issued by the governing authority. 
C.  Any local government action under this LDC does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
3.04.06   Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted by right within the wetlands district to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging: 
A.  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
1.  Section 404 does not require permits for normal, ongoing silvicultural activities. 
2.  However, section 404 does list some required road construction best management practices that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption. 
B.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish or other wildlife, provided the conservation or preservation does not affect waters of the State of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual Section 404 permits. 
C.  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
D.  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
E.  Normal agriculture activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
3.04.07   Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in a wetland district: 
A.  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
B.  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
CHAPTER 4. - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 4.00.00 - Generally. 
4.00.01   Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide design standards applicable to all development activity in all zoning districts. This chapter also provides design standards applicable in specific situations, such as development within overlay districts or development of specific uses, that require supplemental standards to address potential impacts. 
4.00.02   Applicability.
No buildings, structures, or land shall be used or occupied; and, no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this LDC as well as applicable State and federal regulations. These provisions apply within the City of Tifton. 
Sec. 4.01.00 - Site design standards for base zoning districts. 
4.01.01   Design standards for lots (area and width).
A.  Only one (1) principal residential building and its allowable accessory buildings shall hereafter be erected on any one (1) lot in any residential zoning district. 
B.  Except as specifically provided in this LDC, no lot existing at the time of adoption of this LDC shall be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a lot or tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimensional or area requirements of this section. 
C.  Land that is required, dedicated, and accepted for public use is exempt from the requirement of Section 4.01.01(B). 
D.  No building shall be erected on a lot that does not abut an open public street or a private street, meeting current development standards for streets in the City of Tifton. 
E.  Lot width shall be measured at the required minimum front setback line, as set forth in Table 4.01.01(E). Where no minimum setback is established, the lot width shall be measured along the street right-of-way line (property line). 
Table 4.01.01(E). Standards for Lot Area and Width. 

 
1 See Supplemental Standards in Section 4.03.00 for additional lot area requirements for specific uses. 
2 For purposes of providing access from a public right-of-way, the lot width shall be as required for a driveway as set forth in Chapter 6 plus ten (10) feet on each side of the driveway. 
Note: The zoning districts wherein reference is made to Chapter 4 § 4.08.04B (Landscape), the Maximum Impervious Area will be the total gross land area less the required area of landscaping under that section. 
( Ord. No. 2014-01 , 1-6-2014; Ord. No. 2018-06 , 2-19-2018) 
4.01.02   Dimensional standards for building height and location.
A.  Measurement of setbacks. 
1.  Front setbacks shall be measured from the property line of the abutting street to the outermost wall of the building or structure. 
2.  Side and rear setbacks shall be measured from the property line to the outermost wall of the building or structure. 
B.  Encroachments into required setbacks. 
1.  Architectural features, such as cornices, eaves, gutters, steps, and fire escapes, may project not more than three (3) feet beyond a required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways which are used or may be used for access of service and/or emergency vehicles. 
2.  In the case of automobile service stations, motels, and similar uses which serve the motoring public, canopies shall be allowed over a driveway or walkway within the front yard not to extend from the principal building to a point any closer than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line. 
C.  Lots with multiple frontage. 
1.  On a corner lot where the main entrance into a residence is facing a side yard, it shall be permissible for purposes of this LDC to interpret the residence to be fronting on the street other than that street which said entrance faces, and side and rear yard requirements may be provided accordingly. Such determination shall be made by the Manager. 
2.  For a corner lot, side yard setback requirements from the right-of-way of abutting streets shall be equal to seventy-five (75) percent of that required for the front yard setback in SA, R20, R14, R12, R10, R8 and RP zoning districts. For a corner lot, side yard setback requirements from the right-of-way of abutting streets shall be equal to fifty (50) percent of that required for the front yard setback in MR, NC, GB, WLI and HI zoning districts. 
3.  For a corner lot, the street with the higher classification shall be considered the front for purposes of this section, regardless of which street the entrance (front door) faces. Setbacks for side and rear yards shall be established according to the standards in the table below for the yards as indicated on the plan or plat. 
4.  If a building is constructed on a through lot having frontage on two (2) roads not at an intersection, a setback from each road shall be provided equal to the front yard requirement for the district in which the lot is located. 
D.  Maintenance of setbacks. 
1.  No open space or yard established through standards for setbacks shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, setback, off-street parking, and accessory buildings standards of this LDC. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and planted buffer strips shall not be construed to be an encroachment of yards. 
2.  No part of any required yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space shall be considered to be part of a required yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space for any other building or structure or use. 
E.  Building heights. 
1.  Building height is the vertical distance of a building, measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
2.  The height limits of these regulations shall not apply to a church spire, belfry, cupola, dome, ornamental tower not intended for human occupancy, monument, water tower, observation tower, transmission tower, chimney, smoke stack, conveyor, flag pole, radio or television tower, mast or aerial, parapet wall not extending more than four (4) feet above the roof line of the building, and necessary mechanical appurtenances. 
F.  Building setback and height standards are provided in Table 4.01.02(F). 
Table 4.01.02(F). Standards for Building Locations and Heights. 1 

 
1 See Supplemental Standards in Section 4.03.00 for additional setback requirements for specific uses. 
2 When the proposed building is adjacent to a building of thirty-five (35) feet or more in height, the rear setback is increased one (1) foot for each two (2) feet above thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
3 See Building Code for fire rated wall requirements based on setbacks. 
4 Required Setbacks must conform to approved site development plan 
Table 4.01.02(G) Standards for Minimum Gross Floor Area 

 
* 800 square feet for each unit (2 bedroom or larger); 600 square feet for each one bedroom unit (not to exceed 25% of project); 400 square feet for each efficiency unit (not to exceed 25% of project) 
( Ord. No. 2014-01 , 1-6-2014; Ord. No. 2014-07 , 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 2018-06 , 2-19-2018) 
4.01.03   Design standards for commercial and professional condominium developments.
A.  These regulations shall apply to all lands and structures intended to be utilized for either commercial or professional uses where the property owner proposes to apply the condominium development and sales concept. 
B.  Uses allowed within each specific commercial or professional development project shall be those uses specifically permissible in the zoning district as set forth in Section 2.03.03 of this LDC. 
C.  All building facades, landscaped grounds, and parking areas shall be commonly owned and maintained by a properly constituted owners' association while individual ownership of specific units shall be permissible. 
D.  Each individual unit proposed for such a development shall be separated by a fire resistant wall or floor as required by applicable construction and safety codes, and each unit shall be served by separate utilities. 
E.  Parking for such developments, including layout and site design as well as parking space requirements, shall comply with the requirements of Section 6.01.03 of this LDC. 
F.  The site design shall demonstrate compliance with lot area, lot dimension, setback, and height standards set forth in this LDC. 
G.  Applications for a building permit for all proposed commercial and professional development projects shall comply with the submittal and procedural requirements set forth in Chapter 10. In addition, if the project proposes the subdivision of the tract into various individual lots and common area, a copy of the proposed subdivision plat must be submitted for review with the site development plan. 
4.01.04   Design standards for multi-family residential developments.
A.  The regulations as set forth in this section shall apply to all lands and structures intended primarily to provide for owner occupied residential units, including condominiums, single family attached dwelling units (with or without condominium ownership), patio homes, multi-family development, zero lot line, and other similar housing types. Multiple buildings may be allowed on a single lot in these development types. Such projects may be referred to as residential group development projects. 
B.  A condominium is defined as a type of residential development which includes individually owned dwelling units in a multi-family structure, combined with joint ownership of common areas of the buildings and grounds. 
C.  Single family attached dwellings are a type of residential development which includes a dwelling unit on a subdivided lot individually owned, though attached by a common party wall to another dwelling unit on an adjacent lot. This housing type may also include provisions for joint ownership of common areas of certain buildings and grounds. 
D.  Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit, other than projects located in the CD zoning district. One guest parking space shall be provided for every five (5) dwelling units. 
E.  Each dwelling unit proposed for such a development shall be separated by a fire resistant wall or floor as required by applicable construction and safety codes, and each dwelling unit shall be served by separate utilities. 
F.  When the residential development consists of townhouses, there shall be no more than ten (10) townhouse units in one building. 
G.  In addition to any required yards created by building setbacks, an open space shall be established which includes a minimum of 500 square feet per dwelling unit. The open space shall be left in a natural state, or developed as park or open air recreation facilities to be part of the common area of the residential development. 
H.  If the project proposes the subdivision of the tract into various individual lots and common area, a copy of the subdivision plat shall be submitted with the site development plan application. 
I.  Interior lots within a residential group development may be smaller than the minimum lot area and lot width requirements for the applicable zoning district, so long as the required building setbacks are provided. However, perimeter lots, meaning lots adjacent to public streets, shall meet the lot area and setback requirements for the zoning district. 
J.  Buildings within the residential group development shall meet the building height standards for the zoning district. 
Sec. 4.02.00 - Site design standards for special and overlay districts. 
4.02.01   Site design standards for the Historic Preservation Overlay District.
A.  The review of proposed development within the Historic Preservation Overlay District shall consider the provisions contained in the HPC Manual and the following in determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness: 
1.  Size, number, arrangement, rhythm, and position or location of doors, windows, porches, stairs, fixtures, and architectural features, both decorative and functional. 
2.  Materials and colors. 
3.  Form, mass, and scale. 
4.  Setting, including streetscape and landscape. 
5.  Relationship of proposed features, buildings, additions, and other elements of the development or redevelopment to original details, features, materials predominant in the Historic District. 
B.  Proposed redevelopment shall be designed to retain, preserve, and restore original features and elements. 
C.  New construction shall be compatible with the historic character and building types in the Historic District. 
D.  Determinations regarding the appropriateness of the proposed redevelopment and/or new construction shall be based on the standards contained in the following documents. 
1.  Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings from the U.S. Secretary of Interior; and 
2.  City of Tifton Historic Design Manual, dated November 2003. 
4.02.02   Site design standards for the Airport Overlay District (TMA).
A.  Airport zoning regulations are important for both the protection of airspace and land use compatibility in relation to the airport. The regulations set forth in this section are intended to prevent encroachment into the runway protection zones and airspace zones of the Henry Tift Myers Airport. Further, these regulations are intended to ensure that structures, such as but not limited to telecommunication towers/cellular antennas, buildings, water tanks, smokestacks, power lines, and cranes, are not erected to encroach into protected space. 
B.  The specific purposes of the regulations set forth in this section are: 
1.  To protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons within the vicinity of the Henry Tift Myers Airport; 
2.  To provide for the safe and efficient operation of the Henry Tift Myers Airport; and 
3.  To ensure the safety of flyers using the Henry Tift Myers Airport from hazards to air navigation. 
C.  Within the TMA Airport Overlay District, the following zones are established, and are depicted on the City of Tifton and Tift County Zoning Maps. 
1.  Ground zone, which is the area of the airport consisting of the runway and apron features including an area immediately off the runway where air traffic, in normal conditions, is on the ground preparing to taxi, takeoff, land, or be maintained. Aircraft in the ground zone area are typically not engaged in aerial flight. 
2.  Visual approach zone, which is the zone extending outward from the end of the runway for a distance of 5,000 feet with a terminal width of 2,400 feet used for visual approaches. 
3.  Utility approach zone, which is the zone extending outward from the end of the visual approach zone for a distance of 10,000 feet with a terminal width of 3,800 feet used for instrument approaches. 
4.  Transitional zone, which is the zone extending from the terminal point of one utility approach zone and running parallel to the ground zone that serves as a gradual transition for height restrictions before entering more restrictive zones and airspace. 
5.  Transitional buffer zone, which extends from the terminal point of one utility approach zone to another terminal point for either visual or a utility approach zone; the transitional buffer is designed to ensure that airspace around multiple runways no directly in the path of air traffic is developed in such a manner as air traffic is not imperiled due to height or proximity to existing approaches. 
D.  The following runways are delineated for the TMA Airport Overlay District: 
1.  15/33 Primary Runway; 
2.  6/27 Secondary Runway; and 
3.  3/21 Auxiliary Runway. 
E.  No use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this section in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft that make it difficult for the pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other light which result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird striking hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
F.  No structure or building shall be erected, created, installed, or maintained within the transitional and approach zones to exceed the height limit established below. 
Table 4.02.02(E). Height Limits in Airport Zones. 

 
4.02.03   Reserved.
Sec. 4.03.00 - Supplemental standards for specific uses. 
4.03.01   Kennels and animal boarding facilities.
A.  Keeping animals shall be considered a commercial kennel when the following conditions exist: 
1.  When there are more than six (6) dogs, cats, or other small animals or more than four (4) of any one breed. 
2.  There are seven (7) or more dogs, cats, or other small animals, not including fish, reptiles, and birds. Such animals are boarded, cared for, bred, raised, or kept for compensation. One must have a license from the State of Georgia Department of Agricultural Animal Protection Section. 
3.  There are more than seven (7) dogs, cats or other small animals boarded, cared for, or kept without compensation or for a hobby such as show dogs or hunting dogs. One must have a kennel License from the State of Georgia Department of Agricultural Animal Protection Section. 
4.  Litters of animals not more than six (6) months of age are exempt from the provisions of 4.03.01(A). One may have one (1) litter per year if for compensation you must have a license issued by the State of Georgia Department of Agricultural Animal Protection Section. 
B.  Kennels shall meet the design standards set forth in Table 4.03.01(B). 
Table 4.03.01(B) Standards for Kennels. 

 
4.03.02   Intensive agricultural feedlot operations (IAFO).
A.  Commercial farms, including commercial chicken houses, shall meet the design standards in Table 4.03.02(A). 
1.  A farm shall be considered commercial when the density of animals is more than one (1) animal per 10,000 square feet of fenced area or more than fifty (50) fowl per lot. 
2.  Animals shall be kept within a fenced area. 
Table 4.03.02(A). Standards for Commercial Farms. 

 
B.  A noncommercial farm shall provide at least 10,000 square feet of fenced yard for each animal. A farm is considered noncommercial when the number of fowl is fifty (50) or fewer per lot. Noncommercial farms shall meet the design standards in Table 4.03.02(B). 
Table 4.03.02(B). Standards for Noncommercial Farms. 

 
[C].  Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations shall meet and demonstrate compliance with Section 391-3-6-.21 of the Georgia DNR Environmental Planning Rules and meet Best Management Practices as outlined by NRCS. 
[D].  Retail selling of products raised on the premises shall be considered a permissible activity. Off-street parking shall be provided for customers vehicles. 
4.03.03   Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics.
All animal hospitals and veterinary clinics shall meet the following standards: 
Table 4.03.03. Standards for Animal Hospitals or Veterinary Clinics. 

 
4.03.04   Golf courses.
A.  A golf course may be public or private and may include the following buildings and accessory uses: 
1.  A clubhouse with or without a pro shop, retail sales of golf supplies and accessories, and a restaurant or snack shop; 
2.  An equipment building for maintenance, minor repairs, and storage. Storage may include fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides; and 
3.  Driving range. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  The types of golf courses may be par 3, executive, or regulation. 
D.  Lighted golf courses are permissible only when located in the GB, WLI, and HI zoning districts. 
E.  The following are site design standards for golf courses: 
Table 4.03.04(D). Standards for Golf Courses. 

 
4.03.05   Junk yards and salvage yards.
A.  A junk yard or salvage yard means the use of property for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking, and structural steel materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
B.  The site design standards for salvage yards and junk yards are set forth in the following table: 
Table 4.03.05(B). Standards for Junk Yards and Salvage Yards. 

 
4.03.06   Religious facilities and associated uses.
A.  A religious facility is a building or group of buildings where persons assemble for purposes of worship. The principal use of a religious facility is considered worship, which is a form of religious practice, together with its creed and ritual. 
B.  Uses and activities other than worship and offices to support the primary facility shall be considered accessory uses and shall be clearly ancillary to the primary use. Such uses and activities shall be limited to: 
1.  Religious instruction (such as "Sunday School," Bible school, or similar religious instruction or study typically associated with the religion); 
2.  Child or adult day care, subject to the standards set forth in 4.03.09 and 4.03.06(D); 
3.  Private academic school, subject to the standards set forth in 4.03.06(E); 
4.  A fellowship hall, with or without a kitchen, subject to the standards of Section 4.03.06(F), (which may be known as a community center, activity hall, or life center); 
5.  Recreation facilities; 
6.  Individual meeting spaces; and 
7.  A parsonage, subject to the standards of Section 4.03.06. 
C.  All accessory uses are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The accessory use shall be owned and operated only by the owner of the primary use; 
2.  The facility housing the accessory use shall meet all local, state, or federal standards; 
3.  The owner of the primary use shall obtain any licenses required to conduct the accessory use. Any approval of the accessory use shall be contingent upon receipt of all licenses; 
4.  Loudspeaker of paging systems shall be located to ensure that they cannot be heard at the property line of adjacent properties; 
5.  All outdoor activities shall occur no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 10:00 p.m.; 
6.  All exterior lighting shall be directed or shielded to avoid illumination of adjacent properties as measured at the property line; 
7.  Outdoor play or activity areas shall be no closer than fifty (50) feet from any residential property line. 
D.  Child day care, adult day care, preschool, or child nursery uses are allowable accessory uses subject to applicable state codes and the following standards: 
1.  The total floor area allocated to the child day care, adult day care, preschool, or nursery uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total floor area on the site. The calculation of total floor area allocated to the uses shall be cumulative and shall include all child day care, adult day care, preschool, nursery facilities, and related mechanical and support facilities. 
2.  An off-street drop-off area for persons served by the facility shall be provided. The entrance and vehicle drop off points shall not be located on a street providing primary access to residences, unless such street is classified as a collector or arterial. 
E.  Private academic schools are allowable accessory uses subject to applicable state code and the following standards: 
1.  The total floor area allocated to the school shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total floor area on the site. The calculation of total floor area allocated to the school shall include all components of the school: classrooms, school library, school offices, teacher work areas, and the like, including related mechanical and support facilities. This standard shall apply whether the floor area allocated to the school is also used for other purposes when not needed for the school. 
2.  The entrance and vehicle drop off points for students shall not be located on a street providing primary access to residences, unless such street is classified as a collector or arterial. 
F.  A fellowship hall or multi-purpose building is an allowable accessory use, provided that the total floor area allocated to the fellowship hall, including related mechanical and support facilities, shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the total floor area on the site. 
G.  One (1) residential dwelling unit is allowable to serve as a parsonage, subject to the following standards: 
1.  A minimum lot area, within the parcel developed for religious uses and facilities, to be devoted to the dwelling unit ("parsonage lot") shall be 8,000 square feet. A larger lot area may be required when the dwelling unit is served by a septic tank. The parsonage lot shall be used exclusively for the dwelling unit, and shall not include any primary or other accessory use allowable on the site. 
2.  Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided to serve the parsonage and shall be located within the parsonage lot. 
3.  The parsonage lot may contain children's outdoor play equipment, in a size and quantity typical of residential uses. 
4.  The parsonage lot may contain a residential swimming pool, fully enclosed by a fence, and attached to the dwelling. 
H.  A specific parking plan shall be provided. This plan shall identify the principal use and each accessory use proposed on the site. The parking plan shall indicate the hours of operation and peak times of use (parking demand) for the primary use and each accessory use on the site. The parking standards for the principal use and each accessory use shall be identified based upon LDC requirements. The parking plan may propose reduced or shared parking. The parking plan shall indicate areas designated for overflow parking during times of extraordinary use (such as festival or holiday periods). 
I.  For religious facilities that exceed 10,000 square feet in total floor area, excluding the parsonage, if any, the minimum setback from any property line that is otherwise required shall increase five (5) feet for each 2,000 square feet of floor area, or portion thereof, over 10,000 square feet in floor area. 
4.03.07   Manufactured homes.
A.  Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. 
Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the City of Tifton. 
Building Inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections, or the city building official, or his or her designee.. 
Certificate of Occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this Ordinance, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
Install means to construct a foundation system to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured homes and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction means the incorporated areas of the City of Tifton, Georgia. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the travelling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Sections 5401, et seq. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
B.  Conditions. All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying that it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards (MHCSS) Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Sections 5401, et seq. (the HUD Code), and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, et seq. 
C.  Permitting, Inspection, Certificate of Occupancy and Fees. A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
1.  Permit. To obtain a permit, Applicants shall provide to the Director: 
a.  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by the MHCSS Act and this ordinance. 
b.  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that the home meets the minimum health and safety standards of Section 4 of this ordinance. 
c.  The permit and inspection fee required by sub-section (4) of this Section. 
2.  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, Applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
3.  Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall only be issued to the Applicant after such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this ordinance have been met. 
4.  Fee. A permit and inspection fee as determined by City Council shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the City to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow up inspection. The applicant shall be charged a fee as determined by City Council for each additional follow up inspection that is necessary. 
5.  Alternative Inspection. At the request of the Applicant, the building inspector may, at his or her discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then locate at another site within the City within 90 days from the date of the inspection. 
D.  Minimum Health and Safety Standards. All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector. 
1.  HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code), and shall not be altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
2.  Interior Condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
3.  Exterior Condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
4.  Sanitary Facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one (1) bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
5.  Heating Systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Unvented heaters shall be prohibited. 
6.  Electrical Systems. (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are property bonded. 
7.  Hot Water Supply. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
8.  Egress Windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
9.  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
10.  Smoke Detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one (1) operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
11.  Underpinning . Each pre-owned manufactured home must be properly underpinned or skirted with material comparable to the manufactured home. 
E.  Enforcement. 
1.  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
2.  Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction. 
F.  Penalties. Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by a fine as adopted by City Council. Each day any violation under this ordinance continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2014-07 , 5-5-2014) 
4.03.08(a)   Manufactured housing parks.
A.  General Standards. Where a development is proposed as a manufactured housing park (called park), the following standards shall apply: 
1.  The minimum parcel size for a park shall be three (3) acres. 
2.  The units within the park shall be manufactured homes. 
3.  The minimum area for each manufactured home (called lot) shall be 6000 square feet with a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet where lots are served by both public water and public sewer systems. 
4.  Each lot shall be clearly defined by markers placed at all corners. 
5.  At least 200 square feet per lot, and not part of the required lot, shall be provided in one (1) or more locations for community playground and recreation purposes. 
6.  Each manufactured home must be installed and anchored as per State of Georgia minimum requirements, properly underpinned or skirted within forty-five (45) days of installation with material comparable to the proposed manufactured home. Each manufactured home shall have a minimum three (3) foot by three (3) foot landing, stairs, and handrails at each ingress and egress. 
7.  Each site shall have a connection to public water and sewer system. 
8.  No park shall be occupied by occupied by a greater number of manufactured homes than that authorized in the approved site development plan. No park shall be enlarged or extended unless a separate site development plan has been submitted and approved. Procedures for submission and review of site development plans are set forth in Chapter 10. 
9.  Each lot shall have a properly drained and paved parking space for at least two (2) motor vehicles, designed and built in compliance with Section 6.01.03 as it pertains to parking spaces. 
B.  Buffers. A perimeter buffer shall be provided for the park development as follows: 
1.  The buffer width shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
2.  Landscaping within the buffer shall comply with the standards in Section 4.08.06(b)(1) through (6). 
3.  Buffers shall comply with requirements for maintenance as set forth in Section 4.08.03. 
C.  Accessory Uses. 
1.  Accessory uses and structure may include management headquarters, recreational facilities, buildings for toilets and showers, coin-operated laundry facilities, solid waste facilities, and other uses and structures customarily incidental to park use. 
2.  Accessory buildings on individual lots shall be set back ten (10) feet from lot boundaries, with a limit of one (1) accessory building per lot. 
3.  Accessory uses and parking to serve the accessory uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total area of the park. Accessory buildings and use areas shall have an interior setback of ten (10) feet from the boundary of the area established for accessory uses and buildings. 
D.  Streets and Sidewalks. 
1.  Access to the park shall be by paved public street. Such access shall be on or within 1,000 feet of and accessible to a principal or minor arterial or collector street. Any park with more than twenty (20) units shall have a minimum of two (2) access points. 
2.  A twenty (20) foot interior roadway or drive shall be paved, curbed, properly drained, and shall serve all lots. 
3.  Sidewalks shall be required throughout the park constructed according to the City of Tifton Design Standards. 
4.  Security lights shall be required throughout the park to insure a safe environment and help protect the welfare of occupants of the park. 
4.03.08(b)   Recreational vehicle parks.
Where a development is proposed as a recreational vehicle park (called park), the following standards shall apply: 
A.  General Standards. 
1.  The minimum parcel size for a park shall be one (1) acre. 
2.  The units within the park shall be recreational vehicles, including travel trailers, motor homes, fifth wheel trailers, pop-up trailers, park model trailers, and other similar vehicles. 
3.  Each site shall have a connection to public water, waste water, and electrical systems. 
4.  The minimum area for each recreational vehicle site (called space) shall be 2400 square feet with a minimum lot width of forty (40) feet. 
5.  Each lot shall be clearly defined. 
6.  No park shall be occupied by a greater number of recreational vehicles than that authorized in the approved site development plan. No park shall be enlarged or extended unless a separate site development plan has been submitted and approved. Procedures for submission and review of site development plans are set forth in Chapter 10. 
7.  Application for site development plan shall include demonstration of compliance with State regulations. 
8.  Each lot shall have a properly drained and paved parking space for at least one (1) motor vehicle, designed and built in compliance with Section 6.01.03 as it pertains to parking spaces. 
B.  Buffers. A perimeter buffer shall be provided for the park development as follows: 
1.  The buffer width shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
2.  Landscaping within the buffer shall comply with the standards in Section 4.08.06(b)(1) through (6). 
3.  Buffers shall comply with requirements for maintenance as set forth in Section 4.08.03. 
C.  Accessory Uses. 
1.  Accessory uses and structure may include management headquarters, recreational facilities, buildings for toilets and showers, coin-operated laundry facilities, solid waste facilities, and other uses and structures customarily incidental to park use. 
2.  Accessory uses and parking to serve the accessory uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total area of the park. Accessory buildings and use areas shall have an interior setback of ten (10) feet from the boundary of the area established for accessory uses and buildings. 
D.  Streets and Sidewalks. 
1.  Access to the park shall be by paved public street. Such access shall be on or within 1,000 feet of and accessible to a principal or minor arterial or collector street. Any park with more than twenty (20) spaces shall have a minimum of two (2) access points. 
2.  A minimum twenty (20) foot interior roadway or drive shall be provided with paved or stabilized dust free surfaces. All roads must be properly drained and shall serve all lots. 
3.  Security lights shall be required throughout the park to insure a safe environment and help protect the welfare of occupants of the park. 
4.03.09   Day cares, kindergartens, and nurseries.
A.  A day care, kindergarten, or nursery is a facility providing care for six (6) or more children who are not related by blood or marriage and are not the legal wards or foster children of the owners or operators of the facility. The facility is intended to provide care, training, education, or supervision of children less than fourteen (14) years of age. 
B.  The facility shall provide off-street loading and unloading spaces, separated from the parking area. 
C.  There shall be at least 100 square feet of outdoor play area for each child. 
D.  The entire play area shall be enclosed by a steel mesh security fence or substantial building material at least four (4) feet in height. Such fence shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide maximum safety to the children. 
E.  All facilities regulated in this section shall comply with State regulations and acquire applicable State licenses for operation. 
4.03.10   Gasoline service stations and/or convenience stores.
A.  The term "gasoline service station" includes convenience stores with gas pumps, and establishments that provide the following accessory uses in addition to gas pumps: fast food restaurants, drive-through restaurants, groceries, and sundries, supplies for the traveling public, food, and beverages. Freestanding convenience stores without gas pumps are also regulated by this section. 
B.  Vehicle repair services are prohibited. Maintenance services, such as oil changes, are permissible. Body repair and paint is specifically prohibited. 
C.  Underground storage tanks, if any, shall be designed, located, and monitored in full compliance with State requirements. Evidence of such compliance shall be provided with the site development plan application. 
D.  Oil drainage pits and hydraulic lifts, if any, shall be located as follows: 
1.  Such uses shall be within an enclosed structure. 
2.  Such uses shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
E.  Drive-through lanes for restaurants associated with the gasoline service station or convenience store shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any property zoned for residential uses. Distance shall be measured from the outermost edge of the drive-through lane to the property line of the nearest property zoned for residential use. 
F.  Dumpsters shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of property zoned for residential use and shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 5.02.05. 
G.  All exterior lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
H.  Vehicle parts, supplies, damaged parts, or other materials and supplies shall be stored within an opaque screened enclosure or building. 
4.03.11   Hospitals and nursing homes.
A.  A hospital is any institution receiving in-patients, or a private or public institution receiving out-patients, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical, and/or obstetrical care, such as examination, diagnosis, treatment, and nursing care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of senile psychotics, drug addiction, or alcohol treatment but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
B.  The following are site design standards for free standing hospitals and nursing homes: 
Table 4.03.11(B). Standards for Free Standing Hospitals and Nursing Homes. 

 
C.  Private or Public Hospitals located within or as part of a group of buildings shall follow the setback and minimum land area and setbacks as approved in the site development plan. The above guidelines for emergency vehicle entrances, exterior lighting and dumpsters shall apply. 
4.03.12   Dry cleaning plants.
A.  The plant shall not serve more than one (1) pick-up and delivery station in addition to the onsite pick-up and delivery service. 
B.  The building shall not exceed 4,000 square feet of floor area, including the pick-up and delivery facility. 
C.  An application for approval of a site development plan for a dry cleaning plant shall include documentation of compliance with EPD rules and regulations. 
4.03.13   Personal care homes.
A.  A personal care home is a building or group of buildings in which two (2) or more beds are provided for compensation and facilities and services are provided to non-family ambulatory adults. Facilities and services may include room, meals, and personal care. 
1.  A family personal care home is a family-type residence where facilities and services are provided to two (2) to six (6) adults. 
2.  A group personal care home is a building where facilities and services are provided to seven (7) to fifteen (15) adults. 
3.  A congregate personal care home is a building where facilities and services are provided to sixteen (16) or more adults. 
B.  An application to establish a personal care home shall include documentation demonstrating compliance with State rules and regulations. 
C.  The following site design standards apply to personal care homes: 
Table 4.03.13(B). Standards for Personal Care Homes. 

 
4.03.14   Electrical substation.
A.  All buildings, masts, and other facilities shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from adjacent property lines when the adjacent district is zoned or used for residential development. 
B.  A perimeter buffer shall be provided as follows: 
1.  The buffer width shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
2.  Landscaping within the buffer shall comply with the standards in Section 4.08.06(b)(1) through (6). 
3.  Buffers shall comply with requirements for maintenance as set forth in Section 4.08.03. 
4.03.15   Heavy manufacturing facilities.
A.  Heavy manufacturing uses are those that produce noise, odor, dust, fumes, fire hazards, or other similar nuisances. 
B.  Heavy manufacturing uses shall be set back not less than 500 feet from all property lines, except when the adjacent property is zoned HI. 
4.03.16   Mini-storage and self-storage facilities.
A.  The following activities or uses are prohibited on the grounds or within the buildings of self-service storage facilities: 
1.  Wholesale sales; 
2.  Retail sales, including garage sales, or other commercial activities; 
3.  Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, or other industrial activity; 
4.  Service or repair of vehicles, engines, electronic equipment or similar activities; 
5.  Rehearsal or practice of musical instruments; and 
6.  Residential use. 
B.  Notwithstanding the limitations described in Section 4.03.16(A) above, the following activities may be conducted: 
1.  Rental of storage bays; 
2.  Truck rental business, limited to a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the gross site area; 
3.  Sales of boxes or goods related directly to the operation of a self-service storage facility; and 
4.  Sales by the owner or manager of the facility of abandoned items for reclamation of rental costs. 
C.  Except as specifically provided in this section, all property stored on the site shall be entirely within enclosed buildings. 
D.  Storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals is prohibited. 
E.  As an accessory use, one (1) dwelling unit may be established for security personnel, management personnel, or the facility owner. The dwelling unit may be site built or manufactured housing. 
F.  The following site design requirements shall be met: 
Table 4.03.16(F). Site Design Standards for Self-storage Facilities. 

 
G.  The following design standards are required for the self-service storage buildings: 
Table 4.03.16(G). Building Design Standards for Self-storage Facilities. 

 
H.  Outdoor (open) storage is permissible, subject to the following standards: 
Table 4.03.16(H). Standards for Outdoor Storage at Self-service Storage Facilities. 

 
I.  Traffic circulation requirements: 
1.  Traffic lane widths shall be established to provide for the adequate circulation, safety, and accessibility of trucks, cars, and individuals who utilize dead storage in such facilities; 
2.  The minimum traffic lane width shall be twenty-four (24) feet; 
3.  The maximum traffic lane width shall be forty (40) feet; 
4.  Traffic flow patterns, directional signage, and painted land markings with arrows shall also be clearly marked; and 
5.  In order to ensure appropriate access and circulation by emergency vehicles and equipment, the turning radii of the aisle ways shall be approved by the governing authority and the local fire inspector at the time of site development plan review. 
4.03.17   Radio and television broadcast stations.
All towers, masts, aerials and antennas (including guy wires therefore) and other apparatus that constitute accessory equipment necessary for the broadcasting of television signals and/or radio signals shall meet the following standards 
Table 4.03.17. Standards for Radio and Television Broadcast Stations. 

 
4.03.18   Vehicle sales, rentals, repair, paint, or rebuilding.
A.  Vehicle sales establishments may sell, rent, or lease vehicles, including recreational vehicles, motor vehicles, watercraft, and utility trailers. 
B.  The following are the site design standards for vehicle sales establishments. 
Table 4.03.18(B). Standards for Vehicle Sales Establishments. 

 
C.  Only motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, and watercraft that are operable may be sold or leased. 
D.  The owner of vehicle sales establishment shall prepare a plan and inventory for the safe storage of flammable or hazardous materials to be stored or used on the property. The plan shall provide for the prevention, containment, recovery, and mitigation of spilled fuel or other hazardous material. The inventory shall be submitted to the local fire marshal prior to the site development plan approval, listing the type, quantity, and location of these materials. The inventory shall be kept current. 
E.  Vehicles, signs, banners, tents, or other items shall not be stored, parked, displayed, or otherwise placed on public rights-of-way at any time. 
( Ord. No. 2013-11 , 9-9-2013) 
4.03.19   Funeral homes.
A.  Funeral homes shall comply with all State and Federal Rules and Regulations. 
B.  Off-street waiting space shall be provided for funeral processions so that no vehicle stands or waits in a public right-of-way. A minimum off-street stacking distance of sixty (60) feet shall be provided. 
4.03.20   Clubs, lodges, community centers, and recreation centers.
A.  The club, lodge, community center, or recreation center (called "center") shall be located on a collector or arterial street. 
B.  When adjacent to residential uses, the building in which the center is located shall be substantially similar in design, appearance, and character to buildings located within a 200 foot radius. Distance shall be measured from all property lines of the lot on which the center is located. 
C.  The minimum lot area for a center is 21,780 square feet. 
D.  Parking for the center shall be located as follows: 
1.  All required parking spaces shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure. 
2.  On-street parking shall not count toward meeting the parking requirements of the center. 
E.  Outdoor recreation facilities may be provided, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The buffer adjacent to the outdoor recreation area shall be two (2) times the buffer otherwise required pursuant to Section 4.08.06. 
2.  Exterior lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid illumination of adjacent properties. 
3.  There shall be no loudspeakers or paging systems. 
4.03.21   Adult uses and adult entertainment establishments.
A.  An adult use or adult entertainment establishment is any commercial use or establishment that includes an adult bookstore, adult movie house, or explicit media outlet as regulated by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3, and shall include adult entertainment establishments, adult hotel/motels, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult motion picture arcades, adult motion picture theatre and adult video store as those terms are defined in the City of Tifton's Adult Entertainment Ordinance. 
B.  An adult use or adult entertainment establishment shall be located on an arterial road and shall be permitted in HI, WLI and SA zoning districts. 
C.  The lot or parcel on which an adult use or adult entertainment establishment is located shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet from the following: 
1.  A lot or parcel used or zoned for residential use. 
2.  A lot or parcel used or zoned for religious facilities. 
3.  A lot or parcel used or zoned for public or private schools, day care facilities, kindergartens, or child nurseries. 
4.  A lot or parcel used or zoned for public recreation facilities, public parks, or public playgrounds. 
5.  A lot or parcel used for adult uses or adult entertainment. 
D.  Measurement of distance for compliance with Section 4.03.21 shall be from property lines of the lot on which the adult use or adult entertainment is proposed to the property line of the lot or parcel with the uses listed in Section 4.03.21(C) and 4.03.12(J). Distance shall be a straight line from lot line to lot line and shall not follow roads or paths of travel unless such road or path of travel also describes the shortest distance from lot line to lot line. 
E.  The minimum lot area for an adult use or adult entertainment establishment is one (1) acre and must comply with Zoning Standards. 
F.  The minimum lot width for an adult use or adult entertainment establishment is 210 feet. 
G.  Buildings on the lot shall be set back forty (40) feet from all property lines. 
H.  Windows shall be maintained in a clear unobstructed manner so as to provide an open and unobstructed view of the entire reception area, lobby, and any ticket or other sales areas. 
I.  Parking shall be provided as follows: 
1.  One (1) space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area, or 
2.  One (1) space for each three (3) occupants as determined by the occupancy rating of the fire marshal, whichever is greater. 
J.  No adult entertainment facility shall be located within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment licensed by the City to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises is located. 
4.03.22   Boarding houses or rooming houses.
A.  A boarding house or rooming house shall not exceed ten (10) guest rooms or bedrooms. 
B.  Communal areas may be provided for dining, social activities, entertainment, or recreation. Cooking facilities are prohibited in individual guest rooms. 
C.  Off-street parking shall be provided. There shall be one (1) space per guest room, plus two (2) additional spaces. 
4.03.23   Shooting club or range.
A.  Outdoor Gun/Archery Ranges that are utilized by Law Enforcement and Safety Personnel are essential services areas for the community. 
B.  The discharge of weapons shall be conducted only within the range and or bays specifically designated for such use on an approved site plan. 
C.  Firing positions shall be separated a minimum of 200 feet from the boundary of the subject property with any adjacent parcel in separate ownership and in addition, firing positions shall be separated a minimum of 500 feet from any permitted residence existing at the time of site plan approval for the proposed shooting range. 
D.  An impenetrable backstop, a minimum of twenty (20) feet in height, shall be constructed down range of any authorized range or bay and side berms a minimum of twenty (20) feet in height shall be provided along the sidelines. 
E.  The perimeter of the shooting range, including the weapon discharge area and surrounding berms, shall be enclosed by a fence or wall, a minimum of six (6) feet in height to prevent unauthorized access. Warning signs of at least one (1) square foot each shall be attached to the perimeter fence at the rate of once at every corner and at least one (1) for every 100 lineal feet plus one (1) at each entry gate. 
F.  The applicant's range complex design shall be consistent with the NRA Range Source Book latest edition for the construction of outdoor shooting ranges. To assure the protection of groundwater from lead and other contaminants associated with the discharge of firearms the range shall comply with USEPA's Best Management Practices (http://www.epa.gov/region2/waste/leadshot/). 
G.  The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable state and local regulations and how safety and noise factors have been addressed through the site plan and other special features of the proposed development. 
H.  A shooting range sites are a community asset that once sited and in operation, needs to be protected. To that end is a requirement that properties to be sold within two (2) miles of the range, once the site has been approved, that the seller must disclose of the existence of said shooting range to the prospective buyer. 
4.03.24   Intensive commercial recreation.
A.  Intensive commercial recreation includes such uses as tracks for go-carts and similar vehicles, sports fields, miniature golf, climbing walls, pony rides, playgrounds, and other similar outdoor, commercial recreation. 
B.  Intensive commercial recreation may include accessory uses, such as snack shops, food stands, gift shops, ice cream stands, and similar uses. 
C.  Intensive commercial recreation uses shall comply with the following standards: 
Table 4.03.24(C). Standards for Intensive Commercial Recreation. 

 
4.03.25   Cemeteries (human and pet).
A.  Cemeteries must front on an arterial or connector street to be permitted. 
B.  A cemetery may include one or more of the following: a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments and a columbarium. 
C.  A cemetery may include a chapel when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of the cemetery. 
D.  Registered cemeteries per State Law must have a minimum size of ten (10) acres; other cemeteries must have a minimum land area of two (2) acres. 
E.  The minimum setbacks for any structures to the front property line must be forty (40) feet, to the side and rear property lines must be twenty (20) feet and adjacent to any residentially zoned property must be fifty (50) feet. 
F.  Must have a twenty-five (25) foot planted buffer strip around their entire perimeter except for ingress and egress points. 
4.03.26   Internet cafe; or similar uses.
A.  No Internet Cafe or Similar Uses shall be permitted within 300 feet, as measured in a straight line from the nearest point on the property which will be the location of the business in which the internet cafe license will be utilized to the nearest point on the property upon which is located a church, school, college, or alcohol or drug treatment center operated by any governmental agency, with the terms "school" and "college" as used in this subsection meaning those institutions which are both (i) operated either by a governmental or church entity and (ii) are engaged in courses of instruction which are commonly taught in public primary or secondary schools or colleges in the state; 
B.  No Internet Cafe or Simliar Uses shall be permitted which would cause or create any violation of the LDC of the city or of the building code or fire code of the city. 
4.03.27   Portable on demand (POD) storage units.
A.  Before placing a PODS unit on his or her property, a person must submit an application and receive a permit from the City. An insurance certificate providing liability insurance in the amount of $100,000 provided by the company supplying the POD must accompany the application. 
B.  There is a fee as determined by City Council for a ninety (90) day permit. Applications can be required from the Director. 
C.  Permits will be granted for a period of ninety (90) days. At the expiration of the ninety (90) day period, applicants may seek to extend their permits one time for an additional thirty (30) days by seeking an extension for cause from the Director. Extension of a permit will cost a fee as determined by City Council for the additional thirty (30) days granted. 
D.  PODS units are prohibited from being placed in the road right-of-way streets or the front yard of a property. 
E.  All locations must be paved off-street surfaces. Portable Storage Units shall only be placed the property owner's driveway or a parking area or, if access exists at the side or rear of the site, the side or rear yard. The required parking space(s) shall at all times be maintained if temporary storage units are placed in parking areas. 
F.  The portable storage unit is no larger than eight feet in height by ten (10) feet in width by twenty (20) feet in length. 
G.  The Applicant, as well as the Supplier, shall be responsible for ensuring that the Portable Storage Unit is maintained in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering, discoloration, graffiti, rust, ripping, tearing or other holes or breaks, at all times. 
H.  No Portable Storage Unit shall be used to store solid waste, construction debris, demolition debris, recyclable materials, or any other illegal or hazardous material. 
I.  No Portable Storage Unit shall be occupied as a dwelling or office/business location. 
4.03.28   Food service establishments.
Food Service Establishments shall meet all the Technical Design Standards contained in Appendix 1 to this Code as may be necessary to meet all permitting standards and requirements for the site plan and construction. 
4.03.29   Hotel/motel.
Hotel/Motel Establishments shall meet all the Technical Design Standards contained in Appendix 1 to this Code as may be necessary to meet all permitting standards and requirements for the site plan and construction. 
4.03.30   Car/truck wash.
Car Wash/Truck Wash Establishments shall meet all the Technical Design Standards contained in Appendix 1 to this Code as may be necessary to meet all permitting standards and requirements for the site plan and construction. 
4.03.31   Tattoo parlors/body piercing establishments.
A.  Definitions. 
Body Art. The practice of physical body adornment by permitted establishments and operators utilizing, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. This definition does not include implants under the skin, tattoo removal, or any other practices that are considered medical procedures by a state medical board. 
Body Art Establishment. Any place or premise, whether public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices of body art, whether or not for profit are performed. 
Body Piercing. Any method of piercing the skin or mucosa, except the entire ear, in order to place any object including, but not limited to, rings, studs, bars, or other forms of jewelry through the skin or mucosa. 
Body Piercing Establishment. Any place or premise, whether public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices of body piercing, whether or not for profit, are performed.. 
Operator. Any person who controls, operates, manages, conducts, or practices body art activities at a body art establishment and who is responsible for compliance with these regulations, regardless whether actually performing body art procedures or not. The term includes technicians who work under the operator and perform body art procedures. 
Permit. The authorization granted by the County to the governing body to operate a body art establishment. 
Tattooing. Any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instruments used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo the body of any person within any area within one (1) inch of the nearest part of the eye socket of such person. 
B.  Permitting and Inspections. Every Tattoo Parlor, Body Piercing Establishment and Operators shall be permitted and inspected pursuant to O.C.G.A § 31-40 et seq., the Rules and Regulations of the Department, of Community Health, the Tift County Board of Health and the ordinances of the City of Tifton 
C.  Tattoo Parlors or Body Piercing Establishments shall be located on an arterial road and shall be permitted in NC, GB and WLI zoning districts. 
D.  The lot or parcel on which Tattoo Parlors or Body Piercing Establishments is located shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet from the following: 
1.  A lot or parcel used or zoned for residential use. 
2.  A lot or parcel used or zoned for religious facilities. 
3.  A lot or parcel used or zoned for public or private schools, day care facilities, kindergartens, or child nurseries. 
4.  A lot or parcel used or zoned for public recreation facilities, public parks, or public playgrounds. 
5.  A lot or parcel used for Tattoo Parlors or Body Piercing Establishments. 
E.  Reserved. 
F.  Measurement of distance for compliance with Section 4.03.31(D) shall be from property lines of the lot on which the tattoo parlor or body piercing establishment is proposed to the property line of the lot or parcel with the uses listed in Section 4.03.31(D). Distance shall be a straight line from lot line to lot line and shall not follow roads or paths of travel unless such road or path of travel also describes the shortest distance from lot line to lot line. 
G.  Windows shall be maintained in a clear unobstructed manner so as to provide an open and unobstructed view of the entire reception area, lobby, and any ticket or other sales areas. 
H.  Parking shall be provided as follows: 
1.  One (1) space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area, or 
2.  One (1) space for each three (3) occupants as determined by the occupancy rating of the fire marshal, whichever is greater. 
I.  No Tattoo Parlor, Body Piercing Establishment shall be permitted which would cause or create any violation of the LDC of the city or of the building code or fire code of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2015-06 , 3-30-2015; Ord. No. 2016-18, 12-5-2016 ) 
Sec. 4.04.00 - Conventional subdivision design standards. 
4.04.01   Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide design standards for conventional subdivisions. Dividing land for the purpose of recording lots requires that Tifton review plans and designs for such divisions to ensure that the lots are buildable according to the standards of the zoning district and that improvements, when required, are provided and constructed according to City standards. Further, the purposes of the subdivision design standards are to: 
A.  Encourage economically sound and stable land development in Tifton. 
B.  Assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land developments. 
C.  Assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments. 
D.  Assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes. 
E.  Assure that land is developed in conformity with the Greater Tifton Tift County Comprehensive Plan. 
4.04.02   Applicability.
A.  No final plat of a subdivision shall be accepted for review which does not conform with the standards for the zoning district in which the subdivision is located. 
B.  The requirements of Section 4.04.00 apply to all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into five (5) or more lots, tracts, or parcels, except as provided in section 4.04.02(C). 
C.  Exemptions: 
The requirements of Section 4.04.00 do not apply in the following situations: 
1.  When combining or recombining previously platted lots where the total number of lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or plots of land is not increased and the resultant lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or plots of land are to equal to the standards of these regulations. However, such lots shall be surveyed and recorded as set forth in Chapter 10.02.05. 
2.  When a parcel of land is acquired or sold by the federal, State, City, or County government. 
4.04.03   Specific exemption for family residences in SA.
The establishment of dwelling units for family members on a parcel zoned SA shall be permissible provided that all of the following standards are met: 
A.  The minimum parcel or lot area shall be three (3) acres. The parcel shall meet the width standards set forth in Section 4.01.01(E). 
B.  A principal dwelling unit must be established prior to approval of any additional dwelling units. 
C.  Up to two (2) additional dwelling units are permissible for family members who are related by blood ties to the owner of the property, such ties extending to the second descending or ascending generation. 
D.  Each dwelling unit shall meet the requirements of the Tift County Health Department regarding lot area for a septic system. 
E.  Each dwelling units shall have a domestic water supply that meets the requirements of the Tift County Health Department. 
F.  Each dwelling unit shall require a building site of one (1) acre and shall meet the setback standards of Section 4.01.02(F) based on the assumed lot lines. 
G.  The principal dwelling unit and additional dwelling units shall have direct access to a public right-of-way. 
H.  Each dwelling unit shall have an individual power supply, in compliance with utility installation standards. 
4.04.04   General design standards.
The process for designing a subdivision, designing and constructing improvements, and recording lots for future sale, is a three (3) step process. The first step is the development of a preliminary plat, which requires approximate scale and dimensions. The second step is the development of an improvement plan. The final step is the preparation of a final plat. The design standards for the subdivision are set forth in this section. 
A.  The applicant shall first determine if any environmental and natural resource lands are located on the parcel to be divided. Such lands should be identified and protected as required according to the provisions in Chapter 3 of this LDC. 
B.  All subdivisions shall conform to the standards of the zoning district in which the land is located. 
C.  When subdivisions are proposed on land intended for commercial or professional condominium development, the preliminary plat shall demonstrate that the lots also comply with requirements in Section 4.01.03. 
D.  When subdivisions are proposed on land intended for multi-family development or a combination of single-family and multi-family development, the preliminary plat shall demonstrate that the lots also comply with the standards in Section 4.01.04. 
E.  When subdivisions are proposed where lots may be developed for uses subject to supplemental standards, the preliminary plat shall also demonstrate compliance with the standards for applicable uses as set forth in Section 4.03.00. 
4.04.05   Specific design standards for lots, blocks, access, and easements.
A.  Lots. 
1.  All proposed lots shall comply with lot area, lot width, setbacks for buildings and structures on those lots, as set forth in Sections 4.01.01 and 4.01.02. 
2.  The lot area may include wetlands provided that the uplands portion of the lot is sufficient in area and dimensions to provide a building site in full compliance with all standards set forth in Sections 4.01.01 and 4.01.02. A lot shall not be created where access is only available by crossing a wetland. A lot shall not be created if the building site cannot be established in full compliance with the standards of this LDC. 
3.  Corner property lines at street intersections shall comply with Technical Standards Design Detail SD-3. 
4.  Through lots are prohibited. 
5.  Lot elevation. The lot area contained within and contiguous to the building walls and for minimum distance of ten (10) feet measured from all sides of said building shall have a minimum elevation of two (2) feet above the 100-year flood stage of streams or canals in the particular area being developed and in full compliance with the requirements for construction in the flood plain as set forth in Section 3.02.00 for structures located in special flood hazard areas (SFHA). 
B.  Blocks. 
1.  Blocks for nonresidential use shall be of such length and width as may be suitable for their prospective use and shall include adequate land area for off street parking and traffic maneuvering. 
2.  The length of residential blocks shall be at least 400 feet. The length of blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet in all zoning districts other than SA. Within the SA zoning district the maximum block length is 1,800 feet. 
3.  Blocks of more than 1,200 feet may be permitted if natural or manmade barriers such as streams and railroads require blocks of greater size. 
4.  The depth of residential blocks shall be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of lots, unless one tier abuts a natural barrier, a manmade barrier, or a property line of the parent tract. 
5.  The design standards for blocks shall not prevent the creation of blocks of greater width and length, when public use areas such as parks and playgrounds are included in the project design. In such instances, maintenance agreements are required according to the standards set forth in Chapter 10. 
C.  Access. All lots shall abut a street that complies with standards for public streets in Tifton . Such standards are set forth in Chapter 6. 
D.  Rights-of-way for pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided when the necessary for direct pedestrian access to schools, shopping centers, and parks. A crosswalk right-of-way shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide. 
E.  Utilities shall be located according to the standards for utility placement set forth in Chapter 6 and the Technical Standards Manual contained in Appendix 1 to this LDC. 
F.  Buffer requirements. The subdivision plat shall demonstrate compliance with buffer standards set forth in Section 4.08.06. 
4.04.06   Required improvements and design standards.
A.  Design standards for infrastructure, public facilities, and public services are set forth in Chapter 6 and the Technical Standards Manual. 
B.  The following improvements are required: 
1.  Potable water for each lot. 
2.  Fire hydrants, if public water service is available. 
3.  Provision for sewage collection, treatment, and disposal for each lot. 
4.  Access to the public thoroughfare system and a system of streets to provide access to each lot. 
5.  Drainage system, or retention/detention system 
6.  Sidewalks, as required in Chapter 6. 
7.  Street signs. 
8.  Access to telecommunications for each lot. 
Sec. 4.05.00 - Conservation subdivision design standards. 
4.05.01   Generally.
A.  The intent of the conservation subdivision is to provide for flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
B.  The total number of residential dwelling units shall not exceed the number of such units permissible by the zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located. 
C.  All requirements set forth in Section 4.04.00 regarding conventional subdivisions for provision of public improvements and infrastructure shall apply to conservation subdivisions except where specifically modified in this section. 
D.  Where there is conflict between the standards and requirements set forth in this section for the conservation subdivision and the standards and requirements in Section 4.04.00 regarding a conventional subdivision, the standards of this section shall apply. The standards set forth in this section are intended to replace the standards in Section 4.04.00 regarding the design of subdivisions. 
E.  No building permits and no public improvements or services shall be authorized or installed for any conservation subdivision until approval has been granted for the subdivision plat. Procedures for application, review, and approval of preliminary and final plats, and acceptance of public improvements, are set forth in Chapter 10. 
F.  In addition to other application requirements, an application for CS approval shall include a: 
1.  Site analysis map depicting significant site features, consistent with the requirements of Chapter 3 for the protection of natural resources and environmentally sensitive lands; 
2.  Plan for management of open space and common facilities; and 
3.  Legal instrument for permanent protection of designated open space. 
4.05.02   Applicability and purpose.
A.  The conservation subdivision design shall be permissible only in the SA zoning district. 
B.  The purposes of the conservation subdivisions are to: 
1.  Promote the preservation of open space in environmentally sensitive areas, provide for open space connectivity, and provide for wildlife habitat and corridors within the region; 
2.  Preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater recharge areas, floodplains, wetlands, streams, woodlands, and wildlife habitat; 
3.  Preserve important historic and archaeological sites; 
4.  Permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils, which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development; and 
5.  Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
4.05.03   Design standards for conservation subdivisions.
A.  Minimum requirements for water and sewer. A conservation subdivision shall have access to, or propose to install, a central sanitary sewer system. As an alternative, a shared drain field may be proposed whereby two (2) or more lots have septic tanks which flow to a drain field in a designated common area or open space. Shared drain fields shall only be allowable when approved by the Tift County Board of Health. A homeowner's or property owner's association shall be required for management and maintenance of the common drain field. 
B.  The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single or multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single development plan. A legal instrument shall be required to designate the authority and responsibility for open space and other common areas. 
C.  A conservation subdivision shall meet the following design requirements: 
1.  Minimum land area of ten (10) acres. 
2.  Designation of open space pursuant to Section 4.05.03(D). 
3.  Maximum number of dwelling units based on a density of one (1) dwelling unit per three (3) acres. 
4.  Clustering of residential development on remaining land after designation of protected open space. 
a.  The minimum building lot is one (1) acre. 
b.  The minimum lot width is 120 feet. 
c.  Setback standards for the SA zoning district shall be applied to lots in the conservation subdivision. See Section 4.01.02(F). 
5.  Location of dwellings and driveways to ensure minimal visual impact and to avoid interruption of views of open fields, pastures, or other agricultural areas. 
6.  Limiting impervious surface area to a maximum of three (3) percent within designated open space areas and to a maximum of sixty (60) percent of designated residential development areas (including lots, driveways, and roads). 
D.  Open space standards. 
1.  All open space shall be permanently protected through a legal instrument of permanent protection. 
2.  The minimum open space requirement shall be fifty (50) percent of the gross tract area or the sum of primary conservation areas (see Section 4.05.03(E)), whichever is greater. 
3.  At least fifty (50) percent of the required open space shall be in one (1) contiguous tract. 
4.  The open space shall adjoin any neighboring areas of protected open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
5.  Open space shall be directly accessible to the majority of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space through the use of walking trails or unpaved paths. 
E.  Designation of open space. 
1.  Primary conservation areas are required to be included within the open space. The following comprise primary conservation areas: 
a.  The 100-year floodplain (see Section 3.02.00); 
b.  Groundwater protection areas (see Section 3.03.00); 
c.  River corridor protection areas (see Section 3.03.00); 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act (see Section 3.04.00); 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries, and burial grounds. 
2.  Secondary conservation areas shall be included within the open space, to the maximum extent feasible, in order to protect the following features: 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one (1) acre contiguous area; 
c.  Other significant natural features and scenic vistas such as ridge lines, peaks, and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
d.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five (5) acres contiguous area; and 
e.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
F.  Permitted uses of open space may include the following: 
1.  Conservation of natural, archeological, or historical resources; 
2.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
3.  Unpaved walking or bicycle trails or paths; 
4.  Passive recreation areas, such as open fields; 
5.  Active recreation areas, such as playgrounds or playing fields which meet the following standards: 
a.  Such areas do not exceed ten (10) percent of the total required open space; and 
b.  Such areas are located outside any primary conservation areas. 
6.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture, or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
7.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; and 
G.  Prohibited uses of open space: 
1.  Golf courses; 
2.  Stormwater facilities; and 
3.  Roads, parking lots, and impervious surfaces except as provided for in Section 4.05.03(C)(6). 
Sec. 4.06.00 - Standards for planned development rural districts. 
4.06.01   Generally.
A.  The City of Tifton hereby establishes two (2) types of planned development districts, the Planned Development Rural District (PDR) and the Planned Development Urban District (PDO). Considerations for all planned developments shall include connectivity, overall integration with the Thoroughfare Plan, utility provision, and environmental protection. Section 4.06.00 sets forth the standards for the PDR district. 
B.  The PDR district is a zoning district, and is permissible only when approved as a rezoning accompanied by a site development plan that ensures the conservation of the natural environment, more efficient use of land, efficiency in the extension of streets and utilities, and compliance with the standards in Section 4.06.00. Procedures are set forth in Chapter 10. 
C.  The PDR district is intended to provide flexibility with regard to the internal site planning considerations of a planned development as compared to other zoning districts. A fundamental purpose of the PDR district is to allow the governing body and the developer to agree on the site design standards applicable to the development. 
D.  The purposes of the PDR district are to: 
1.  Accomplish a more desirable development pattern than would be possible through strict adherence to zoning district standards and subdivision regulations; 
2.  Allow and encourage creative and flexible projects that include residential, commercial, office, and related public facilities unified by a site development plan; 
3.  Require a mixture of uses which are compatible both internally and externally through standards for signs, building locations, buffering or other techniques which may be appropriate to a particular development proposal; 
4.  Encourage flexible and creative concepts of site development planning which meet changing needs, technologies, economic, and consumer preferences; 
5.  Encourage combining and coordinating of architectural styles, building forms, and building relationships within a rural planned development; 
6.  Preserve natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas; and 
7.  Ensure consistency of the PDR with the Greater Tift County Comprehensive Plan. 
E.  Applicability. The PDR district is permissible within the AU Character Area as depicted on the Greater Tift County Comprehensive Plan and any area that is outside the Twenty (20) Year Utility Master Plan. 
4.06.02   Minimum standards.
A.  The minimum land area for a PDR district is forty (40) acres. 
B.  A PDR site development plan shall demonstrate compliance with all standards for resource protection set forth in Chapter 3. 
C.  Land uses within the PDR district shall include the following: 
1.  At least twenty (20) percent of the land area within the PDR shall be open space. The open space shall be internally connected with other uses and accessible to residents of the PDR development. 
2.  The PDR district shall include neighborhood scale (See Section 4.06.02(D)(10)) personal and shopping services to serve the residents within the development. Not more than ten (10) percent of the land area shall be used for such services. 
3.  The PDR district shall include civic, community, or recreational areas, such as a public safety auxiliary office, postal station, community center, school site, sites for religious facilities, play grounds, and play fields. Not more than ten (10) percent of the land area shall be used for such areas. 
4.  Residential uses may include single-family, duplex, or industrialized buildings. 
5.  Home occupations, if proposed, shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 5.01.00. 
6.  Normal and customary accessory uses are permissible. 
D.  Site design standards. 
1.  The minimum lot area for any use is 21,780 square feet, or larger if required by the Tift County Health Department. 
2.  Specific setbacks for front, side, and rear yards shall be clearly depicted on the proposed site development plan. Once approved, the setbacks shall be imposed on all development within the PDR district. 
3.  Specific height standards for proposed buildings within the PDR district shall be clearly depicted on the proposed site development plan. Once approved, the setbacks shall be imposed on all development within the PDR district. 
4.  Buffers: 
a.  A perimeter buffer for the entire PDR district shall be provided. 
b.  A buffer shall be provided between commercial, office, and personal service uses and adjacent residential uses. 
c.  The minimum buffer is ten (10) feet in width. 
d.  The plants within a buffer shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 4.08.04. Buffers shall include at least four (4) canopy (shade) trees and twenty-five (25) shrubs per 100 linear feet of total perimeter property line. Existing trees and shrubs that meet the standards set forth in Section 4.08.04 may be counted toward this standard. 
5.  Landscaping within an PDR district shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 4.08.04. 
6.  The internal circulation system shall be connected to the existing street system and shall provide local and collector streets, as appropriate, in compliance with the standards set forth in Chapter 6. The internal circulation system shall include facilities for pedestrians and bicycles, such as sidewalks, pedestrian paths, bicycle lanes, or bicycle paths. 
7.  When the PDR contains more than twenty (20) residential units a second entrance shall be provided. 
8.  All utilities within a PDR district shall be underground. 
9.  Signs within a PDR development shall have a unified design and shall comply with the standards set forth in Chapter 7 of this Code. 
10.  Neighborhood scale commercial, office, and personal service uses shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Buildings shall not exceed 3,000 square feet per building. 
b.  A unified architectural design shall be established. 
c.  Buildings shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. 
d.  Equipment and service areas shall be screened from view of adjacent residential properties and public rights-of-way. 
E.  Compatibility. The PDR district shall demonstrate compatibility of uses within the district and compatibility of the development with adjacent uses. Compatibility shall be determined by: 
1.  Development pattern, considering the street system, lot sizes and dimensions, and the overall layout of the development. 
2.  Scale, dimensions, and location of buildings. 
3.  Site features, such as parking lots, exterior lighting, and accessory uses such as dumpsters, swimming pools, recreational areas, and community buildings or facilities. 
4.06.03   Site plan requirements.
A.  All land included in the rezoning to a PDR district shall be under single ownership, or if under multiple ownership, a joint application for site development plan and rezoning shall be submitted. 
B.  Once approved, the site development plan shall be recorded and shall be binding on all owners. 
C.  The applicant(s) or owner(s) shall maintain and provide for unified control of the PDR development project until the project is complete. 
D.  Responsibility for unified control, if not retained by the owner(s), shall be assigned to an individual or an entity such as a homeowners' association, provided that proposed homeowners' association documents are submitted demonstrating that appropriate controls are in place following transfer of management responsibility. Association documents shall be acceptable to the government body, and shall be recorded upon approval. 
E.  Proposed legal instruments shall be provided to demonstrate improvement, operation, and maintenance of any common property within a PDR development, including streets, drives, service areas, parking areas, recreational and community facilities, and open space. Approval of a site development plan and rezoning for the PDR district shall include the condition that such legal instruments are properly recorded. 
Sec. 4.07.00 - Standards for planned development urban districts (PDO). 
4.07.01   Generally.
A.  The City of Tifton hereby establish two types of planned development districts, the Planned Development Rural District (PDR) and the Planned Development Urban District (PDO). Considerations for all planned developments shall include connectivity, overall integration with the Thoroughfare Plan, utility provision, and environmental protection. Section 4.07.00 sets forth the standards for the PDO district. 
B.  The PDO district is a zoning district, and is permissible only when approved as a rezoning accompanied by a site development plan that ensures the conservation of the natural environment, more efficient use of land, efficiency in the extension of streets and utilities, and compliance with the standards in Section 4.07.00. Procedures are set forth in Chapter 10. 
C.  The PDO district is intended to provide flexibility with regard to the internal site planning considerations of a planned development as compared to other zoning districts. A fundamental purpose of the PDO district is to allow the governing body and the developer to agree on the site design standards applicable to the development. 
D.  The purposes of the PDO district are to: 
1.  Accomplish a more desirable development pattern than would be possible through strict adherence to zoning district standards and subdivision regulations; 
2.  Allow and encourage creative and flexible projects that may include residential, commercial, office, and related public facilities unified by a development plan; 
3.  Allow a mixture of uses which are compatible both internally and externally through standards for signs, building locations, buffering or other techniques which may be appropriate to a particular development proposal; 
4.  Encourage flexible and creative concepts of site development planning which meet changing needs, technologies, economic, and consumer preferences; 
5.  Encourage combining and coordinating of architectural styles, building forms, and building relationships consistent with the urban location of the PDO; 
6.  Preserve natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas; and 
7.  Ensure consistency of the PDO with the Greater Tifton-Tift County Comprehensive Plan. 
E.  Applicability. The PDO district is permissible only within the urban service area boundary. 
4.07.02   Minimum standards.
A.  The minimum land area for a PDO district is one (1) acre.. 
B.  A PDO site development plan shall demonstrate compliance with all standards for resource protection set forth in Chapter 3. 
C.  Land uses within the PDO district shall include the following: 
1.  At least ten (10) percent of the land area within the PDO shall be open space. The open space shall be internally connected with other uses and accessible to residents of the PDO development. 
2.  The PDO district may include a single use, such as residential, commercial, office, civic, community, or recreational uses, or any combination of uses. 
4.  Residential uses may include single-family, duplex, or multi-family housing. 
5.  Home occupations, if proposed, shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 5.01.00. 
6.  Normal and customary accessory uses are permissible. 
D.  Site design standards: 
1.  The minimum lot area may be 8,000 square feet where central water and sewer are available. Larger lots may be required by the regulations of the Tift County Health Department. 
2.  Specific setbacks for front, side, and rear yards shall be clearly depicted on the proposed site development plan. Once approved, the setbacks shall be imposed on all development within the PDO district. 
3.  Specific height standards for proposed buildings within the PDO district shall be clearly depicted on the proposed site development plan. Once approved, the setbacks shall be imposed on all development within the PDO district. 
4.  Buffers: 
a.  A perimeter buffer for the entire PDO district shall be provided. 
b.  When the PDO contains one use, no internal buffers are required. When mixed uses are proposed, a buffer shall be provided between commercial, office, and personal service uses and adjacent residential uses. When a vertical mix of uses is proposed, no internal buffer is required, however, uses must be compatible and conditions on operations may be imposed. 
c.  The minimum buffer is ten (10) feet in width. 
d.  The plants within a buffer shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 4.08.04. Buffers shall include at least four (4) canopy (shade) trees and twenty-five (25) shrubs per 100 linear feet of total perimeter property line. Existing trees and shrubs that meet the standards set forth in Section 4.08.04 may be counted toward this standard. 
5.  Landscaping within an PDO district shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 4.08.04. 
6.  The internal circulation system shall be connected to the existing street system and shall provide local and collector streets, as appropriate, in compliance with the standards set forth in Chapter 6. The internal circulation system shall include facilities for pedestrians and bicycles, such as sidewalks, pedestrian paths, bicycle lanes, or bicycle paths. Traffic circulation shall not route commercial traffic through residential areas within or adjacent to the PDO. 
7.  When the PDO contains commercial or other nonresidential uses, a traffic study shall be required to identify the transportation impacts and the need for transportation improvements. 
8.  When the PDO contains more than twenty (20) residential units a second entrance shall be provided. 
9.  When the PDO contains 100 residential units or more, a traffic study shall be required to identify the transportation impacts and the need for transportation improvements. 
10.  Signs within a PDO development shall have a unified design and shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 5.04.00. 
E.  Compatibility. The PDO district shall demonstrate compatibility of uses within the district and compatibility of the development with adjacent uses. Compatibility shall be determined by: 
1.  Development pattern, considering the street system, lot sizes and dimensions, and the overall layout of the development. 
2.  Scale, dimensions, and location of buildings. 
3.  Site features, such as parking lots, exterior lighting, and accessory uses such as dumpsters, swimming pools, recreational areas, and community buildings or facilities. 
4.07.03   Site plan requirements.
A.  All land included in the rezoning to an PDO district shall be under single ownership, or if under multiple ownership, a joint application for site development plan and rezoning shall be submitted. 
B.  Once approved, the site development plan shall be recorded and shall be binding on all owners. 
C.  The applicant(s) or owner(s) shall maintain and provide for unified control of the PDO development project until the project is complete. 
D.  Responsibility for unified control, if not retained by the owner(s), shall be assigned to an individual or an entity such as a homeowners' or property owners' association, provided that the proposed association documents are submitted demonstrating that appropriate controls are in place following transfer of management responsibility. Association documents shall be acceptable to the government body, and shall be recorded upon approval. 
E.  Proposed legal instruments shall be provided to demonstrate improvement, operation, and maintenance of any common property within an PDO development, including streets, drives, service areas, parking areas, recreational and community facilities, and open space. Approval of a site development plan and rezoning for the PDO district shall include the condition that such legal instruments are properly recorded. 
Sec. 4.08.00 - Landscaping, buffers, and tree protection. 
4.08.01   Purpose.
A.  The purpose of this section is to provide requirements for landscaping, buffering of developments, and tree protection within the City of Tifton. 
B.  It is the intent of the governing body to reduce the adverse visual, environmental, and aesthetic effects of development in order to: 
1.  Minimize the rate of stormwater runoff. 
2.  Maximize the capability of groundwater recharge. 
3.  Provide shade for the ground surfaces. 
4.  Buffering adjacent incompatible land uses. 
5.  Improve the appearance of parking areas and vehicular surface areas. 
6.  To provide best management practices for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures as set forth in the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
4.08.02   Applicability and provision of landscape plans.
A.  The requirements of this section shall apply to all properties to be used, developed, or redeveloped within the City of Tifton except as may specifically be exempted in Section 4.08.02(C) below. 
B.  In order to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section, a landscaping plan shall be submitted with applications for development approval for all development subject to these standards. The requirements and procedures for submittal, review, and approval of all applications are set forth in Chapter 10. 
C.  The following types of development are exempt from the requirements to provide a landscaping plan: 
1.  Single-family and two-family dwellings. 
2.  Applications for accessory uses or accessory structures where a principal structure or principal use is already established. 
3.  Applications for temporary uses. 
4.  Plant or tree nurseries or botanical gardens. 
5.  The City of Tifton or authorized agents for the purpose of removal of a tree on publicly owned property or a public right-of-way, provided that such tree is dead or a hazard to the public. 
6.  Utility companies or their authorized agents for the purpose of removal of a tree that is a substantial hazard to overhead wires or for trimming that is necessary for establishment or maintenance of service. 
7.  The trimming or pruning of trees or the removal of underbrush. 
8.  The removal of trees or other landscaping damaged by fire, windstorm, lightning, or other acts of nature, which pose imminent danger to life or property. 
9.  An existing vehicle use area, provided that no change of use or modification of the structure(s) served by the vehicle use area is proposed. 
10.  Any resurfacing, repair or replacement of any then existing paved vehicle use area unaccompanied by land disturbance of any adjacent surface area. 
4.08.03   Maintenance requirements.
A.  All landscaped areas shall be maintained to ensure that plant materials are healthy and thrive. Any diseased or dead plant materials shall be replaced as soon as reasonably possible based on the growing season, but not later than ninety (90) days following identification of the need for replacement. 
B.  All landscaped areas shall be provided with an irrigation system or as an alternative, a watering plan shall be included with the landscaping plan, sufficient to ensure that plants are established in a healthy growing condition. 
C.  Where an irrigation system is proposed in a landscaped area, the system shall be shown on the landscaping plan. Standards for the irrigation system are set forth in Section 4.08.04.C. 
D.  Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be performed to maintain the health of the plant materials, to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to assure that the landscaped and buffer areas serve the intended purpose. 
E.  Where a tree, shrub, or any portion of a tree or shrub overhangs a public right-of-way, the owner of such tree or shrub shall remove or prune the tree or shrub to ensure the following: 
1.  The tree or shrub shall not obstruct light from any street light. 
2.  The tree or shrub shall not obstruct a motorist's view of any street intersection. 
3.  The tree or shrub shall comply with the requirements for a clear visibility triangle as set forth in Section 6.01.05. 
4.  Damaged or dangerous trees and shrubs shall be removed to ensure safety in the use of the public right-of-way. Damaged or dangerous trees shall be determined in accordance with the United States Forestry Service Guidelines. 
4.08.04   General landscape standards.
The general standards set forth in this section apply to all required landscaped areas, including parking lots, buffers, and interior landscaping. 
A.  Minimum specifications for plant materials: 
[1].  All plant material shall be nursery grown, number one (1) grade, meet current American Association of Nurseryman Standards, and installed according to accepted planting procedures. 
[2].  Acceptable plant materials are identified in Section 4.08.08 of this LDC, titled "Appendix to Chapter 4—Acceptable and prohibited landscape plant materials". 
[3].  Shrubs shall be at least eighteen (18) inches in height at the time of installation. 
[4].  All landscaped areas and buffers shall be sodded or covered with ground cover. 
[5].  Ground cover used in lieu of grass shall be planted so as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within three (3) months of installation. 
[6].  Retention of and replacement with native and drought tolerant species is preferred. Only plants on the approved plant list in Section 4.08.08 of this LDC, titled "Appendix to Chapter 4—Acceptable and prohibited landscape plant materials", shall be installed. 
[7].  At least twenty-five (25) percent of the required trees installed in landscaped buffers, landscaped parking areas, and to meet tree planting requirements shall be canopy trees. 
[8].  Existing trees, which are four (4) inches DBH or larger, and shrubs may be counted toward meeting the requirements for landscaped buffers, landscaped parking areas, and tree retention. 
[9].  Canopy trees shall not be installed under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility line; over or within five (5) lateral feet any buried utilities; or within a utility easement. 
[10].  All trees and shrubs shall be installed to comply with the requirements for a clear visibility triangle, as set forth in Section 6.01.05. 
[11].  Canopy trees shall not installed closer than ten (10) feet from a property line. 
[12].  Trees shall not be planted closer than ten (10) feet from a fire hydrant. 
B.  Requirements for landscaping. The landscaping plan shall demonstrate compliance with the standards of this section. The plan shall show the location, size, description, and specifications of all proposed plant materials. 
1.  Existing plant materials, other than invasive species, may be counted toward meeting the landscaping requirements set forth in this section. 
2.  At least ten (10) percent of the total gross land area of a non-residential development site shall be landscaped, inclusive of any required buffer. The landscaped areas shall be located on the site in such manner as to maximize preservation of existing trees. The landscaped area shall contain trees, shrubs, and vegetation consistent with accepted horticultural practice. Plant materials shall be selected from the list of acceptable plant materials provided in Appendix A to this LDC. 
3.  The choice, location, and irrigation of plant materials shall follow the recommendations of Xeriscape: A Guide to Developing a Water-Wise Landscape, Bulletin 1073, published May 2007, by the Cooperative Extension Service of the University of Georgia College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, available online at www.caes.uga.edu/extension . 
4.  Where there is a conflict between the plant materials listed in Section 4.08.08 of this LDC, "Appendix to Chapter 4—Acceptable and prohibited landscape plant materials", and the plant materials listed in Bulletin 1073, the plants listed in Section 4.08.08 of this LDC, "Appendix to Chapter 4—Acceptable and prohibited landscape plant materials", shall be used. 
5.  Any landscaping plan required under this Code shall be completed no later than ninety (90) days from the date of the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
C.  Requirements for irrigation systems. All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, and maintained in such a manner as not to be a nuisance to adjacent properties and the general public. 
1.  Irrigation systems must include moisture sensors and an automatic shut-off feature that is activated during rain events. 
2.  The water source for the irrigation system shall be the lowest quality water that is available and acceptable for the irrigation system. The first choice is reclaimed water. Where reclaimed water is not available and not expected to become available within six (6) months of the completion of the development project, the following sources may be used, and are listed in priority order: 
a.  Stormwater retention pond or lake; 
b.  Groundwater from an onsite well; or 
c.  Potable water. 
( Ord. No. 2014-01 , 1-6-2014) 
4.08.05   Landscape requirements for parking lots.
A.  Parking lots within the Historic District. 
1.  A parcel of land with fifty (50) percent or more of the land area within the Historic District shall meet the landscaping standards set forth in this section. 
2.  A vehicle use area of more than 3,000 square feet but not more than 10,000 square feet shall provide one (1) or more landscaped areas within the vehicle use area equal to six (6) percent of the designated vehicle use area. Perimeter landscaping is not required. 
3.  A vehicle use area of more than 10,000 square feet shall provide one (1) or more landscaped areas equal to six (6) percent of the designated vehicle use area. In addition perimeter landscaping is required as set forth in Section 4.08.05.C. 
B.  Parking lots other than within the Historic District. 
1.  A vehicle use area with 20,000 square feet or less of paved area is not required to provide interior landscaping. However, perimeter landscaping is required as set forth in Section 4.08.05.C. 
2.  A vehicle use area of more than 20,000 square feet shall provide one (1) or more landscaped areas within the vehicle use area which equals a total of six (6) percent of the vehicle use area. Perimeter landscaping is required as set forth in Section 4.08.05.C. 
C.  Standards for interior landscaped areas within all parking lots. 
1.  The interior landscaped area shall contain one (1) tree for each 500 square feet of landscaped area. At least fifty (50) percent of all trees shall be canopy (shade) trees. 
2.  Interior landscaped areas may be located within the median of a divided entrance provided that the median is a minimum of ten (10) feet wide. 
3.  Interior landscaped areas may be located as landscaped islands at the end of parking tiers or as landscaped strips between parking tiers. 
4.  The choice of plant materials and location of trees and shrubs shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 4.08.04. 
5.  Vehicle stops or curbing shall be used to ensure that vehicles do not overhang required landscaped areas more than two (2) feet. 
6.  Where architectural planters are used, the planting area provided by the planter shall be at least ten (10) square feet for shrubs and twelve (12) square feet for understory trees. Canopy or shade trees shall not be located in planters. 
D.  Perimeter landscaping for all parking lots. A minimum of a ten (10) foot wide strip of land, located between the property line and a parking lot shall be landscaped. Width of sidewalks shall not be included within the ten (10) foot wide front setback perimeter landscape area. Any tree located adjacent to a public right-of-way shall have a root guard or similar design method so as to prevent damage to the City's infrastructure. 
4.08.06   Buffer requirements.
A.  The intent of these requirements is to enhance the visual and aesthetic appearance of Tifton. The purpose of these buffer requirements is to: 
1.  Provide space definition and landscape continuity within developed areas. 
2.  Provide appropriate screening and relief from traffic, noise, heat, glare, odor, and the spread of dust and debris. 
3.  Reduce the impact of development on the drainage system and reduce flooding. 
4.  Provide for reduction or elimination of incompatibility 
5.  Reduce the visual impact of potentially negative aspects of adjacent development. 
B.  Location, measurement, and design of buffers between uses. 
1.  Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending to the lot or parcel boundary line. Where a fence or wall is provided, the buffer shall be located on private property between the property line and the fence or wall. 
2.  Buffers shall be located on any portion of an existing, dedicated, or reserved public or private street, right-of-way, and shall not include plantings located within a drainage, utility, or other easement. 
3.  Buffer width may be averaged as follows. Average width shall be measured at the two (2) end points of the buffer and two (2) additional points which are each approximately one-third (1/3) of the total linear distance from the end point. 
4.  The plants within a buffer shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 4.08.04. Buffers shall include at least four (4) canopy (shade) trees and twenty-five (25) shrubs per 100 linear feet of total perimeter property line. Existing trees and shrubs that meet the standards set forth in Section 4.08.04 may be counted toward this standard. 
5.  The land within the buffer shall be maintained as green open space, consisting of sod or ground cover, along with required plantings. An access drive, sidewalk, or pedestrian or bicycle path shall be allowed to cross a buffer. 
6.  Buffers shall be established and maintained by the owner of the proposed development site. 
7.  The minimum buffer area for specific zoning districts is set forth in Table 4.08.06(B). 
Table 4.08.06(B). Buffer Area Standards. 

 
C.  Location and design of screening of equipment and other site features 
1.  Where screening is required for service areas, loading areas, dumpsters and refuse areas, outside storage, or equipment, the standards of this section shall apply. 
2.  Screening shall consist of a durable wall or fence to provide a visual blind, designed to be compatible with the character of adjoining properties. 
3.  Such fences and walls shall be at least six (6) feet in height, but no greater than eight (8) feet in height, measured from the ground along the common lot line of the adjoining properties. 
4.08.07   Tree protection.
A.  Generally. 
1.  It is the intent of the City of Tifton that existing trees be protected. Trees that are invasive or exotic are not required to be protected. Trees less than four (4) inches DBH are not required to be protected. 
2.  All protected trees shall be shown on a tree survey, submitted with the site development plan together with an application for a tree removal permit or with an application for development approval as set forth in Chapter 10. 
3.  Developers and builders shall coordinate the location of all utilities with all utility companies in order to prevent root damage within the critical root zones of protected trees, so as to minimize damage to trees in the protected zones. 
4.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow the removal of any tree or vegetation in a required stream buffer, watershed buffer, buffer adjacent to waters of the state, or other undisturbed or planted buffer located for protection of natural resources, except where such removal has been specifically authorized as set forth in this LDC. 
B.  Exemptions. The following situations are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
1.  Construction of a single-family home on an existing platted lot. The exemption does not include an exemption from requirements for protective buffers along streams, creeks, and reservoirs as set forth in Chapter 3. 
2.  The removal of diseased, deceased, infested, or dying trees, or living pine trees or other trees which may pose a danger to an existing or proposed home, or other structure. 
C.  Protection of Trees During Construction. Trees shall be protected during construction as follows: 
1.  Protected trees shall be identified prior to the commencement of any land disturbance. Identification may be through the use of flag, ties, or other markings. 
2.  During construction, a tree protection area must be designated around any trees that are to remain at the end of construction. A physical barrier shall be installed around each protected tree or group of trees. This barrier can consist of a four (4) foot high orange safety fence, wide plastic caution tape, a simple fence made of lumber, or other appropriate methods that can identify the tree protection area. 
3.  The barrier should be placed at or beyond the drip zone of the tree or group of trees. For trees or groups of trees with a drip zone larger than twenty (20) feet, the protection zone shall be the area twenty (20) feet from the tree or the outermost tree in a group. 
4.  No person engaged in the construction of any structure(s) or site improvement(s) shall encroach on a protected tree or the identified zone surrounding a protected tree with heavy machinery or the storage of heavy building materials. 
5.  The protection area shall not be used for stockpiling of soil or building materials, dumping cleaning solvents, or parking vehicles or equipment. 
4.08.08.   Appendix to Chapter 4—Acceptable and prohibited landscape plant materials.
Appendix 4.A. Canopy (Large or Shade) Trees 

 
Appendix 4.B. Small Trees (Understory) 

 
Appendix 4.C. Shrubs, Large and Small 

 
Appendix 4.D. Ground Covers 

 
Appendix 4.E. Prohibited Plants 

 
* denotes top ten exotic pest plants in Georgia. 
CHAPTER 5. - ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USES 

Sec. 5.00.00 - Generally. 
The provisions of Chapter 5 apply to home occupations, accessory uses and structures, and temporary uses. The standards for home occupations are provided in Section 5.01.00. The standards for accessory uses and structures are provided in Section 5.02.00. The standards for temporary uses and structures are provided in Section 5.03.00. Telecommunication towers and antennas may be located on a lot or parcel with a principal use, or may be the principle use on a parcel. The standards for telecommunication towers and antennas are referenced in Section 5.04.00. 
Sec. 5.01.00 - Home occupations. 
5.01.01   Generally.
A.  A home occupation is permissible in a lawfully established dwelling unit in any zoning district where residential uses are permissible. All home occupations shall meet the standards set forth in Section 5.01.02. Home occupations in the SA zoning districts shall meet the additional standards in Section 5.01.03. 
B.  The following and similar uses shall be considered home occupations: 
1.  Instruction or teaching, such as, but not limited to, academic tutoring, performing arts, or fine arts, provided that no more than two (2) students are instructed at any one (1) time. 
2.  Professional offices such as, but not limited to, the following: accountant, architect, drafting, insurance agent, manufacturing agent, real estate agent, and tax consultant. 
3.  Administrative or clerical support services, such as transcription, court reporters, stenographers, notary public, or addressing services. 
4.  Personal services, such as beauty or barber shop, nail technician, dressmaking or tailoring, provided that the service is limited to one (1) station. 
5.  Cottage industries, such as cooking, or the creation of intellectual property (books, videos, DVDs, and similar). 
6.  Studios for artists, photographers (including a darkroom), or artisans, including potters and basket weavers. 
7.  Light repairs, such as clock repair shop, gunsmith shop, or locksmith. 
8.  Boarding non-transient guests, limited to four (4) guests at any one time subject to the provisions of Section 4.03.21. 
9.  Day care for six (6) or fewer children. 
C.  An interpretation that a use not listed in Section 5.01.01(B) is similar shall be based on the tasks and activities normally associated with the proposed use and the similarity of those tasks and activities with the tasks and activities normally associated with a listed use. 
5.01.02   Standards for all home occupations.
A.  The parcel on which a home occupation is proposed shall conform to all standards of the zoning district in which it is proposed. 
B.  Business licenses are required for all home occupations. 
C.  Employees of the home occupation shall be limited to the residents of the dwelling. 
D.  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling. 
E.  The use of the dwelling for a home occupation shall not change the residential character of the building. 
F.  No internal or external alterations which are inconsistent with the residential use or character of the dwelling shall be permitted. 
G.  Products for sale or use in the home occupation shall not be visible from the street. 
H.  Only products produced on the premises shall be sold on the premises. 
I.  Use of a dwelling for a home occupation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of one (1) floor of the dwelling. 
J.  The home occupation shall not constitute a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood, as evidenced by the use of machinery or equipment that produces noise, smoke, odor, vibration, electrical interference, or other objectionable condition beyond the property line of the lot on which the home occupation is located. 
K.  Outside storage of materials used in connection with a home occupation is prohibited. 
L.  If the home occupation is proposed to involve the use of an accessory building, such use shall be permissible when it is clearly demonstrated that the accessory building is located, designed, and generally follows the normal and typical patterns of residential accessory buildings. The floor area of accessory building used for a home occupation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of one (1) floor of the dwelling. 
M.  The total floor area devoted to a home occupation, when combining home occupation use of the dwelling and home occupation use of an accessory building, shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of one (1) floor of the dwelling. 
N.  Vehicles used for the home occupation shall be limited to passenger vehicles. 
O.  Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 7 of this Code. 
5.01.03   Standards for all rural home occupations.
A.  A rural home occupation shall be permissible only on land in the SA zoning district. 
B.  Where a rural home occupation is proposed, the following standards shall apply in addition to the standards for all home occupations set forth in Section 5.01.02: 
1.  Employees of a rural home occupation may be any residents on the parcel and are not limited to the residents in the principal dwelling. Further, there shall be no nonresident employees of a rural home occupation. 
2.  Permissible home occupations include those identified in Section 5.01.01.B and the following: service-oriented commercial activities associated with agricultural activities, such as taxidermy or farm equipment service. 
3.  In addition to passenger vehicles, two (2) non-passenger vehicles directly associated with the rural home occupation are permissible. 
Sec. 5.02.00 - Accessory uses and structures. 
5.02.01   Generally.
A.  It is the intent of this section to regulate accessory uses and the installation, configuration, and use of accessory structures. Regulation is necessary in order to ensure that accessory uses and structures are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and are consistent with the character and intent of the zoning district in which the accessory structures are located. 
B.  Permissible accessory uses and structures are identified in Table 2.03.04. 
C.  Accessory structures shall be on the same lot and subordinate to the principal use or structure. 
D.  Accessory structures shall not be allowed in front yards in areas zoned residential or residential professional. 
E.  Accessory buildings shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Accessory buildings located in front or side yards on lots zoned for residential use shall meet the front and side setbacks set forth in Table 4.01.02(F). 
2.  Accessory buildings located in the rear yard on lots zoned for residential use shall be setback at least five (5) feet from the rear property line and eight (8) feet from the side property line. 
3.  Accessory buildings located on through lots shall be setback a distance equal to or greater than the required front yard setback for the zoning district, as set forth in Table 4.01.02(F). 
4.  Accessory buildings on lots with a nonresidential zoning classification shall be located to comply with all front, side, and rear setbacks set forth in Table 4.01.02(F) or standard backyard setback requirements with appropriate screening. 
5.  An accessory building that exceeds eight (8) feet in height shall be separated from the principal building by at least ten (10) feet. 
6.  Accessory structures shall not be located on or within any recorded or required easement. 
7.  Accessory structures shall not be erected on a lot prior to the construction of the principal structure. 
8.  Accessory structures shall be included in all calculations for impervious surface ratio standards and for stormwater management standards. 
9.  Accessory structures, other than fences located in compliance with the requirements of Section 5.02.03, shall not be located within any required buffer or landscaping area, parking lot, protected resource area, or stormwater management area. 
F.  An accessory building may be permitted on a separately platted lot provided that the following standards are met: 
1.  The lot on which the accessory building is proposed shall abut the lot on which the principal building is located. 
2.  The lot on which the accessory building is proposed and the lot on which the principal building is located shall have the same ownership. 
3.  The lot on which the accessory building is located shall comply with the standards for uses within the zoning district. 
4.  The accessory building shall be located in compliance with the setback standards for the zoning district, as set forth in Section 4.01.02. 
5.  Except as set forth herein (Section 5.02.01.E) the accessory building shall otherwise comply with all standards set forth in Section 5.02.01. 
5.02.02   Accessory dwellings.
A.  Accessory dwellings include, but are not limited to, basement apartments, garage apartments, caretaker, or other employee quarters. 
B.  Accessory dwellings shall be under the same ownership as the principal dwelling and lot. 
C.  On lots zoned for residential use, accessory dwellings are permissible only within the principal dwelling or a garage apartment. 
D.  Accessory dwellings contained within a principal dwelling shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  There shall be no more than one (1) accessory dwelling in a principal dwelling unit. 
2.  The accessory dwelling may have a separate exterior entrance. 
3.  The accessory dwelling shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the habitable floor area of the principal dwelling. 
4.  One (1) additional off-street parking space shall be provided to serve the accessory dwelling. 
5.  The accessory dwelling shall comply with all building and health code standards. 
E.  An accessory dwelling may be located above or attached to a garage, and shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  There shall be no more than one (1) accessory dwelling unit per lot. 
2.  The garage and associated accessory dwelling shall be located only within the side or rear yard. 
3.  The lot shall comply with the minimum lot area standards set forth in Table 4.01.01. 
4.  The total floor area of the accessory dwelling shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the principal dwelling and shall have a minimum of 400 square feet 
5.  One (1) additional off-street parking space shall be provided to serve the accessory dwelling unit. 
F.  An accessory dwelling to provide quarters for caretakers or security personnel are permissible on lots zoned CC, CD, WLI, and HI, subject to the following standards. 
1.  The dwelling shall be occupied only by an employee of the business conducted on the premises. 
2.  No more than one (1) dwelling shall be located on the nonresidential parcel. 
3.  The portion of the total site (called dwelling lot) devoted to the dwelling shall be at least 8,000 square feet. The portion of the total site devoted to the dwelling shall be identified on the site development plan, but shall not be platted as a separate lot. 
4.  The location of the dwelling on the dwelling lot shall comply with the setbacks required for the R8 zoning district. 
5.  The dwelling may be a manufactured house or site built. 
6.  The dwelling shall have water and sewage disposal in full compliance with the requirements of the Tift County Health Department. 
G.  Accessory dwellings for agricultural workers is permissible in the SA zoning district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The dwellings shall be occupied only by an employee of the agricultural operation conducted on the premises and the employee's family. 
2.  There shall be no more than two (2) such accessory dwellings per twenty-five (25) acres of land. 
3.  The dwellings shall meet all applicable rules and regulations regarding agricultural worker housing of the Georgia Department of Labor. 
4.  The dwellings shall have water and sewage disposal in full compliance with the requirements of the Tift County Health Department. 
5.  The dwellings shall be located in compliance with the SA zoning district setbacks and height standards. 
6.  Accessory dwellings shall be separated from other dwellings and buildings by at least thirty (30) feet. 
5.02.03   Fences and walls.
A.  Location of fences and walls. 
1.  Fences and walls may be located on or inside property lines. 
2.  Setback requirements applicable to buildings shall not prohibit or restrict any necessary retaining wall, below ground foundation, or fence which shall be necessary for the proper development of a site as required by this LDC. 
3.  Fences and walls shall be located to avoid interference with the required clear visibility area designated in Section 6.01.05. 
4.  Fences and walls shall not obstruct, hinder, or impede the movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and shall not present a nuisance, danger, or hazard to the general public. 
5.  Fences shall be constructed with the finished side facing outward. 
B.  Height standards. 
1.  Heights of fences shall be measured from natural ground level at the base of the fence to the topmost part of the fence. Heights of fences located on berms shall be measured from the bottom of the berm to the topmost part of the fence. 
2.  The maximum height of a fence in a side or rear yard is eight (8) feet. 
3.  The maximum height of a fence in a front yard is four (4) feet, except within the clear visibility area designated in Section 6.01.05, where the maximum height is three (3) feet. 
C.  Specific provisions within the SA zoning district. 
1.  Barbed wire may be used on fences. 
2.  Electric fences are permissible in full compliance with electrical and safety codes. 
D.  Specific provisions in WLI and HI zoning districts. Fences required for enclosure of permissible outdoor storage as set forth in Section 5.02.04 shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. 
5.02.04   Outside storage.
A.  The standards set forth in this section apply to any storage of equipment, machinery, or materials other than enclosed within a building. 
B.  Outside storage involving machinery and equipment, service areas for vehicles in need of major service or repair, materials for construction or distribution is permissible only in the GB, WLI, and HI zoning districts. 
C.  Outside storage involving machinery and equipment for agricultural support is permissible only in the SA zoning district. 
D.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the outdoor storage of non-commercial lawn equipment in residential areas. 
E.  Outside storage shall be located within a rear yard or side yard. 
F.  Outside storage shall be fully concealed from public view with a solid fence, not to exceed ten (10) feet in height. 
G.  Outside storage of parts and materials, service areas, refuse, or work activity areas shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner. 
H.  Stored materials shall not exceed the height of the fence enclosing the outside storage area. 
I.  Outdoor storage shall not be located within any required buffer area, stormwater management area, or easement. 
5.02.05   Dumpsters.
A.  Dumpsters shall be screened with a solid masonry wall or hardy plank. The fence shall be eight (8) feet in height. If a fence is used, the finished side shall face outward. 
B.  Double-staggered shrubs shall be installed around the perimeter of the wall or fence to form a continuous hedge. Plant materials shall meet the specifications set forth in Section 4.08.04(A), and shall be maintained as required in Section 4.08.03. 
C.  A gate shall be provided for access. 
D.  Whenever possible, dumpsters shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. 
E.  Dumpsters shall be located on a concrete surface of sufficient size to accommodate the dumpster. 
1.  Dumpsters for food service establishments shall provide a drain. 
2.  Dumpsters for food service establishments shall provide a grease trap. 
F.  The dumpster location shall be easily accessible for pick-up. 
G.  Dumpsters shall be located to the rear or side of the principal building. A location in the front of the principal building shall be permissible only where side and rear yard locations cannot provide adequate access for pick-up. 
H.  Dumpsters shall not be located within any required buffer area, required landscaped area, required parking lot landscaping, or stormwater management area. 
I.  All dumpsters shall be properly maintained and shall comply with City's requirements for safety, sanitation, and nuisances. 
5.02.06   Swimming pools.
Swimming pools shall be enclosed by a steel mesh security fence, masonry wall, or other building material providing equal or better access control. The fence or wall shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in height. 
5.02.07   Reserved.
5.02.08   Mobile food units.
A.  As used in this section, the terms below shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Commissary shall mean an approved catering establishment, restaurant, or other approved place in which food, containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored. 
2.  Menu change shall mean a modification of a food establishment's menu that requires a change in the food establishment's food preparation equipment or storage requirements previously approved by the Tift County Health Department. The term "menu change" shall include, but is not limited to, the addition of potentially hazardous food to a menu, installation of new food preparation or storage equipment, or increasing storage capacity. 
3.  Mobile food unit shall mean a retail food establishment that reports to and operates from a commissary and is readily moveable. 
4.  Mobile food vendor ("vendor") shall mean the registered owner of a mobile food truck or the owner's agent or employee. 
5.  Mobile food vendor permit ("vendor permit") shall mean a document indicating the owner of an established mobile food unit has met the requirements of this ordinance and is licensed to operate within the City of Tifton. 
6.  Mobile food vendor site ("vendor site") shall mean a location where one or more mobile food units are located at any one time specifically for the purpose of selling merchandise in accordance with the provisions set forth within this ordinance. 
B.  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, food or beverages of any type from a commissary or mobile food unit without first obtaining a vendor permit as described herein. 
C.  Vendor permit application requirements. An application for a mobile food vendor permit as described herein shall be submitted to the Director of Environmental Management or his or her designee for review and consideration and shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  Name of the mobile food unit vending business. 
2.  Owner's contact information. 
3.  Operator's contact information. 
4.  Make, model, dimensions and license plate number of the mobile food truck. 
5.  Photographs of mobile food unit, to include all sides and all signage. 
6.  Location, dates and times of vending site operation. 
7.  A copy of approved permit from the Tift County Health Department. 
8.  A copy of the current occupational tax certificate from where the business is licensed. 
9.  A copy of current liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance company licensed to practice in the state. Each vendor shall maintain no less than a $1,000,000.00 liability insurance policy, protecting the vendor, the public and the city from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. 
10.  Signature of applicant indicating agreement to the listed regulations. 
A mobile food vendor permit shall be valid for 12 months from the date of issuance. 
D.  Vendor site application requirements. An application for a mobile food vendor site as described herein shall be submitted to the Director of the Environmental Management or his or her designee and shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  Vendor sites shall be limited to private tracts of land within the GB General Business and CD Commercial Downtown zoning districts. 
2.  A separate application for each vendor site shall be submitted for approval prior to establishing a vendor site. 
3.  Written consent from the property owner(s), property manager(s), leasing agent(s) and/or lessee(s) indicating their approval of the vendor site. 
4.  A detailed site plan of the proposed vendor site indicating the location of each mobile food unit, generators, tables, trash cans, parking areas and traffic flow. Each mobile food truck shall be located: 
a.  On paved surfaces only and shall not block drive aisles, access to loading/ service areas, emergency access or fire lanes. 
b.  No closer than 30 feet from the right-of-way of an arterial highway and shall not be located within a landscape buffer or sight triangle. 
c.  No closer than 15 feet from existing fire hydrants or transformers. The overall vendor site shall include no less than 15 off-street parking spaces for each mobile food unit. If adequate on-site parking is not available, the parking requirements must be met by designating parking spaces in an off-site parking area abutting the vendor site. Written consent from the owner of the adjoining property must be provided indicating they have approved off-site parking on their property. 
d.  Within 100 feet of an existing brick-and-mortar restaurant during the hours when such restaurant is open to the public for business. 
e.  Within 300 feet of a school or day care facility while that facility is in session unless written approval is established with that facility. 
A mobile food vendor site permit shall be valid for the dates identified on the application only. Any changes to the approved permit shall be approved in advance by the Director of the Environmental Management or his or her designee. 
E.  Aesthetic/signage requirements. 
1.  Absolutely no flashing, blinking or strobe lights shall be used on or within mobile food unit or related signage. All exterior lights with over 60 watts shall contain opaque hood shields to direct the illumination downward. 
2.  All signs used must be permanently affixed to or painted on the mobile food unit and shall extend no more than six inches from the vehicle. No sign shall flash, produce or reflect motion pictures; emit visible smoke, vapor, particles or odor; be animated or produce any rotation, motion or movement. No sign shall be internally illuminated. 
3.  A portable menu board measuring no more than six square feet in size may be placed on the ground within the customer waiting area. This sign shall be located no more than ten feet from the edge of the mobile food unit. 
In no instance shall the portable menu board be located between the mobile food unit and any adjoining public road. 
4.  Mobile food units shall be maintained in good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust. 
F.  Operational requirements. 
1.  Mobile food units shall not conduct business within the city limits unless a valid permit has been issued as described herein. 
2.  The vendor permit shall be firmly attached to the mobile food unit in a prominent and conspicuous location readily visible to patrons of the mobile food unit and visible on the mobile food unit at all times. 
3.  No sales or offers for sale shall be made from any mobile food unit between 9:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m. unless such sale is in conjunction with a city-approved special event. 
4.  No structure, vehicle or equipment shall be left unattended or stored at any time on the vending site when sales are not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
5.  Each vendor shall comply with all state, federal and local health and safety regulations and requirements and shall obtain and maintain any and all licenses required by any other health organization or governmental organization having jurisdiction over this subject matter. 
6.  Vendors may sell food and non-alcoholic beverage items only. 
7.  Customers shall be provided with single service articles such as plastic utensils and paper plates. Each vendor shall provide no less than one waste container for public use. 
Each vendor shall provide for the sanitary collection of all refuse, litter and garbage generated by the patrons using that service and shall remove all such waste materials from the vendor site before the vehicle departs. This includes, but is not limited to, physically inspecting the general area surrounding the vendor site for such items prior to the vehicle's departure. 
Absolutely no dumping of gray water on public or private property shall be permitted. 
8.  The issuance of a permit does not grant or entitle the vendor to the exclusive use of any property or parking space. 
9.  All power required for the mobile food unit shall be self-contained. Mobile food trucks shall not use utilities drawn from the public right-of-way. No power cable or equipment shall extend across any city street, multi-use path, or sidewalk. 
G.  Fees. Permit fees shall be as adopted by city council in the schedule of fees and kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
H.  Indemnity. As a part of the permitting process set forth herein, any person or entity receiving a permit shall execute an indemnity agreement indemnifying and releasing the city, its agents, employees and elected officials from any and all liability against any and all claims, actions and suits of any type whatsoever. 
I.  Review of permit application. In determining whether or not to approve a specific vendor permit or the location of a vendor site, the Director of the Environmental Management or his or her designee may consider any factors reasonably deemed relevant for the application including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant, is false in any material detail; 
2.  The applicant failed to complete the application form after having been notified of the need for additional information or documents; 
3.  Another permit or application has been received prior in time or has already been approved at the same time and location requested by the applicant; 
4.  The size, nature or location of the vendor site will present a substantial risk to the health or safety of the public or participants in the event or other persons; 
5.  The location of the vendor site will substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along the city streets. 
J.  Revocation and suspension. Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this section may be subject to revocation for cause by the Director of the Environmental Management or his or her designee, including but not limited to the failure to comply with this section or any other applicable provisions of the City of Tifton Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 5.03.00 - Temporary structures and uses. 
5.03.01   Temporary structures and uses during construction.
A temporary building or use in connection with a construction project shall be permitted during the construction period. The following standards shall be met by temporary uses established during construction: 
A.  A building permit shall be required. 
B.  Temporary offices may be located on a construction site to be used for administrative functions during construction. Temporary construction offices may have the name of the construction company printed on one (1) permanently affixed sign on the outside of the building and shall comply with the specifications set forth in the supplemental standards and comply with Chapter 7 of this Code. On-site outdoor storage of equipment and construction materials shall be allowed during the period of construction. 
C.  Portable toilet facilities shall be provided. 
D.  Construction and demolition debris dumpsters are allowable and are not required to be screened. 
E.  A temporary office shall be allowable, which may be used for sales functions or sales offices, allowing for the sale, resale, or marketing of dwellings, structures, or property within the development in which it is located, or adjacent developments under the same control. Where such office is open to the public, ADA compliance is required. 
F.  On-site temporary use of structures and equipment for the building of roads, public utilities, and government projects shall be allowed. 
5.03.02   Reserved.
5.03.03   Special events and seasonal sales.
A.  Special events include carnivals, fairs, festivals, seasonal sales, tent meetings, or other periodic events of a temporary nature. Such events are typically outdoors. 
B.  Special events shall be limited to: 
1.  The SA zoning district; or 
2.  On any property used for civic purposes; or 
3.  On any property used as a religious facility. 
C.  The following standards apply to carnivals, fairs, festivals, tent meetings, and similar events and activities: 
1.  A temporary use permit is required according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 10 and shall be posted in a public and conspicuous location. 
2.  The applicant shall ensure the provision of adequate sanitation facilities, sewage disposal, garbage and refuse disposal, potable water supply, and food service during the special event. 
3.  The area devoted to the special event shall not be located on any required setbacks, buffers, parking spaces, parking lot aisles, driveways, fire lanes, or other traffic circulation areas. 
4.  The site shall have floodlighting for the special event and parking areas, if any activities are to be offered during darkness. Lighting shall be shielded and directed to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties as measured at the property line. 
5.  The site shall have adequate parking facilities. Parking may be on-site or off-site. Where off-site parking is provided, there shall be adequate plans for transporting or conducting patrons from the off-site parking facilities to the special event area. 
6.  The applicant shall provide adequate traffic control and security in and around the special event area during hours of operation. 
7.  All stages, booths, tents, scaffoldings, or structures of any nature on, under, or within which persons may congregate, shall conform to applicable building, health, and other construction codes. 
D.  The following standards apply to seasonal sales: 
[1].  A temporary use permit is required according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 10 and shall be posted in a public and conspicuous location. 
[2].  The area devoted to seasonal sales shall not be located on any required setbacks, buffers, parking spaces, parking lot aisles, driveways, fire lanes, or other traffic circulation areas. 
[3].  Goods, tents, equipment, or materials used for the seasonal sales activity shall not be located within any right-of-way. 
[4].  Parking spaces shall be provided to support the seasonal sales activity. Parking spaces necessary to support the seasonal sales activity shall be in addition to parking provided on the site to serve other uses and shall be calculated based on the square feet of sales area according to the standards in Section 6.01.03. 
[5].  The applicant shall ensure the provision of adequate garbage and refuse disposal. 
[6].  The applicant shall demonstrate conformance with all applicable building, health, and other federal, State, or local laws. 
5.03.04   Model homes and sales offices.
A.  Model homes are permissible only in conjunction with a new residential development during the period of construction of site improvements and new homes. 
B.  One (1) or more model homes may be established in a residential development, including planned developments, subject to the following standards: 
1.  A model home shall be located on a platted lot meeting all standards of this LDC. The number of model home units shall not exceed five (5) percent of the number of homes or lots permissible in the residential development. Fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 
2.  A model home shall be located to meet all site design standards of this LDC, except for the modifications specifically enumerated herein. 
3.  A model home may include a sales office. Where a sales office is provided open to the public, ADA compliance is required. 
4.  One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee plus one (1) off-street parking space per model home. In addition, one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for handicapped parking. These spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the model dwelling unit or on a contiguous lot within the specific project. 
C.  The model home shall be discontinued as a model unit and sales office when ninety (90) percent homes in the residential development have been built. The model home site shall be redesigned to comply with all site design requirements applicable to the residential development. Such redesign includes, at a minimum, removal of parking in excess of that associated with a single-family home; removal of any signs; and removal of any exterior lighting associated with the model home and sales office. 
Sec. 5.04.00 - Telecommunication towers and antennas. 
Telecommunications towers and antennas shall be permitted provided that: 
A.  All structures are setback from property lines and right-of-way of lines the required distance for that district plus one foot for every two feet above the height requirements of that district. 
B.  Towers or tall structures for telecommunications services will not be permitted within 500 feet of each other measured form the base of the tower to the base of the tower. 
CHAPTER 6. - INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 6.00.00 - Generally. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and requirements for the provision of infrastructure by all development. This chapter contains requirements for the transportation system, set forth in Section 6.01.00, including access, streets, off-street parking, and clear visibility at intersections. Tift County Board of Health requirements are set forth in Section 6.02.00. Requirements for utilities are set forth in Section 6.03.00, including potable water and sanitary sewer. Requirements for drainage and stormwater management are set forth in Section 6.04.00. 
Sec. 6.01.00 - Transportation and parking facilities. 
6.01.01   Access and driveway design requirements.
A.  Requirements for curb cuts. Within any zoning district, where the lowering or cutting away of any curbs or the placement of asphalt and/or driveway pipe on non-curbed sections for the purpose of ingress and egress is required to the property, such curb cuts or asphalt width shall be subject to the following provisions: 
1.  The location, design, and construction of driveway connections shall comply with the Technical Standards Manual. 
2.  Residential curb cuts (excluding multi-family development and manufactured housing park development): 
a.  No more than two (2) combined entrances and exits shall be allowed any parcel of property, the frontage of which is less than 200 feet on any one (1) street. Additional entrances or exits for parcels having a frontage in excess of 200 feet shall be permitted at the rate of one (1) entrance/exit for each additional 100 feet. 
b.  At street intersections, no curb cuts shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of two (2) curb lines or such lines extended; or within twenty five (25) feet of the intersection of two (2) right-of-way lines or such lines extended, whichever is more restrictive. On principal or minor arterials or collector streets, no driveway shall be within seventy (70) feet of the intersection of two (2) curb lines or curb lines extended. 
c.  The distance between any two (2) curb cuts on the same side of the street shall be not less than ten (10) feet. Said distance shall be measured between the point of tangency of the curb return radii and the established curb. 
d.  All driveways shall be constructed so as to have at least five (5) feet from any property line (excluding right-of-way), except that a curb return may flare to a point where such property line extends with the right-of-way line. 
e.  The maximum width of any residential driveway shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet measured at the right-of-way line. 
f.  The sum of the two (2) curb return radii for any curb cut shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
3.  Commercial, industrial, manufactured housing park, and multi-family curb cuts 
a.  Existing lots of record less than 150 feet frontage shall be allowed one (1) combined entrance/exit not to exceed twenty-four (24) feet at right-of-way line. 
b.  No more than two (2) combined entrances or exits shall be allowed any parcel or frontage that is less than 300 feet on any one (1) street. Additional entrances or exits for parcels of property having a frontage in excess of 300 feet shall be permitted at the rate of one (1) entrance-exit for each additional 150 feet. 
c.  At street intersections, no curb cuts shall be located within seventy (70) feet of the intersection of two (2) curb lines or within sixty (60) feet of the intersection of two (2) property lines where such lines extended, whichever is more restrictive. 
d.  Maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed forty (40) feet measured at the right-of-way line; minimum two-way shall be twenty-four (24) feet at right-of-way line with a maximum of twelve and a half (12.5) foot radius. If the driveway provides primary access for heavy truck traffic, the maximum driveway width may be increased upon approval of the Manager. No two (2) driveways on the same property shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet. 
e.  The sum of the two (2) curb return radii for any one (1) curb cut shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet, nor greater than forty (40) feet. 
B.  Defunct driveways shall be removed. 
1.  When development on sites where existing curb cuts are abandoned and access is no longer afforded due to parking lots, buildings or other permitted structures, the driveway shall be removed, the sidewalk (if existing) shall be replaced, the curb and gutter shall be replaced, fill dirt backfilled to its natural state. 
2.  Where the development was served by a piped driveway to a dirt or paved street, said pipe shall be removed, asphalt removed and the shoulders and ditch regraded to its natural pre-existing state. 
C.  Joint access driveways and cross access easements. Joint access driveways and cross access easements shall be designed according to the following provisions: 
1.  Adjacent commercial or office properties shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites through a system of joint use driveways and cross access easements as shown in Figure 6.1. The design of the joint or cross access area shall incorporate the following: 
a.  Continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation; 
b.  Stub-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross-access via a service drive; and 
c.  Sufficient separation between side street access to the property and the major road to ensure safety. 
2.  In order to ensure continuous availability of access to all properties, all property owners shall: 
a.  Record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to and from other properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access or service drive; 
b.  Record an agreement with the deed that remaining access rights along the thoroughfare shall be dedicated to the governing authority and pre-existing driveways shall be closed and eliminated after construction of the joint-use driveways; and 
c.  Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners. 
6.01.02   Streets and rights-of-way.
A.  The location, arrangement, extent, width, and grade of all streets shall conform to the City of Tifton-Tift County Thoroughfare Plan, and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public safety and convenience, and proposed use of land to be served by the streets. The layout of a subdivision shall conform to the requirements and design principles described in this LDC. 
B.  The location, design, and construction of all streets shall comply with the Technical Standards Manual and the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) standards for streets. 
C.  The location, design, and construction of all traffic control devices, signage and other markings shall comply with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). 
D.  Streets signs designating the approved name of each street shall be placed in accordance with the standards established by the governing authority. 
E.  Access (also see Section 6.01.01(A)). 
1.  Except as provided in Section 6.01.02(E) below, each lot within a subdivision shall abut a paved public street which is or shall be maintained by the City of Tifton with a minimum right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet. 
2.  Where the subdivision does not immediately adjoin a public street, the subdivider shall provide a paved public street from the subdivision to a paved public street. 
3.  A subdivision with twenty (20) or more lots shall provide two (2) access points. Where access is by a private street, the following additional standards shall be met: 
a.  The private street shall comply with the standards in Section 6.01.02(E). 
b.  If gated, the gate shall be a breakaway design and construction to as to ensure emergency access. 
4.  A driveway connecting the public street with adjoining property is the responsibility of the property owner. Prior to installation, any needed drainage pipe under the driveway shall be approved by the governing authority. 
5.  Alleys or fire lanes may be provided at the rear of lots in residential subdivisions. Alleys or fire lanes shall be provided at the rear of lots in commercial and industrial developments. 
F.  Private roads. 
1.  The development of a subdivision on private roadways may be permitted subject to the provisions of this section. 
a.  Subdivisions which utilize private streets shall be approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
b.  The developer of a subdivision which utilizes private streets shall establish a responsible association with the authority to maintain the private streets. 
c.  Private streets shall be approved for development only when they are eligible for categorization as a local street. 
d.  Private streets shall be designed and constructed to comply with the Technical Standards Manual and the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) standards for public streets and shall conform to the City of Tifton-Tift County Thoroughfare Plan. 
e.  Private streets shall be designed so as to prohibit through traffic. 
f.  To allow for installation of utilities, there shall be a thirty (30) feet utility easement required to be indicated on the subdivision plat. 
g.  Prior to the issuance of building permits for lots within the development, the developer shall file with the Manager a "Release of Maintenance Agreement," acknowledging that the governing authority shall have no responsibility for present or future maintenance of the private streets. 
h.  A blue street sign indicating that the street is a private street shall be erected at the intersection of each public street and the private street. 
i.  Subdivisions developed with private streets may erect a security gate at the entrance to the subdivision, provided that the security gate is equipped with a pass key system or an emergency alarm activated gate to provide access for emergency vehicles. 
G.  Design standards. 
1.  Alignment and Continuation. Streets within a subdivision shall be so arranged as to provide for the alignment and continuation of existing public streets. 
2.  Cul-de-sacs. 
a.  Permanent cul-de-sacs shall be limited in length so that each cul-de-sac serves as street access for no more than twenty-five (25) lots. 
b.  Cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a right-of-way of not less than 100 feet. 
c.  Paving within the turnaround shall have an outside diameter of not less than ninety (90) feet. 
3.  Permanent dead-end streets and dead-end alleys shall be prohibited. 
4.  Permanent half-streets and half-alleys shall be prohibited. 
5.  Intersections. 
a.  The center line of no more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one (1) point. 
b.  No street shall intersect another street at less than eighty (80) degrees and shall as nearly as possible intersect at ninety (90) degrees. 
6.  The right-of-way radius at street intersections shall be no less than twenty (20) feet except on major arterial streets, where GDOT standards shall apply. 
7.  Horizontal and Vertical Alignment of Streets. 
a.  New streets shall be designed to meet all minimum requirements for the appropriate classification as listed in the most recent edition of the City of Tifton-Tift County Thoroughfare Plan "Road Classifications" table. 
b.  The classification will be determined by the estimated traffic volume for each street and the land use of lots adjacent to the street. Traffic volumes shall be estimated in accordance with the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). 
c.  New streets shall have horizontal alignment, vertical alignment, and superelevation designed in accordance with the latest edition of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (ASHTO), Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 
8.  Right-of-way Extension. 
a.  Where the proposed subdivision has twenty-five (25) lots or more and abuts undeveloped properties, street rights-of-way shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of the proposed subdivision as necessary such that every subdivision and prospective subdivision will have at least two (2) points of ingress onto and egress from the public road system either upon completion of construction of the proposed subdivision or when both proposed subdivision and the undeveloped property are developed. 
b.  Undeveloped properties are unimproved lands without prior plans or plats submitted to or recorded with the governing authority where such plans or plats are for the purpose of allowing a higher and better use of the property than allowed in its unimproved state. 
9.  Street jogs at intersections shall be not less than 150 feet between centerline offsets. 
10.  Street Right-of-way and Pavement Width. 
a.  Street rights-of-way shall be measured between lot lines. 
b.  Street rights-of-way and pavement widths shall meet the minimum requirements as listed in the latest edition of the City of Tifton-Tift County Thoroughfare Plan "Road Classifications" table. 
c.  If the subdivision boundary line lies adjacent to the right-of-way line of an existing street of less than the minimum right-of-way width, a minimum of one-half (1/2) the required extra right-of-way shall be dedicated. 
11.  Medians. 
a.  When a new development is proposed with a median in a street, the subdivider must make provisions for future maintenance of the grassing and landscaping within the median. Prior to issuance of building permits for lots within the development, the developer shall file with the Manager a "Release of Maintenance Agreement," acknowledging that the governing authority shall have no responsibility for present or future maintenance of the medians. 
b.  Median in a street with curb and gutter 
i.  Additional right-of-way will be required to provide a shoulder of at least ten (10) feet width measured from back of curb to right-of-way. 
ii.  Utility easements will be required beyond the right-of-way for the installation of utilities. The width of such easements will be as required by the governing authority engineer after review of the Preliminary Plat and preliminary construction plans of the subject subdivision. 
12.  Street names. The subdivider shall provide on the subdivision plat the approved name or number of all streets within the subdivision. 
a.  Streets and roads that are obviously in alignment with and are extensions of existing previously named or numbered streets shall bear that name. 
b.  The names of all new streets within the subdivision shall be subject to the review and approval of the SDRC. 
c.  New street names shall not duplicate or closely resemble the names of streets already in existence within the City of Tifton. 
H.  Street and right-of-way classification map. 
1.  The SDRC will prepare a street and right-of-way classification map, which map will depict all streets in the City of Tifton showing the designations of streets. 
2.  This map will be accompanied by a table in the City of Tifton Technical Standards Manual to establish the widths of the following 
a.  Minimum required right-of-way; 
b.  Minimum required pavement or asphalt widths; and 
c.  Minimum required curb and gutter widths. 
3.  This map shall be kept up to date by the committee and a copy of such map shall be maintained at all times by the Manager or his designee. 
I.  Prerequisites to acceptance of street dedication. 
1.  The developer will be responsible for 100 percent of the costs of all materials to establish and construct a street upon rights-of-way dedicated to the City to include paving, stormwater drainage, and curb and gutter. 
2.  The developer will be responsible for 100 percent of the costs of all materials to install water and sewer utilities and service within the new street. 
3.  Warranty of street work required: 
a.  The developer must provide an agreement acceptable to the City that all work will be done in accordance with City specifications and that such developer will warrant to the City all work for a period of two (2) years from the date that the SDRC approves and accepts, subject to the aforesaid warranty, such work. 
b.  The developer must provide testing and inspection of the construction of all streets certified by a third party independent laboratory. The costs of this third party testing shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
c.  At the expiration of two (2) years from such acceptance date, the paved street and all subject utilities will become the maintenance responsibility of the City. The developer will correct, at his expense, any defects that arise or occur or become manifest within the two-year warranty period. 
6.01.03   Parking standards and design.
A.  Parking space requirements. 
1.  Except as provided in this section, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvements, or use, a development plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and loading. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and loading facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. 
2.  These regulations shall apply to all zoning districts except the Commercial Downtown (CD) district. 
3.  Minimum off-street vehicular parking spaces shall be provided at the time of the construction of the principal building or at the time of the conversion of a building having a previously existing use, to a more intensive use of the same property. 
4.  When an addition is made to a building containing less than the required parking or loading requirements, off-street parking shall be provided for the entire building, based upon the standards in this section. 
5.  No addition to an existing building shall be constructed which reduces the number of spaces, area, or usability of an existing parking lot or loading space, unless such building and its addition conform with the regulations for parking and loading contained herein. 
6.  Requirements for off-street parking for uses not specifically mentioned in this section shall be the same as required for the use most similar to the one sought. 
7.  Number of parking spaces 
In order to assure a proper and uniform development of public parking areas throughout the area of jurisdiction of this LDC, to relieve traffic congestion on the streets, and to minimize any detrimental effects on adjacent properties, off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained as called for in Table 6.01.03(A). 
8.  Calculation of required parking. 
a.  Where floor area determines the amount of off-street parking required, the floor area of a building shall be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of every floor of the building, using exterior wall dimensions. 
b.  For places of public assembly, the number of seats shall be the maximum occupancy load established for the building by the fire inspector. 
Table 6.01.03(A). Parking Space Requirements. 

 
B.  Parking space requirements (number of spaces) may be adjusted by the City Manager or his designee. Adjustments may be granted for a multiple tenant establishment, commercial center, or joint use of two (2) or more adjacent or adjoining uses. The property owner shall provide the following information to support a request for reduction or waiver of otherwise required parking. 
1.  The site development plan shall show that there is one (1) or more paved driveway connections between the parking areas of the developments involved. The number, location(s), and design specifications of said driveway(s) shall be acceptable to the governing authority. 
2.  A parking study may be provided to document the proposed number of parking spaces as may be required as determined by the SDRC based upon the site development plan. The study shall include an estimate of the number of spaces required and the source of the estimate. Acceptable sources include studies such as conducted by the Urban Land Institute or the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Parking data for similar uses may be included, provided that the similar uses are documented as similar in density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, hours of operation, and location. The governing authority shall retain the sole authority to accept the parking data as appropriate for the proposed use. 
3.  A cross-access and cross-parking agreement, in recordable form acceptable to the governing authority, shall be executed by the owners of developments involved. Said agreement shall guarantee the joint use of a specified number of parking spaces. 
C.  Parking space requirements may be reduced, waived by the Manager or his designee, or shared parking may be approved, based upon the availability of an off-site and non-contiguous parking facility or parking lot. The property owner shall provide the following information to support a request for reduction or waiver of otherwise required parking. 
1.  The availability of the off-site parking lot shall be guaranteed in perpetuity, by virtue of common ownership with the primary site, recorded easements, or other binding agreements acceptable to the governing authority. 
2.  The off-site parking lot shall be located no more than 200 feet from the primary site. The distance shall be measured along the paved public right-of-way from the entrance driveway into the parking area to the entrance of the principal building. 
3.  The off-site parking lot shall meet all development standards set forth in this LDC. 
D.  Parking lot design requirements. Off-street parking lots, individual parking spaces, loading areas, and loading stalls shall be designed to conform to the following criteria and standards. 
1.  All multiple-family, commercial, and industrial uses shall provide a paved, dust-free surface. 
2.  All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the expense of the owners thereof in a clean, orderly, and dust-free condition to the extent it does not create a nuisance. 
3.  All off-street parking and loading areas shall be well maintained. Parking lots and loading areas shall be free of potholes, debris, weeds, broken curbs, and broken wheel stops. 
4.  All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or public streets. 
5.  All parking areas shall be arranged for convenient access and safety of pedestrians and vehicles. 
6.  All parking areas shall provide barriers when located at the perimeter of the lot to prevent encroachment onto adjacent property. 
7.  All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, and streets by curbing or other suitable protective device. Loading stalls shall not hinder movement of pedestrians or vehicles over a street, sidewalk, or alley, or to and from an off-street parking area. 
8.  Off-street parking and loading areas that are to be used at night shall include proper illumination for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles, and for security purposes. Lighting shall be located and shielded to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
9.  Individual spaces and internal aisles shall be designed according to the standards below: 
a.  Parking space dimensions shall be a minimum width of nine (9) feet and length of twenty (20) feet. 
b.  The number, design, and location of parking spaces provided to ensure handicapped access shall comply with the Georgia Accessibility Code standards for accessible design. 
c.  There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
Table 6.01.03(D). Parking Lot Design. 

 
10.  Pavement markings and signs 
Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and pavement directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows, and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
E.  Loading space requirements. 
1.  Industrial, wholesale, institutional, and commercial operations or similar uses shall provide loading spaces as follows: 
a.  Commercial centers, commercial uses, hotels, hospitals, and institutional uses with less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area shall provide one (1) off-street loading space. 
b.  Commercial centers, commercial uses, hotels, hospitals, and institutional uses with 10,000 square feet or more of gross floor area shall be provide one (1) space per 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space for each additional 20,000 square feet, or fraction thereof. 
c.  Industrial uses shall provide one (1) space for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Elementary, middle, and junior high schools, day care centers, and childcare centers shall provide safe and convenient drop off areas for students. The drop off area is intended to allow a student to enter or exit a vehicle directly to a sidewalk abutting the designated drop off area to the school or day care center. 
3.  Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering for loading and unloading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free, normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way. 
4.  Off-street loading spaces shall meet the following design requirements: 
a.  Loading spaces shall not block streets, alleys, or sidewalks. Loading spaces shall not impair the movement of vehicles or pedestrians on streets, alleys, or sidewalks. 
b.  Every loading space shall meet the following minimum dimensions: 

 
6.01.04   Drive-through facilities and stacking lanes.
A.  All uses and facilities providing drive-up or drive-through service shall provide stacking lanes in compliance with the standards of this section. 
B.  Restaurants with drive-up or drive-through facilities shall provide a minimum stacking space to accommodate eight (8) vehicles. A bypass lane shall be required. 
C.  Banks and financial institutions shall provide stacking spaces according to Table 6.01.04(C). A by-pass lane shall be provided. 
Table 6.01.04(C). Stacking Lane Requirements for Banks and Financial Institutions. 

 
D.  Stacking lanes shall not be located within a designated delivery area or area designated for loading spaces. 
6.01.05   Visibility at intersections.
A.  In order to provide a clear view of intersecting rights-of-way and/or private driveways, there shall be a triangular area of clear visibility formed by the two (2) intersecting rights-of-way, driveways, or combination thereof. 
B.  The horizontal dimensions of sight areas are defined as triangular areas formed by the intersecting right-of-way lines and a straight line joining the right-of-way lines twenty (20) from the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
C.  The vertical dimensions of sight areas are defined as that vertical space between the heights of two (2) feet and twelve (12) feet in elevation above the nearest edge of the street pavement of a paved street or above the nearest edge of the riding surface of an unpaved street. 
D.  Within the clear visibility triangle area no fence, wall, sign, structure, slope or embankment, parked vehicle, hedge, foliage or other planting, and other object or structure shall be placed, erected, or maintained which will obstruct visibility. (See Figure 6.2). 
E.  Streetlights and street name signposts shall be permitted, provided that illuminating fixtures or nameplates are not within the prescribed clear space. 
F.  These visibility requirements shall not be required within the Commercial Downtown (CD) zoning district. 
Sec. 6.02.00 - Board of health requirements. 
6.02.01   Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to insure that private water supply wells, private septic tanks, and on-site sewage disposal systems are located and installed in a manner that protects the general health and safety of the citizens of the City of Tifton. 
6.02.02   Jurisdiction.
A.  The Tift County Health Department and, if applicable Georgia DNR, shall have jurisdiction for protecting the health of the community for developments that propose the installation of private wells, private septic tanks, or on-site sewage disposal systems. 
B.  The Health Department shall review proposed development for the suitability of soils, minimum lot size, and minimum lot width for the location and installation of private wells, private septic tanks, or on-site sewage disposal systems. 
C.  Administrative procedures and permit procedures, including the role of the Health Department in the review of proposed development, are provided in Chapter 10. 
6.02.03   Soil suitability criteria.
In determining the suitability of soils for the installation of private wells, private septic tanks, or on-site sewage disposal systems, the Health Department shall use the following sources: 
A.  Preliminary review of soil suitability shall be based on the Tift County Soils Map. 
B.  The Health Department may require soil borings of the proposed development site to determine the suitability of soils. Soil borings may be required at up to two (2) stages of the development review process: 
1.  During the development review process by the Health Department. 
2.  At the time of the application for a building permit by the applicant of the building permit. 
6.02.04   Water supply, sanitary sewage, and septic systems.
A.  No building permit shall be issued by the Manager or his designee without the approval of the Tift County Health Department for the proposed private wells, private septic tanks, or on-site sewage disposal systems. 
B.  Community or shared sewage disposal systems may be approved by the Health Department. 
C.  Community or shared sewage disposal systems with a capacity of greater than 10,000 gallons per day shall require approval from the Georgia EPD as do developments with more than ninety-nine (99) individual septic tanks. 
D.  Where topography, soil characteristics, drainage, groundwater or other physical conditions preclude safe on-site water supplies and/or sewage disposal systems, the developer shall furnish to the Georgia EPD, plans and specifications for a public water supply and/or public sewage disposal system for the development. 
Sec. 6.03.00 - Requirements regarding potable water, sanitary sewer, and other utilities. 
6.03.01   Generally.
A.  All development shall include adequate provision for utility infrastructure in full compliance with the standards of Section 6.03.00. 
B.  A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for structures in a subdivision or a development until Health Department approval has been received and all necessary utilities have been installed in full compliance with the design, construction, and placement standards set forth in Section 6.03.00. 
C.  All construction drawings shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia. 
D.  All engineering plans and specifications shall be reviewed and approved by the governing authority prior to the developer submitting plans and specifications to any other governmental agencies. 
6.03.02   Requirements for all utilities.
A.  New connections to the existing City of Tifton and Tift County Utility Systems are subject to all standards, specifications, codes, and ordinances as they pertain to water and sewer systems and/or facilities. 
B.  The location, design, and construction of utilities shall comply with the City of Tifton Technical Standards Manual. 
C.  All construction and installation shall be performed by a utility contractor licensed by the governing authority. 
D.  The developer shall construct and convey to the governing authority, free and clear of all encumbrances and at no cost to the City, the extension to the utility systems and the complete water and/or sewer system on the subject property prior to recording of the final plat. 
E.  Following conveyance to the governing authority by the developer, the extension and any additions, repairs and replacements thereto shall at all times remain the sole, complete and exclusive property of and under the control of the governing authority. The developer shall have no right or claim in or to the developer's extension provided, however, that the extension shall be used for providing service to the development. 
6.03.03   Potable water system requirements.
A.  The developer shall be responsible for the design of an adequate system of water supply, treatment, transmission, and distribution facilities for the development. 
B.  All potable water systems shall comply with the design and construction standards of the City of Tifton Utility Department. 
C.  All development shall be required to connect to a public water system when the governing authority's water system is available within 500 feet. Through extensions, the subdivider shall assure that every lot of the subdivision shall be provided with public water. 
D.  The City of Tifton Utility Department may determine that conditions are such that a private water system is acceptable. It is the developer's responsibility to contact the Utility Department for this determination. The Utility Department will advise the developer as to the proper procedures for connecting to the system. 
E.  If it is determined that a private water system is permitted, it is the responsibility of the developer to coordinate with the private utility company for approval of the connection. Plans, specifications, and design calculations must be submitted to the City of Tifton Utility Department for approval, whether the system is public or private. 
F.  All water systems, public or private, shall be located entirely within rights-of-way or permanent easements dedicated to the City of Tifton. 
G.  Hydrants. 
1.  Specifications for the location and depth of the connection of hydrants shall meet the minimum standards contained in the City of Tifton Technical Standards Manual and the International Fire Code. 
6.03.04   Sanitary sewer system requirements.
A.  The developer shall be responsible for the design of an adequate sewage collection system and/or treatment facilities where necessary. 
B.  All wastewater systems shall comply with the design and construction standards of the City of Tifton Utility Department. 
C.  All development shall be required to connect to a public sewer system when the governing authority's sanitary sewer system is available within 500 feet. Through extensions, the subdivider shall assure that every lot of the subdivision shall be provided with public sewer. 
D.  The developer is responsible for the coordination of connection to a privately owned system. 
E.  All sewer systems, public or private, shall be located entirely within rights-of-way or permanent easements dedicated to the City of Tifton. 
6.03.05   Other utility requirements.
A.  When water, sewer, electrical power, telephone, or cable television facilities are installed and intended to be owned, operated, or maintained by a public utility or any entity other than the property owner or developer, the ownership of such utility or facility shall be transferred to the service provider. 
B.  All lines for electricity, telephone, cable television, streetlights, and gas distribution (exclusive of transformers or enclosures containing electrical equipment, including, but not limited to, switches, meters, or capacitors) may be placed underground within easements or dedicated public rights-of-way. 
6.04.00 - Requirements regarding drainage and stormwater management. 
6.04.01   Generally.
A.  The purpose of the drainage and stormwater management requirements set forth in this section is to minimize the detrimental effects of stormwater runoff and to provide for mitigation of stormwater impacts from new development and redevelopment. 
B.  The regulations in this section are intended to: 
1.  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
2.  Provide retention/detention of stormwater runoff to maintain surface water quality, to ensure percolation, and reduce contamination to surface water and groundwater; 
3.  Preserve natural lakes, creeks, other water courses, and natural drainage features; 
4.  Prevent creation of flood hazards due to new development; 
5.  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of green space and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
6.  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety. 
C.  The requirements of this LDC do not supersede those of other State or federal agencies. 
6.04.02   Applicability and exemptions.
A.  All proposed development, except as specifically described in this section, shall comply with the standards and criteria set forth in Section 6.04.00. 
B.  No drainage system, whether natural or manmade, shall be altered, designed, constructed, abandoned, restricted or removed without prior written approval of all appropriate local, state and federal agencies. 
C.  The following activities are exempt from the requirements of Section 6.04.00: 
1.  An individual single-family residential dwelling unit on a legal lot of record; 
2.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
3.  Maintenance of an existing structure which will not change the peak discharge rate, volume, or pollution load of stormwater runoff from the site on which that structure is located; and 
4.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within the SA zoning district. 
D.  Stormwater design manual. All stormwater management plans shall utilize the policy, criteria, technical specifications, and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) for the proper implementation of the requirements of this section. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. All references to the GSMM mean the latest edition as defined on the GSMM website at www.georgiastormwater.com . Updates, errata, and revisions will be provided on the website. 
6.04.03   Standards for stormwater management.
A.  "Master Drainage and Stormwater Management Plan," prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered professional engineer shall be submitted to the SDRC simultaneous with preliminary plat submittal. 
1.  The developer shall be responsible for the design of an adequate drainage and stormwater management system for the development. 
2.  The developer shall provide for adequate drainage for springs or other ground water drainage. 
3.  The location, design, and construction of drainage and stormwater management systems shall comply with the City of Tifton Standards Manual. 
4.  The Master Drainage and Stormwater Management Plan shall contain sufficient information to demonstrate that the requirements and criteria in Section 6.04.00 are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the proposed development. 
5.  The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the proposed drainage and stormwater management system. 
6.  The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the GSMM. 
B.  Design Standards. 
1.  The drainage system for a subdivision, commercial, or industrial development shall be designed in accordance with sound engineering principles and procedures such that all parcels included in the subdivision final plat are positively drained. 
2.  The drainage system shall be designed to accommodate drainage from adjacent lands that naturally drain to or through the lands being subdivided. This accommodation shall be provided by the construction of interceptor ditches along the entire upstream perimeter of the subdivision. 
3.  Further, this accommodation shall provide for the conveyance of the 100-year storm event peak flows through the subdivision in such a way as to prevent flooding of any proposed buildings or to the drainage and road infrastructure. 
4.  The drainage and stormwater management system shall be designed to not significantly affect the natural drainage onto adjacent lands. 
a.  Significant effects to natural drainage onto adjacent lands include both changes in flow rates and character and location of stormwater runoff, including changes from sheet flow to point discharge; 
b.  The post-developed peak discharge rate must not exceed the pre-developed peak discharge rate for the design storms unless appropriate agreements are obtained by the developer from the owner of such adjacent lands concurring with the proposed drainage design; 
c.  Such agreements must extend to the next natural or man-made drainage feature downstream of the development; and 
d.  Such downstream drainage feature must be capable of conveying the 100-year storm event peak flow rates for the entire drainage basin it serves. 
e.  Unless discharge is into an existing well defined drainage channel, such agreement must be provided. 
i.  Evidence of such concurrence shall be submitted to the Manager or his designee along with the Master Drainage and Stormwater Management Plan, or 
ii.  A level spreader shall be designed and installed. 
5.  Drainage facilities for stormwater management, both detention and retention, shall have their storage volumes and principal outlet control structures designed for the storms with return frequencies of two (2) years, five (5) years, ten (10) years, twenty-five (25) years, fifty (50) years, and 100 years. 
a.  All such facilities shall have the emergency overflow structures designed to convey the 100-year storm event peak flows. 
b.  All facilities that impound water on a permanent or temporary basis with water depths greater than two (2) feet must either have side slopes below the 100-year water surface of 4H:1V or flatter, or be enclosed by a fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
c.  Fencing material must prohibit passage of items larger than six (6) inches in diameter, and adequate gates must be installed to allow maintenance. 
6.  All drainage systems discharging into any creek, stream, or natural body of water including but not limited to wetlands, as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shall, pass through an approved sedimentation or detention pond prior to such discharge. 
7.  Drainage facilities associated with streets and roads must be designed: 
a.  To convey stormwater in accordance with the minimum requirements listed in the City of Tifton and Tift County Thoroughfare Plan "Road Classifications" table 
b.  Such that all lateral and longitudinal storm pipes and drainage structures, including catch basins and drop inlets, are capable of carrying the twenty-five (25) year design storm. 
c.  All cross drain pipes shall be designed such that all pipes are capable of carrying the fifty (50) year design storm. 
C.  Record documents. Upon completion of construction and prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall provide record documents for all facilities that impound water on a temporary or permanent basis. 
1.  Drainage facilities including, but not limited to, culverts, rights-of-way, and easements, shall be dedicated to the governing authority, at no expense to the City, and at the option of the City. 
2.  The record drawings shall include pipes and outlet control structures, shall show one (1) foot contours, and shall give pipe and structure elevations to the accuracy of 0.01 feet. 
3.  Such record plans shall demonstrate that the construction has been completed in accordance with the approved construction plans, shall be sealed by a professional engineer or registered land surveyor, and shall include the following statement: 
ENGINEER'S/SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE  STATE OF GEORGIA  COUNTY OF TIFT 
I, ____________ , being a registered Professional Engineer/Land Surveyor in the State of Georgia, registration number ____________ , do hereby certify that the stormwater management system elevations, pipe sizes, structure sizes, dams, and storage volumes for ____________ (the project) were constructed in general accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the City of Tifton, and that the stormwater management system will function as designed. 
Signed and sealed this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
(SEAL) 
Signature 
4.  Ingress and egress easements shall be documented for the stormwater management facilities to ensure access from a public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities requiring regular maintenance and for the purpose of inspection and repair. Upon final inspection and approval, the final plat shall indicate that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. Areas required for maintenance shall be cleared of all trees and underbrush that would interfere with maintenance of the facilities. 
5.  To provide for future access, drainage and utility easements measuring a minimum of five (5) feet shall be provided along each side and rear property line of every lot within a residential subdivision. 
6.  Drainage pond structures shall be designated as a separate lot of record on the final plat of a residential subdivision, unless otherwise approved by the Manager. 

Figure 6.1.

Figure 6.2.
( Ord. No. 2015-04, Exh. A , 3-2-2015) 
CHAPTER 7. - SIGN REGULATION 

Sec. 7.01.00 - Purpose and findings. 
7.01.01   Findings.
After extensive research, study and deliberation the City Council has determined: 
A.  Proper regulation of signs is a necessary prerequisite to a peaceable, orderly and safely designed business environment, the protection of property values and the promotion of tourism in this unique community; 
B.  An improperly regulated sign environment poses health and safety hazards to the public; 
C.  The result of effective sign regulation will be to lessen hazardous conditions, confusion and visual clutter caused by the proliferation, improper placement, illumination and excessive height and size of signs which compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
D.  Through proper regulation of signs, the attractiveness and economic well being of the city will be enhanced as a place to live, work, and conduct business; 
E.  The City of Tifton derives substantial revenue from tourism centered around the historic character of the City and its surrounding plantations; preservation of the City's historic character is necessary to protect and foster future tourism; and 
F.  The historic districts established and recognized by the city pose special consideration in the regulation of signage, requiring signage within said districts to reflect the character of the district and not detract from or be inconsistent with the historic aspects or character of that district. 
7.01.02   Purpose.
A.  The Mayor and Council find that signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and detriment to property values and the City's overall public welfare as an aesthetic nuisance. By enacting this ordinance, the Mayor and Council intend to: 
1.  Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
2.  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare; 
3.  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
4.  Maintain the historical image of the City; 
5.  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
6.  Promote economic development; and 
7.  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
B.  The following sources, in particular, comprise appropriate background for the regulation of signage within the City of Tifton and are available for inspection and copying at the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Tifton: 
1.  Signs, Billboards and Your Community, a Citizen's Manual for Improving the Roadway Environment by Effective Control of Billboards and Outdoor Advertising, by the Pennsylvania Resources Council Inc. and Society Created to Reduce Urban Blight; 
2.  Information provided by Scenic America with respect to sign control; 
3.  Toronto Staff Report, dated February 6, 2001, reflecting staff input on proposal to install two electronic animation signs; 
4.  Billboard Regulation in Portland, A Report Adopted by the City Club of Portland Oregon on September 6, 1996; 
5.  Electronic Billboards and Highway Safety, prepared for the Bureau of Highway Operations, Division of Transportation Infrastructure Development, by CTC and Associates LLC June 10, 2003; 
6.  Research Review of Potential Safety Effects of Electronic Billboards on Driver Attention and Distraction, Final Report, September 11, 2001, from Human Centered Systems Team, Office of Safety Research and Development, Federal Highway Administration; 
7.  Materials related to a billboard collapse in Snellville Georgia, resulting in the death of three workers; 
8.  Driving Performance and Digital Billboards, a Study by Virginia Tech Transportation Institute; 
9.  A Critical, Comprehensive Review of Two Studies Recently Released by the Outdoor Advertising Association of America, prepared for the Maryland State Highway Administration by Jerry Wachtel, dated October 18, 2007; 
10.  The Milwaukee County Stadium Variable Message Sign Study, dated December 1994; and 
11.  The Impact of Driver Inattention on Near Crash/Cash Risk: An Analysis Using the 100 Car Naturalistic Driving Study Data prepared by National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, US Department of Transportation, dated April 2006. 
Sec. 7.02.00 - Definitions. 
A-frame sign. Any upright, rigid supporting frame in the form of a triangle with steeply angled sides that meet at the top in the shape of the letter "A" located on the ground, not permanently attached and easily movable, and usually two-sided which conveys a message. Sandwich board signs are included in this definition. 
Aggregate sign area. The area of all signs on a parcel, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs. 
Animated sign. A sign with action, motion, or changing colors which requires electrical energy. This definition includes any signs that electronically change the sign face, whether by substitution of copy or scrolling. An electronic sign that maintains a steady sign face without change for no less than six (6) hours is not considered an animated sign. However, any deviation from the minimum six (6) hour change of unchanged copy results in the sign being considered an animated sign. 
Area of a sign/Sign area. The smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses one face of the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
Awning sign. A sign located on a roof-like cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign. 
Banner. A sign, with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation, applied to cloth, paper or fabric of any kind, with only such material as backing. 
Billboard sign. Any sign with a sign area exceeding 300 square feet. 
Director. The Director of Environmental Management or his designee. 
Double-faced sign. A sign which has two (2) display areas placed back to back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is sixty (60) degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Electronic graphic display sign. A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic static images, static graphics or static pictures, with or without information (text), defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fade, re-pixalization or dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays. Electronic graphic display signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects. All signs whose message is displayed by light emitting diodes (LED), fiber optics, or light bulbs, are considered EGD signs, even if they only contain text. 
Flag. Any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used to signify a government or other entity or organization. 
Freestanding sign. A sign securely affixed to a support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, such as monument or stanchion signs. 
Historic District. The entire area designated by ordinance as a historic district. 
Illuminated sign. A sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Monument sign. A freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to or be a part of or supported by the building in or to which the sign applies. 
Non-conforming sign. Any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance that was legal at the time of its erection. 
Parcel. A separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records. 
Roof sign. A sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building which extends above the immediately adjacent roofline of the building. 
Sign. A device or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. 
Stanchion sign. A freestanding sign mounted on one or more steel poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertisement portion of such structure which rests upon or is supported by such poles. 
Stick signs (sometimes referred to as bandit signs, road signs, political signs, yard signs, and real estate signs), are mounted on a metal frame or wood stake with a facing of non-pervious material. 
Wall sign. A sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear or side of the structure. 
Window sign. A sign installed flush with or on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
( Ord. No. 2014-08 , 5-5-2014) 
Sec. 7.03.00 - Permits. 
All signs allowed by this ordinance, except those exempted from obtaining a permit, shall require a permit issued by the city prior to posting, displaying, substantially changing, or erecting a sign in the city. 
Sec. 7.04.00 - Application information. 
Applications for sign permits required by this ordinance shall be filed by the sign owner or the owner's agent with the City of Tifton Environmental Management Department. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
A.  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and a plat map of the property, drawn to scale, showing all existing structures, including existing signage and which bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign. 
B.  The aggregate area for all signs on the parcel. 
C.  The name(s) and address(es) of all of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
D.  Written consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign. 
E.  Name, address, phone number of the sign contractor. 
F.  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected. 
G.  The distance of the sign from the closest adjacent sign in either direction. 
H.  The size of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed. 
Sec. 7.05.00 - Time for consideration. 
The City shall process all sign permit applications within thirty (30) business days of the City's actual receipt of a completed application and accompanying sign permit fee. The Director shall give notice to the applicant of the decision of the City by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by first class mail, to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the City's receipt of the completed application and fee. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the City fails to act within the thirty (30) business day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. 
Sec. 7.06.00 - Denial and revocation. 
A.  Procedure. The City shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this ordinance, are incomplete applications, or applications containing any false material statements. Violation of any provision of this ordinance will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this ordinance, the Director shall revoke the permit. Should the Director deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and mailed by first class mail or via hand delivery to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the City's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of re-submission, instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause. "Due cause" is the violation of the provisions of this ordinance, state or federal law related to signage, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
B. Appeal. An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the Director in accordance with the provisions for appeals to the Board of Appeals contained in [Chapter 10 of this LDC]. 
Sec. 7.07.00 - Permit expiration. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed in accordance with the permit application within six (6) months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
Sec. 7.08.00 - Fees. 
The cost of a permit shall be as set from time to time by the City Council. 
Sec. 7.09.00 - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
A.  Signs on public rights of way other than publicly owned or maintained signs; 
B.  Window signs which exceed 30% of the window area; 
C.  Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-12-80; 
D.  Signs which simulate an official traffic control or warning sign or hide from view any traffic or street sign, signal or public service sign; 
E.  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing; 
F.  Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic; and 
G.  Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, post, curve, utility pole, or other structure except as set forth herein. 
7.09.01   Permitted signs in rights-of-way.
A.  Real estate directional signs to identify the location of real estate for sale shall be permitted and shall be in the form as depicted below. 

B.  The dimensions of the directional sign shall be no more than twenty-four (24) inches wide, six (6) inches in height and shall extend no higher than two (2) feet from ground level. 
C.  Only one directional real estate sign shall be permitted on the left or right mitered corners on arterial or collector streets identified on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated herein. 
D.  In the event more than one directional sign is located on any mitered corner, or two directional signs are located on the same side of the right-of-way, both directional signs will be removed and may be reclaimed in accordance with Section. 
( Ord. No. 2015-03 , 3-2-2015) 
Sec. 7.10.00 - Restrictions in residential zoning districts/historic districts. 
Other than subdivision entrance signs allowed under Section 7.11.00, parcels located in residential zoning districts shall not contain signs having an aggregate sign area greater than fifteen (15) square feet. No individual sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in sign area in a residential zoning district or have a height of greater than five (5) feet. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. Signs meeting the standards of this section are exempt from permitting requirements. 
Sec. 7.11.00 - Residential subdivision entrance signs. 
Platted residential subdivisions consisting of more than two (2) parcels may erect one monument sign at each entrance to the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet and shall not have a sign area greater than twenty-five (25) square feet. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. Such entrance signs shall not count toward the maximum allowable signage on a residential parcel. 
Sec. 7.12.00 - General size and location requirements in non-residential districts. 
A.  No freestanding sign may be located within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended. 
B.  No sign shall be located on any building, fence or other property belonging to another person without the written consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this ordinance. 
C.  Billboard signs. 
1.  Billboard signs shall not exceed 400 square feet of sign area. Billboard signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height or forty (40) feet in length. 
2.  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
3.  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels adjacent to designated state or federal highways and shall be oriented only towards those highways. 
4.  No billboard sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of another billboard sign measured radially along the same thoroughfare. 
5.  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet of residential zoned parcels. 
6.  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however, that such sign may be located within 500 feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery when the sign is separated by buildings or other obstructions so that the sign located within the 500 foot zone is not visible from the public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery. 
7.  No billboard signs shall be erected in the following designated areas: 
a.  Tift Avenue from the City Limits north to 9th Street south; 
b.  2nd Street from the City Limits east to Stafford Drive West; 
c.  South Central Avenue from the City Limits south to the intersection of 3rd Street north; and 
d.  South Main Street from the City Limits south to 9th Street north. 
8.  No billboard sign shall be erected to a height in excess of eighty (80) feet. 
9.  No billboard shall be erected within a historic district or within 500 feet in any direction of the boundary of a historic district. 
10.  The location and spacing of billboard signs along the I-75 corridor shall be subject to the laws of the State of Georgia and the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Transportation and shall not be subject to the provisions contained in this Chapter. 
D.  Stanchion signs. 
1.  Stanchion signs for parcels exceeding three (3) acres shall not exceed a sign area of 150 square feet. 
2.  Stanchion signs for parcels less than three (3) acres, but equal to or greater than 30,000 square feet shall not exceed a sign area of ninety (90) square feet. 
3.  Stanchion signs for parcels less than 30,000 square feet in size shall not exceed a sign area of seventy (70) square feet. 
4.  Stanchion signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas and shall be limited to one such sign per parcel per street frontage. 
5.  No stanchion sign shall exceed eighty (80) feet in height at the highest point on the sign. 
6.  Stanchion signs shall be limited to forty (40) feet in the following designated areas: 
7.  Tift Avenue from the City Limits north to 9th Street south; 
8.  2nd Street from the City Limits east to Stafford Drive West; 
9.  South Central Avenue from the City Limits south to the intersection of 3rd Street north; and 
10.  South Main Street from the City Limits south to 9th Street north. 
E.  Monument signs. Monument signs shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet of total area, which shall include signage and structure, and shall be limited to one such sign per parcel per street frontage. Monument signs shall not exceed 6 feet in height. 
F.  Wall and Awning Signs. 
1.  Wall and awning signs shall not project above the parapet wall. 
2.  Wall signs shall not project beyond the building face. Awning signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than four feet. 
3.  Wall and awning signs shall not exceed a sign area of 300 square feet or ten percent of the wall face of the premises to which the sign relates, whichever is less, on each street facing wall. 
4.  The maximum wall or awning sign height shall be ten feet. 
5.  Wall signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
6.  Each building tenant shall be limited to one wall and/or awning sign on each street facing wall. In the event a tenant or owner chooses to use both a wall sign and an awning sign the tenant or owner must stay within the total aggregated square footage allotted for the building. 
G.  A-frame signs. A-Frame signs shall have a maximum width of eighteen (18) inches and shall not exceed three (3) feet in height and shall be weighted to prevent displacement by wind or weather. No A-frame sign shall impede pedestrian traffic and shall comply in all respects with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
H.  Reserved. 
I.  Maximum aggregate sign area. Parcels may contain more than one freestanding sign, provided that: 
1.  Parcels exceeding three acres shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of 300 square feet for the entire parcel. 
2.  Parcels less than three acres but greater than 30,000 square feet shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of 180 square feet for the entire parcel. 
3.  Parcels less than 30,000 square feet in size shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of 100 square feet for the entire parcel. 
4.  These limits shall not include the area of any wall signs, window signs or billboard signs located on the parcel. 
5.  These limits shall include the area of all freestanding signs on the parcel. 
J.  Measurement of sign height. All sign heights shall be measured from the grade level of the centerline of the adjacent street to which the property on which the sign is located has access. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-7-2013; Ord. No. 2014-08 , 5-5-14; Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 7.13.00 - Construction standards. 
A.  All signs for which a permit is required under this ordinance shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the city building code, state and federal regulations and the International Maintenance Property Code. 
B.  Signs for which a permit is not required under this ordinance that are constructed of degradable material may be posted for a maximum of sixty (60) days unless replaced with another sign of the same material. Any such replacement signs may be posted for a maximum of sixty (60) days. 
Sec. 7.14.00 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Nonconforming signs, which met all legal requirements when erected, may stay in place. Non-conforming signs shall be permitted until one of the following conditions occurs: 
1.  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or unsightly; or 
2.  The sign has been damaged by circumstances beyond the control of the owner to the extent that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign; provided that signs damaged by an Act of God and not due to the owner's action may be restored to their pre-damaged condition, provided that the useful life of the signs is not extended. 
B.  No structural repairs except those permitted pursuant to Subsection (a)(2) above change in shape, size or design, shall be permitted except to make a non-conforming sign comply with all requirements of this ordinance. 
C.  A non-conforming sign may not be replaced by another non-conforming sign except where changed conditions beyond the control of the owner render the sign nonconforming or warrant the sign's repair. 
Sec. 7.15.00 - Variances. 
Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. A variance from compliance with the sign regulations of this ordinance shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
A.  Standards. 
1.  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the public street and within fifty (50) feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, existing buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
2.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; and, such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and, the variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to traffic. 
a.  Requests for a variance shall be taken in accordance with [Chapter 10 of this LDC]. 
Sec. 7.16.00 - Exemptions and permit requirements. 
A.  The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of Section 7.03.00 and shall count toward the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in Sections 7.10.00 and 7.13.00 but shall not require a permit. 
1.  Non-illuminated signs, having a sign area of less than fifteen (15) square feet, provided they are not located in the public right-of-way. 
2.  Every parcel may display no more than two (2) banners with a maximum size of fifteen (15) square feet per banner. On parcels that have more than one 911 address each 911 address may display one (1) banner with a maximum size of fifteen (15) square feet per banner. 
B.  The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of Section 3 and shall not count toward the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in Sections 7.10.00 and 7.13.00(g): 
1.  Window signs installed for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. However, such signs shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the available window space. 
2.  Numerals displayed for purposes of identifying property location and not exceeding four (4) inches in height in residential districts and ten (10) inches in height in nonresidential districts. 
3.  Every parcel may display no more than two (2) flags. Flagpoles in residential zoned districts shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height or the height of the primary structure, whichever is less. Flagpoles in commercial or industrial zoned districts shall not exceed sixty (60) feet in height. The dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height such that the hoist side of the flag shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the vertical height. 
( Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 7.17.00 - Illumination. 
A.  Illumination for signs shall not cast light on adjoining property or shine in such a manner as to cause traffic interference. Sign illumination devices such as, but not limited to, flood or spotlights shall be so placed and so shielded as to prevent the rays or illumination there from being cast into neighboring dwellings or approaching vehicles. No sign shall have blinking, flashing, scrolling, fading, or fluctuating lights or other illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness or color or form or simulate movement. No revolving or rotating beam or beacon of light shall be permitted as part of any sign. 
B.  Illumination of any sign in the historic district of the city shall be in accordance with the City of Tifton Historic District Manual. 
( Ord. No. 2014-08 , 5-5-2014) 
7.17.01   Electronic graphic display signs.
Electronic graphic display signs shall be permitted in zoning districts designated as NC, GB, DC, WLI and HI. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for any EGD sign within the historic district of the City. The total area of an EGD sign shall not exceed 50% of the total allowable sign area for the lot. The transition for each display shall occur within three seconds and the display shall remain fixed for a minimum of seven seconds. No EGD display shall flash, blink or strobe. An EGD sign shall be equipped so as to automatically adjust the brightness of the display for ambient light. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08 , 5-5-2014) 
Sec. 7.18.00 - False advertising on signs; nuisances. 
A.  No persons shall display false statements upon signs in such a manner as to mislead the public as to anything sold, services to be performed, or information disseminated. 
B.  When a business or service utilizing a sign is discontinued, all signs related to that business or service shall be removed or neutralized within ten (10) days from the date of notification by the Director. Sign cabinets or structures to which another sign face may ultimately be attached can conform to this requirement by painting over the existing sign with a color that harmonizes with the business building or by removing sign pan faces and replacing them with blank panels. 
C.  No persons shall display any advertising material on any sign which constitutes a nuisance as defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. Any sign determined to be a nuisance by the zoning administrator is subject to notice and removal pursuant to the city's removal procedures. 
Sec. 7.19.00 - Removal procedures. 
A.  The Director shall caused to be removed any sign that endangers the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous or materially, electrically or structurally defective sign or a sign for which no permit has been issued or which is otherwise in violation of this article. The Director shall prepare a written notice which shall describe the sign and specify the violation involved and which shall state that if the sign is not removed or the violation corrected within thirty (30) days, the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
B.  All notices mailed by the Director shall be sent by certified mail. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date of the receipt of the certified mail. Alternatively, notice may be personally hand delivered to the sign owner, and notice shall be effective on such date of hand delivery. 
C.  The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, the owner of the sign if different than the property owner, and the occupant of the property. If any of such persons is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such person's last known address, if any, and posted on the sign or on the premises. 
D.  Any person having an interest in the sign or the property may appeal the determination of the Director ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days after receipt of notice. An appeal under this section shall act as a supersedeas to the enforcement of the alleged violation. 
E.  Notwithstanding the above, in cases of emergency, the Director may cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice. 
F.  The cost of removal of the sign by the city shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as city property taxes. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the city in connection with the sign's removal. 
G.  When it is determined by the Director that the sign would cause imminent danger to the public safety, and contact cannot be made with the sign owner or building owner, no written notice will have to be served. In this emergency situation, the Director shall document the imminent danger and his or her attempts to contact the sign owner, and may correct the danger, all costs being charged to the sign owner and property owner. 
H.  If it shall be necessary for the Director to remove a sign pursuant to the provisions of this section, and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any material derived in the removal, he may sell the same at private or public sale at the best price obtainable, and shall keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the cost of removal to be charged to the sign owner or property owner. Where the proceeds derived from such a sale are less than the cost of removal, such deficiencies shall constitute a lien against the property on which the sign is located, such lien to be collectible in the same manner as city property taxes. 
I.  In the event a sign is determined to be in the right-of-way in violation of this chapter, the director of environmental management or his designee will make contact with the sign owner. The sign owner will be given a twenty-four (24) hours' notice to remove the sign; after twenty-four (24) hours if the sign is still in the same location, the director of environmental management or his designee shall issue a citation to the sign owner, impound the sign and collect a five dollar ($5.00) impound fee per sign. 
( Ord. No. 2014-08 , 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-6-2017 ; Ord. No. 2017-10 , 4-17-2017) 
Sec. 7.20.00 - Historic districts. 
All signs located in a historic district designated by the City of Tifton shall comply with the requirements of the City of Tifton Historic District Manual. 
Sec. 7.21.00 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  The sign and sign structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, with proper anchorage capable of supporting the imposed loads, so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
B.  All exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking, and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. Sign faces shall be maintained in good repair, and shall have neatly painted, posted or otherwise maintained display surfaces, free of defects such as holes, tears, cracks, breaks or missing portions, which are plainly visible from the public right-of-way. 
C.  When a sign or sign structure is found to be in need of maintenance or repair, the Director shall issue a notice of violation to the property owner, which shall describe the maintenance issue, and provide a period of ten (10) days to rectify the condition. 
D.  If, after receiving the notice of violation, the property owner fails to remedy the maintenance issue within the time provided, it shall be a violation of this chapter, subject to citation and/or removal as provided in the ordinance The Director may also institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal of the sign or sign structure. The reasonable cost of any action taken by the City or its agents to remedy the maintenance issue shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall constitute a lien upon such real estate. 
E.  Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be liable for a fine in an amount as set by the Municipal Court. Each day a sign is posted in violation of this ordinance shall constitute a separate violation. 
Sec. 7.22.00 - Responsibility of owners and agents. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owners or agents, tenants and lessees of all property upon which a sign is located to comply with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 7.23.00 - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, or word of this ordinance is declared and adjudged to be invalidated or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect as if such portion so declared or adjudged unconstitutional were not originally part of this article. The City Council declares that it would have enacted the remaining parts of this article if it had known that such portion thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 7.24.00 - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall be designated as Chapter 7 of the City of Tifton Development Code and the effective date of this ordinance shall be the adoption hereof. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
CHAPTER 8. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 8.00.00 - Generally. 
The committees, boards, and commissions described in Chapter 8 are established for the purpose of implementing the provisions of the LDC. The committees, boards, and commissions described in this Chapter shall have the powers and duties described necessary to achieve the purpose of this LDC. 
8.01.00 - Reserved. 
Sec. 8.02.00 - City of Tifton Planning and Zoning Commission. 
8.02.01   Established.
There is hereby established the Tifton Planning and Zoning Commission which shall function in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
8.02.02   Membership.
A.  The planning and zoning commission shall consist of 5 members who shall be selected from time to time as follows: 
1.  One (1) member shall be selected from time to time by the mayor and city council of Tifton for an initial term expiring June 30, 2013, and three (3) year terms thereafter with such position to be designated as Tifton post number one (1); 
2.  Two (2) members shall be selected from time to time by the mayor and city council of Tifton for an initial term expiring June 30, 2014, and three (3) year terms thereafter with such position to be designated as Tifton post number two (2); and 
3.  Two (2) members shall be selected from time to time by the mayor and city council of Tifton for an initial term expiring June 30, 2015, and three (3) year terms thereafter with such position to be designated as Tifton post number three (3). 
B.  The terms of the members shall be for three (3) years. Said members shall be allowed to succeed themselves at the discretion of the City Council. 
C.  The City Council shall have the authority to remove any member for cause. All vacancies in the membership of the planning commission which shall from time to time exist shall be filled for the unexpired term thereof by the City Council which selected the member whose position shall become vacant. 
D.  Limitation on service. 
1.  Members of the planning commission shall, notwithstanding their terms of office, serve at the pleasure of the governing authority which selected each such member and each member shall be subject to removal prior to the termination of his term by action of the governing authority which so selected such member. 
2.  Upon selection and commencement of his term, each member shall serve, subject to death or resignation and subject to removal, until both the selection of and the commencement of the term of his successor. 
E.  Members of the planning commission shall receive no compensation for their services except that they may be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by them in direct connection with the performances of their services and duties subject to approval thereof by the governing authorities or the governing authority of the governmental entity on behalf of which the member shall function in accordance with such requirements as shall be imposed in connection therewith from time to time by resolutions of the governing authorities or of the governing authority of the governmental entity on behalf of which the member shall function. 
F.  Members of the planning commission shall attend planning commission training within the first year of their appointment. 
8.02.03   Quorum.
A.  A quorum of the planning commission shall consist of any three (3) of the five (5) regular members. 
B.  Decisions of the planning commission as to its recommendations on applications for action shall be rendered by majority vote of members who are present at the planning commission meeting. 
C.  In the event that a quorum is not present at a planning commission meeting, the matters under consideration shall be handled as follows; 
1.  Held for consideration at next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission to which public notice has been given to those entitled thereto, 
2.  If there is not a quorum at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission, only after this second attempt, the matter shall be forwarded to the governing authority without a recommendation from the planning commission. 
8.02.04   Officers.
A.  The planning commission shall annually select from among its members a chair who shall preside at meetings of the planning commission. 
B.  The planning commission shall annually select from among its members a vice-chair who shall preside at meetings of the planning commission in the absence of the chair or the disqualification of the chair. 
C.  Staff Secretary. 
1.  The secretary of the planning commission shall be the zoning administrator or such other person or official as shall from time to time be so designated by the manager acting on behalf of the City Council. 
2.  The staff secretary of the planning commission shall provide administrative assistance to the planning commission relative to matters relating to this LDC. The duties shall include: 
a.  Prepare and conduct all correspondence of the planning commission; 
b.  Receive and file all correspondence to the planning commission; 
c.  Receive and file all applications and filings to and with the planning commission; 
d.  Receive and file all transmittals to the planning commission from the zoning administrator and other public officials; 
e.  Review and evaluate all applications and filings to and with the planning commission for compliance with the rules and regulations of the planning commission and notify those filing the applications and filings of any noncompliance therewith; 
f.  Following consultation with the chair (and to the extent necessary the other members) schedule meetings of the planning commission in accordance with applicable law, ordinances, resolutions, and the rules and regulations of the planning commission; 
g.  Prepare and maintain a calendar and docket of proposed rezoning actions before the planning commission; 
h.  Prepare and submit to the members at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to a scheduled hearing an agenda therefore as well as copies of all applications and other filings made in connection with each such proceeding; 
i.  Determine all notices to be given in connection with proceedings before the planning commission and cause such notices to be given to those entitled thereto; 
j.  Attend all meetings and hearings of the planning commission; 
k.  Cause a mechanical record to be made of all meetings and hearings of the planning commission relative to proposed rezoning actions by use of tape recorder or other appropriate device; 
l.  Cause to be retained and maintained a copy or a facsimile of all physical evidence presented in connection with proposed rezoning actions; 
m.  Prepare and maintain minutes of proceedings of the planning commission indicating therein all significant information, matters and facts pertaining thereto including specifically all motions, votes and decisions of the planning commission together with the vote of each member upon each such motion, vote and decision including those absent, disqualified or failing to vote thereon together with such other matters as shall be pertinent to the activities of the planning commission; 
n.  Cause to be retained and maintained all minutes, records, files and notices of the planning commission; 
o.  With respect to proposed rezoning actions, maintain a written record of the name and address of all persons who shall present any evidence, testimony or opinions, make any statement at a hearing of the planning commission; and 
p.  Perform such other duties as shall be directed from time to time by the planning commission that are approved by the manager. 
8.02.05   Meetings.
A.  Meetings of the planning commission shall be held from time to time as necessary for the planning commission to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
1.  Meetings shall also be held upon call by the chair, the vice-chair in the absence or disability of the chair, or by a majority of the members. 
2.  All meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public and shall be held in accordance with the requirements of state law relative to open public meetings. 
B.  Minutes and records. All minutes, upon approval thereof by the planning commission, and all files, dockets, calendars, physical evidence, notices and records of the planning commission that relate to matters with respect to each governmental entity shall be maintained and made available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14 , 6-19-2017) 
8.02.06   Duties and responsibilities.
The planning commission shall: 
A.  Function only in an advisory capacity to the City Council. 
B.  Subject to the direction, control, and instructions of the City Council, conduct surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and shall develop plans for physical, social, and economic growth which will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, general welfare, efficiency and economy in the development of the City of Tifton and submit the plans to the City Council, and 
C.  Subject to the direction, control and instructions of the city Council: 
1.  Develop and submit to the City Council for its consideration a master plan, and amendments thereto, for the development of each governmental entity; 
2.  Develop and submit to the City Council for its consideration recommendations relative to amendments to or revisions of this LDC, including zoning ordinances, zoning maps and regulations for the subdivision of land within the boundaries of the city; 
3.  Review proposed amendments to or revisions of the zoning ordinances and zoning maps of each of the city which shall be submitted by others, make findings with respect thereto, and make recommendations to the City Council with respect to the adoption, rejection, modification or conditional adoption of each such proposed amendment or revision; 
4.  Develop and submit to City Council for its consideration official maps or plats, and amendments thereto, which designate the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened and narrowed streets, public ways, public open spaces and public buildings and sites together with regulations and amendments thereto for the erection of buildings and other structures to be located therein; and 
5.  Perform such additional functions and services for and on behalf of City Council as shall be authorized or directed from time to time by the City Council. 
8.02.07   Rules and regulations.
The planning commission shall adopt such rules, policies, procedures and regulations as shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this LDC, the zoning ordinances of the City of Tifton and applicable law. 
8.02.08   Authority.
A.  The planning commission shall have no authority or power other than as specifically provided from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the City of Tifton; and 
B.  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, shall have no authority, right or power to expend any funds, to direct the activities of any employee or official of the City of Tifton (except solely the secretaries of the commission and then only to the extent specifically authorized in this article) or to contract for or on behalf of either itself or the City of Tifton. 
8.02.09   Legal assistance.
With respect to this LDC on matters relative to the City of Tifton, the city attorney shall act as the legal advisor and representative of the planning commission and shall render such legal assistance as shall be necessary. 
8.02.10   Disclosures.
A.  Financial interest. 
1.  A member of the planning commission who: 
a.  Has a property interest in any real property affected by any proposed action pending before the planning commission; 
b.  Has a financial interest in any business entity which has a property interest in any real property affected by any proposed rezoning action pending before the planning commission; or 
c.  Has a member of the family who has any interest described in either subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section; 
shall at or prior to the initial meeting of the planning commission at which the matter is to be considered (but in no event later than immediately following the announcement of the matter for consideration by the commission) disclose the nature and extent of such interest in writing to the applicant and to the commission. 
2.  All such disclosures shall be entered into the minutes of meetings of the planning commission, shall be matters of public record of both the planning commission and the City of Tifton, and shall be available for public inspection at any time during normal working hours. 
B.  Contributions. 
1.  When any applicant for any proposed rezoning action has made, within two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of that applicant's application for the rezoning action, gifts having in the aggregate a value of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more to any planning commission member, it shall be the duty of the applicant or the attorney representing the applicant to disclose in writing to the planning commission: 
a.  The name of member(s) to whom the gift or gifts were made; and 
b.  An enumeration and description of each gift having a value of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more made by the applicant to each such member during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the zoning change. 
2.  The disclosures required by subsection 1 above shall be filed within ten (10) days after the application for the proposed rezoning action is first filed. 
C.  Relationships. 
1.  Each member of the planning commission who shall have any business or financial relationship with any applicant or with any owner of any property proposed for rezoning action and who, due to the nature or extent of such relationship or relationships, may not be able to objectively act with respect to the proposed rezoning action shall, at or prior to the initial meeting of the planning commission at which the matter is to be considered (but in no event later than immediately following the announcement of the matter for consideration by the commission), disclose the nature and extent of such relationships to the applicant and to the planning commission. 
2.  All such disclosures shall be entered into the minutes of the planning commission, shall be matters of public record of both the planning commission and the City of Tifton and shall be available for public inspection at any time during normal working hours. 
D.  Disqualification of members. 
1.  Any member of the planning commission who shall have; 
a.  A property interest, a financial interest, or a member of the family who has either a property interest or financial interest which is subject to disclosure pursuant to the provisions of this article; 
b.  Received any contribution which is subject to disclosure pursuant to the provisions of this article; or 
c.  Any relationship which is subject to disclosure pursuant to the provisions of this article; 
may disqualify himself from participation in the consideration of the proposed rezoning action in issue or may be disqualified by vote of the planning commission as provided in subsection 2 below. 
2.  Any other member, the applicant and any other interested person shall each be entitled at the time of the call for consideration of the matter or at any time prior thereto to raise any issue of possible disqualification of any member whereupon, following such consideration as the planning commission shall deem appropriate, the planning commission shall determine by majority vote of those members who are not subject to potential disqualification in connection with the proposed rezoning action whether the member shall be disqualified. 
Sec. 8.03.00 - Zoning board of appeals. 
8.03.01   Established.
There is hereby established an appeals board with the title of "The Tifton Board of Zoning Appeals", hereinafter referred to as the "ZBA." 
8.03.02   Membership.
A.  The ZBA shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Tifton who shall be selected by the City Council. 
B.  None of the members of the ZBA shall hold any other public office, except that one (1) members may also be a member of the City of Tifton Planning and Zoning Commission. 
C.  Officers. 
1.  The ZBA shall elect one (1) of its members as Chairman, who shall serve for one (1) year or until he is re-elected or his/her successor is elected. 
2.  The Zoning Administrator shall function as the secretary to the ZBA. 
D.  The members of the ZBA shall receive no compensation for their service except that they may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenditures made in connection with their duties. 
E.  The members of the ZBA may be removed for cause, upon written charges, and after public hearing. 
F.  Any member of the ZBA shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the ZBA with respect to property in which the member has an interest. 
8.03.03   Rules.
A.  The ZBA shall have the authority to adopt rules of procedure, or by-laws to govern its operation. 
B.  By-laws shall not conflict with the requirements of this LDC. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this LDC and the bylaws, the provisions of this LDC shall control. 
C.  The following topics may be included in the bylaws: 
1.  The creation of committees; 
2.  Code of conduct; 
3.  Voting procedures; 
4.  Scheduling of meetings; 
5.  Order of business; and 
6.  Preparation of minutes. 
D.  Meetings shall be held upon call by the chair, the vice-chair in the absence or disability of the chair, or by a majority of the members. 
All meetings of the ZBA shall be open to the public and shall be held in accordance with the requirements of state law relative to open public meetings. 
E.  The chairman, or in his/her absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena, as otherwise permitted by law. 
F.  The ZBA shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public record. 
G.  The decisions of the ZBA shall be by resolution, which resolution shall contain a statement of the grounds of its decision or action. 
H.  No appeal to the ZBA requesting the same relief in regard to the same property shall be received or heard by the ZBA for a period of twelve (12) months following the date of said resolution, except that this limitation shall not affect the right of said ZBA to grant a rehearing as provided in the rules of procedure adopted by said ZBA. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14 , 6-19-2017) 
8.03.04   Administrative procedures.
A.  The procedures and duties of the ZBA are established in Chapter 9, Variances and Chapter 10, Appeals. 
B.  The ZBA shall have responsibility for final decision on the following types of applications; 
1.  Extension of nonconforming residential uses; 
2.  Variances; and 
3.  Appeal of administrative decisions. 
C.  The Zoning Administrator shall provide such technical, administrative, and clerical assistance and office or meeting space as is required by the ZBA to carry out its function under the provisions of these regulations. 
D.  All applications submitted for variances and appeals under the provisions of the LDC will be forwarded to the SDRC, for preparation of a compliance report. 
Sec. 8.04.00 - Historic preservation commission. 
8.04.01   Established.
There is hereby established a historic preservation commission with the title of "Historic Preservation Commission of the City of Tifton, Georgia", hereinafter referred to as the "HPC." 
8.04.02   Membership.
A.  The HPC shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor and City Council, all of whom shall be residents of the city, and a majority of whom shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history or architecture. 
B.  Members of the HPC shall be appointed for a three (3) year term and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council. 
C.  Members of the HPC shall not receive any salary or any other compensation except expense reimbursement approved in advance by the Mayor and City Council. 
D.  The HPC shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. 
8.04.03   Quorum.
A quorum of the HPC shall consist of any four (4) of the seven (7) regular members. Action by the HPC shall require a minimum of four (4) votes. 
8.04.04   Powers and duties.
The HPC shall be authorized, in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-25, to: 
A.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
B.  Recommend to the Mayor and City Council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
C.  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny the applications in accordance with the provisions hereof and the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28; 
D.  Recommend to the Mayor and City Council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
E.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city to the extent specifically authorized by the Mayor and City Council; 
F.  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976 (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1—44-10-5A); 
G.  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city; 
H.  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, as the Mayor and City Council or the HPC itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of this article; 
I.  Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired by the city as a result thereof; 
J.  Consult with historic preservation experts in the historic preservation section of the state department of natural resources or its successor and the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Inc. or its successors; and 
K.  Submit to the historic preservation section of the state department of natural resources or its successor a list of historic properties or historic districts designated as such pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26. 
8.04.05   Administrative procedures.
A.  Records. The HPC shall maintain a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all the HPC's proceedings relative thereto as well as all of its other actions, decisions and proceedings. 
B.  Rules and Policies. 
1.  The HPC shall adopt such rules and policies for the transaction of its business, for consideration of applications for designations, and for certificates of appropriateness as it deems necessary, subject to approval thereof by the Mayor and City Council. 
2.  The HPC shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings, provide notice to the public thereof as required by law, and shall provide a method for the calling of special meetings. 
C.  Conflict of Interest. Any member of the HPC who has any ownership or other interest in any property which is the subject of any proceeding before the HPC is prohibited from consideration of or voting upon any such matter. 
D.  Negotiations for Acquisition. The HPC may, where such action is authorized in advance by the Mayor and City Council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations on behalf of the city with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein by the city; provided that no commitment of any nature whatsoever relative thereto may be made by the HPC except to the extent specifically authorized by the city council. 
Sec. 8.05.00 - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 9. - VARIATIONS 

Sec. 9.00.00 - Generally. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide mechanisms for obtaining relief from the provisions of this LDC. There are several ways that potential relief from hardship is addressed. Section 9.01.00 addresses relief through requirements regarding nonconforming development. Section 9.02.00 addresses relief through the grant of a variance in a particular situation due to the characteristics of the land to be developed based on the required site design standards. Section 9.03.00 addresses relief through the grant of an administrative waiver in specific situations. Section 9.04.00 addresses relief through recognition of vested rights regarding use and/or design. 
Sec. 9.01.00 - Nonconforming lots, structures, and uses. 
9.01.01   Generally.
A.  Within the zoning and overlay districts established by this LDC there may exist lots, structures, or uses of land which were lawfully established before this LDC was adopted but which do not comply with the requirements set forth in this LDC. 
B.  Any nonconformity created by a change in district boundaries or LDC regulations after the date of passage of this LDC shall also be governed by the provisions of this section. 
C.  It is the intent of Section 9.01.00 to allow these nonconformities to continue until they are removed or discontinued. It is further the intent of this section that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
D.  Nonconforming uses are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses in the district where the nonconforming use is located. 
E.  Nothing in Section 9.01.01 shall be construed to prevent the ordinary and routine maintenance and repair of nonconforming structures or structures which contain nonconforming uses provided that the cubic content of the structure is not increased and no additional non-conforming structure or addition is permitted. 
F.  A structure damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its fair market value at time of destruction shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this LDC. 
G.  Fair market value, where required, shall be determined by reference to current statutory provisions pertaining to the valuation of real property for ad valorem tax purposes. 
H.  A structure that is damaged to an extent less than fifty (50) percent of the fair market value may be restored and occupied as before the damage, provided the following standards are met: 
1.  Restoration shall be commenced within six (6) calendar months from the date damages were incurred. 
2.  If reconstruction is not commenced within six (6) months, the reconstruction and use of the land or structure shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this LDC. 
I.  A nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use that is declared by the Manager to be physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
9.01.02   Nonconforming lots of record.
Any lot for which a plat or legal description has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Tift County at the time of passage of this LDC which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located shall be recognized as a nonconforming lot of record and may, if vacant, be used for any of the uses permitted within the district by this LDC or, if occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged or extended; provided, that in either case: 
A.  Minimum requirements of the district for front, side, and rear yard, height, and floor area shall be complied with. 
B.  A lot to be used for duplexes, multifamily dwellings, residential group development projects, or mobile homes, when allowed within the district, only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district. 
9.01.03   Nonconforming uses.
A.  A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure that at the time the use became nonconforming were already erected and arranged or designed for such nonconforming use. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area, or volume of space occupied by the use. 
B.  When a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use. 
C.  Nonconforming uses shall not be changed to any but conforming uses. 
D.  A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged to cover more area than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming. 
E.  When any nonconforming use of a structure or land is discontinued for a period in excess of six (6) months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this LDC. Vacancy and/or nonuse of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
Sec. 9.02.00 - Variances. 
9.02.01   Generally.
A.  The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) may authorize upon request in specific cases such variance from the terms of this LDC as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the LDC will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship. 
B.  A variance shall be authorized only so that the spirit of this LDC shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
C.  A variance shall not be granted for a use of land or structures that is prohibited by this LDC in the district in question. Such requests shall be filed as requests for rezoning, the authority for such rezoning of property being solely reserved for the governing authority. 
9.02.02   Types of variances.
A request for a variance shall be limited to the following dimensional standards: maximum building height; minimum lot width, minimum road frontage; required spacing for driveways; minimum front, side, or rear yard setbacks; or dimensional standards for parking or loading spaces. 
9.02.03   Requirements for variances.
A variance may be granted upon a finding by the ZBA that all the following conditions have been met: 
A.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
B.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
C.  The application of this LDC to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
D.  Relief, if granted, will not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this LDC; 
E.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this LDC would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties of the zoning district in which the property is located; 
F.  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the zoning district in which the applicant's property is located; 
G.  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this LDC and will not be incompatible with the neighborhood or to the general public welfare; 
H.  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
I.  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land or structure; and 
J.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land or structures that are not permitted by right in the zoning district involved. 
9.02.04   Prohibited considerations.
In exercising the above powers, the ZBA shall not consider the following as grounds for the issuance of a variance: 
A.  Any nonconforming use of neighboring lands or structures in the same district; or 
B.  Any permitted use of land or structures in other districts. 
C.  Economic or financial hardship alone shall not be sufficient to support the issuance of a variance. 
9.02.05   Procedures for variances.
A.  Applications. 
1.  An application for a variance shall include the information required for all applications, as set forth in Chapter 10. 
2.  An application for a variance shall include a statement explaining how the variance request conforms to all requirements listed in Section 9.02.03. 
B.  Review of applications. 
1.  An application for a variance shall be reviewed by the Director for compliance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 10. 
2.  A public hearing shall be scheduled before the ZBA. 
3.  Notice of the public hearing shall be provided pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 10. 
4.  The ZBA shall conduct the public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 10. 
5.  The ZBA shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the application for variance, based upon findings regarding conditions set forth in Section 9.02.03. 
6.  The Director shall issue a written order to the applicant when the variance is approved or approved with conditions by the ZBA. 
C.  Expiration of variance approval. Any variance authorized by the ZBA, for which construction has not commenced within one (1) year from the date on which the decision of the ZBA becomes final, shall be deemed abandoned and be void and of no further force and effect. 
9.02.06   Appeal of ZBA action.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal to the Tift County Superior Court. 
Sec. 9.03.00 - Administrative variance. 
9.03.01   Requirements for variances.
The Director is authorized to reduce specific site design and development standards of this LDC where the intent of the LDC can be achieved and substantial performance obtained by granting a variance. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12, 9-15-2016 ) 
9.03.02   Authority and limitations.
The authority to grant a variance shall be limited to the following: 
A.  A reduction in the minimum front, side, or rear yard setbacks for a single lot, provided the reduction is limited to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent of the minimum standard. 
B.  A reduction in the parking requirement provided the reduction is limited to either three (3) space or ten (10) percent of the parking requirement, whichever is more, and the reduction does not limit the availability or location of required handicapped parking. 
C.  A reduction in landscaping or buffer requirements provided the reduction is limited to thirty (30) percent of the otherwise required width of the buffer and the reduction is limited to thirty (30) percent of the otherwise required plant materials. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12, 9-15-2016 ) 
Sec. 9.04.00 - Vested rights. 
The purpose of this section is to provide a method to recognize vested rights. A landowner will be held to have acquired a vested right to continue the construction of a building or structure and to initiate and continue a use despite a restriction contained in this ordinance where, prior to the effective date of the ordinance, in reliance upon a permit theretofore validly issued, he has, in good faith, made a substantial change of position in relation to the land, made substantial expenditures, or has incurred substantial obligations. 
9.04.01   Time period and applicability.
A.  Within one (1) year from the original date of adoption of this LDC or the date that an amendment to the LDC is passed affecting vested rights or creating a substantial and unreasonable conflict with a development work-in-progress, the affected party may apply for relief. 
B.  Any project that constitutes a public nuisance and/or any project presenting a danger to the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Tifton shall not qualify for consideration. 
9.04.02   Applications.
The affected party shall submit an application which shall include evidence that demonstrates entitlement to vested rights pursuant to applicable State law. The following information shall be provided: 
9.04.02.1 Citation of the specific section(s) of the LDC that affect the development of the property. 
9.04.02.2 Identification of the exact dates that specific ordinances or amendments to the LDC were passed by the City Council. 
9.04.02.3 All complete applications provided for under this section shall be submitted not later than the one (1) year anniversary date of the adopted LDC or amendments to the LDC. 
9.04.03   Procedures.
9.04.03.1 Complete applications shall be submitted to the Director. 
9.04.03.2 Requests for a determination of vested rights shall be heard at a public hearing before the City Council. 
9.04.03.3 Public notice shall be provided according to the procedures set forth in Section 10.03.00. 
9.04.04   Expiration of approval.
An approval for a work-in-progress shall automatically expire in one (1) year where no additional development activity is evident and/or a building permit has not been obtained. Any further work on the site shall require an application for a development plan in full compliance with the standards and procedures of this LDC. 
CHAPTER 10. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10.00.00 - Generally. 
10.00.01   Purpose.
This chapter sets forth the procedures for receiving, reviewing, and rendering decisions on applications for development, including all residential and nonresidential development and planned developments, as well as applications for rezoning, and all types of permits. This chapter also sets forth the requirements for appealing decisions and enforcement. It is the City's intent that the procedures and requirements set forth in this LDC shall be followed in order to seek approval for any development. 
10.00.02   Qualifications for preparation of plans.
A.  NPDES Permitting. All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity with regard to NPDES permitting shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission pursuant to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended. 
B.  Professional engineer or consultant required. Should certain design calculations be required to resolve flow problems, possible erosion or drainage problems, or other detailed design problems which might be encountered in the process of preparing the required improvement plan, the Manager shall be authorized to require the services of a professional engineer in the improvement plan design process. Should such services be required, such plans shall reflect the applicable state registration. All professional surveying or engineering service costs shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
10.00.03   Approvals required.
A.  Subdivision Plat Required. 
1.  Platting Review Required. 
a.  All plats of subdivision of land within the City of Tifton shall not be recorded in the office of the Clerk of Tift Superior Court unless it has been approved per the provisions of the chapter. 
b.  The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the appropriate reviewing bodies and/or authorities as required by this LDC is declared to be a violation. 
c.  No approval shall be required if no subdivision of land is anticipated, no new streets or roads are created or no new utility improvements are required or no new sanitary sewer or approval of a septic tank is required. If no approval of the Zoning Administrator is required, there shall be entered or stamped on any plat of survey the following: "No approval of the Zoning Administrator of the City of Tifton is required prior to recording this plat. This ____________ day of ____________ , ____________ , by ____________ , Registered Surveyor, License No. ____________ ". 
2.  Use of Plat. The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to, exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the Director and recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Tift County is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in such an instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from prescribed penalties. 
3.  Opening and Improving Public Streets. The governing authorities shall not accept, lay-out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street, or lay any utility lines in any street, which has not attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of this LDC, unless such street corresponds to the street location shown on an approved subdivision plat or the Major Thoroughfare Plan; provided that the governing authority may accept, lay out, open, and improve any street not so platted if it first submits such proposed action to the Planning Commission for its review and comment. Developers of subdivisions will be solely responsible for acquiring all rights-of-ways so that in the event the City of Tifton needs to perform maintenance, rights-of-ways will be in place. 
4.  Issuance of Building Permits. A building permit will not be issued for a parcel of land, lot, tract, or building site subject to this LDC unless the parcel is a lot of record for Tift County. 
B.  Building Permit Required. A building permit, or a sign permit in case of a sign, is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving, demolition, or alteration of any building or structure or sign. No building or sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this LDC; however, applications for permits received before the adoption of this LDC shall remain valid according to the requirements in place at the time of receipt, provided all requisite documentation and information has been delivered to the Director necessary for the issuance of a permit. 
C.  Site Development Plan Required. 
1.  A site development plan is required for approval of all single family residential development, all multi-family residential development, and all non-residential development. Multi-family residential development means any development with three (3) or more dwelling units per building. 
2.  The development plan must demonstrate compliance with all design standards required for development in the zoning district in which the use is proposed. 
3.  A recorded plat is required for all developments. 
D.  Land Disturbance Permit Required. 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity without first obtaining a permit if required from the reviewing bodies to perform such activity, see Section 3.01.01. 
2.  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner as well as the developer and any other parties designated for design or development work on the property by the property owner. 
E.  Certificate of Occupancy or Completion Required. A certificate of occupancy or completion issued is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
1.  A building hereafter erected. 
2.  A building hereafter altered so as to affect height or location. 
3.  Any building or premises where a change in the type of use will occur. 
F.  Certificate of Appropriateness Required. 
1.  Required for Designated Historic Properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property or of a structure, site, or work of art within such historic district, including but not limited to demolition, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless and until an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been filed, and such application has been approved and a certificate of appropriateness has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this LDC. 
2.  Exemptions for State and Local Government Entities. Notwithstanding any other provision concerned in this LDC, the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) and any contractors, including cities and counties, performing work funded by GDOT are exempt from this LDC and the City of Tifton, Tift County, the State of Georgia and the Tift County Board of Education are exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness; provided, however, that such local government entities shall notify the commission forty-five (45) days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the commission an opportunity to comment relative thereto. 
G.  Major Changes to Approved Site Development Plan. Major changes to an approved development plan, as defined below, shall require specific approval of an amended development plan. 
1.  Altering the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site; 
2.  Increasing the amount of impervious surface by more than 10 percent within the development; 
3.  Altering the overall density of development; or 
4.  Increasing the amount of excavation, fill, or removal of vegetation during construction. 
H.  Exempt Situations. The following situations are exempt from the requirement to obtain an approved project development plan prior to the issuance of required permits: 
1.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development; 
2.  Accessory structures, provided applicable permits are obtained; 
3.  Farm-related development on a bona fide farm as defined in Section 1.09.02; and 
4.  Single-family detached homes constructed within an approved, platted, and recorded subdivision. Single family detached homes on lots of record that are not part of a project development plan are also exempt. 
10.00.04   Expiration of approvals.
A.  Land Disturbance Permit. If construction described in a land disturbance permit has not commenced within six (6) months from the date of issuance of the permit, the permit shall expire. If construction described in a land disturbance permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six (6) months after the date that work ceased. 
B.  Building Permit. Any building permit shall become void if the work involved has not begun within six (6) months after the date of issuance of the permit or if the work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the work of development is commenced; provided that extensions of time and periods not exceeding six (6) months each may be allowed in writing by the Manager. 
C.  Preliminary Plats. Preliminary approval grants the developer a maximum time of eighteen (18) months within which he shall submit his improvement plan and final plat for approval unless a time extension is granted before the expiration of the eighteen (18) month period. If such time extension is granted, it shall be for not more than twelve (12) additional months. Failure to submit improvement plans and final plat within this time period, including extension if any, shall invalidate preliminary plat approval and require resubmission of preliminary plat. 
D.  Improvement Plan Approvals. Improvement plan approvals are valid for twenty four (24) months. If the subdivision is sold prior to completion and final platting, a mandatory review by the EMS shall be required. 
E.  Extensions. The time period for which a permit is valid may be extended for up to six (6) months where an application for such extension is filed and such extension has been granted in writing by the Manager. 
10.00.05   Resubmittal of denied applications.
No application for a zoning change affecting the same parcel of property (under same Tax I.D. and/or under same ownership) or part thereof shall be accepted until the expiration of at least six (6) months immediately following the denial of the rezoning request by the governing authority. 
10.00.06   Requirements regarding developments of regional impact (DRI).
The Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act, has established criteria for the identification of certain large-scale developments, which have the potential to cause land use impacts beyond the boundaries of the respective local government where a project might be proposed. These developments, known as Developments of Regional Impact (DRIs), shall be submitted, based on established DCA standards, procedures, and format, to the Southern Georgia Regional Commission (SGRC) for review and recommendation prior to issuance of any local building or development permit, utility tap, or rezoning, whichever occurs first. As such, these requirements establish an official delay in the local permitting and/or review process to allow for compliance with these requirements. 
10.00.07   Fees required.
A.  All applications shall be accompanied by payment of application fees, as set forth in the City of Tifton Fee Schedule adopted by the Governing Authority An application shall not be complete until all required fees are paid. Such fees shall include the filing fee, and where notice is required, shall include an additional fee to defray the expense of preparing and mailing such notices. 
B.  For land clearing permits, a fee in addition to local permitting fees will be assessed pursuant to Georgia statutes. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. 
10.00.08   Procedures for conducting public hearings.
The following rules of procedure shall govern public hearings pertaining to development subject to the provisions of this LDC: 
A.  Public hearing procedure. All public hearings shall be placed on the appropriate body's agenda under a section entitled "Public Hearings". The Chair or Mayor or their designee shall officially declare the public hearing open and shall announce that the written public hearing procedures and a copy of Georgia's Conflict of Interest Law are available to the attending public as a handout or are posted for public review. The Manager shall be responsible for providing a copy of the public hearing procedures and a copy of Georgia's Conflict of Interest Law as handouts and/or postings. 
B.  Announcement of matter for consideration. 
1.  The Manager or his/her designee shall announce the matter for consideration. 
2.  The Chair shall then call for acknowledgement of a potential conflict of interest by any members of the body. 
C.  Report of Manager. The Manager or his/her designee will then report the EMS recommendation and, if applicable, the recommendation of the City of Tifton Planning and Zoning Commission. 
D.  Public hearings records standards. 
1.  The clerk shall mechanically record the proceedings of all public hearings. 
2.  If requested by any party, verbatim transcripts of the public hearing can be prepared, but only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party, who must arrange at his expense for a certified court reporter to record and transcribe the hearing and furnish the original of the transcript to the appropriate body for its records. 
3.  The record of the public hearing and all evidence (e.g., maps, drawings, traffic studies, etc.) submitted at the public hearing shall be noted as such and shall become a permanent part of the particular project file. 
E.  Public comments shall be heard in an orderly fashion. Comments and testimony shall be provided in the following order: 
1.  The applicant or applicant's agent; 
2.  Citizens speaking in favor of the proposal or request; 
3.  Citizens speaking in opposition to the proposal or request; and 
4.  Rebuttal. 
F.  Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. 
G.  Each person who appears shall identify himself by name and address; if the person is the applicant, he shall state whether he is the owner of the property or agent for owner. 
H.  Each applicant or other interested party who submits documents at the hearing shall identify each document. Each document submitted shall be made a part of the official record of the hearing. 
I.  Time periods for testimony. Where there are a large number of citizens wishing to testify at a given hearing, the Chair may invoke reasonable time limitations on both the proponents and opponents of a request. In such cases, these time limits shall apply to both sides of an issue equally, such minimum time period to be no less than ten (10) minutes per side. The Chair of the body hearing the request or proposal may otherwise limit discussion. The Chair of the body hearing the request or proposal may allow additional time in the Chair's discretion. 
J.  Citizens shall address their comments to the body as a whole. Individual attacks or cross examination of members, City employees or other citizens will be ruled out of order. 
K.  The body hearing the request or proposal retains the privilege to ask any questions of the Manager, other staff, or persons who have spoken on the matter. 
L.  After all citizen comments have been received, all further discussion of the specific application is reserved for the body hearing the request or proposal. The Chair or his/her designee shall then declare the public hearing closed and no further public comment will be entertained. 
M.  The body hearing the request or proposal may table the public hearing where additional information is necessary in order to render a decision. The continuation shall be to a specific time and date. Where an application is remanded to the Planning Commission for consideration of additional conditions, it shall be heard by the Planning Commission on their next available meeting date. 
N.  In the case of tabling of a matter, no further public comments will be entertained upon further consideration of the matter. 
O.  At the conclusion of the hearing by the body hearing the request or proposal, the Chair shall announce the decision. The Manager or his/her designee shall notify an applicant in writing of the decision. The written notification shall be made a part of the record. 
Sec. 10.01.00 - Application and decision-making requirements. 
10.01.01   Pre-application conference required.
A.  A pre-application conference is a meeting between an applicant and the Environmental Management Staff (EMS) for the purposes of: 
1.  Exchanging information on the potential development of a site; 
2.  Providing information on permissible uses of the site proposed for development; 
3.  Providing information to an applicant regarding the design standards set forth in this LDC that are applicable to a potential application; 
4.  Providing information to an applicant regarding standards of regional, state, or federal agencies that may be applicable to a potential application; 
5.  Determining the need and requirements for supporting plans, documents, and studies; 
6.  Providing information to an applicant regarding infrastructure requirements and the construction of required improvements; and 
7.  Providing information to an applicant regarding the appropriate procedures and schedules for receiving and reviewing applications and rendering decisions regarding a potential application. 
B.  Prior to the submission of an application for a subdivision plat, site development plan, or improvement plan, an applicant shall submit a request for a pre-application conference. 
C.  A pre-application conference shall be held not more than two (2) weeks following the date of submission of the request for such conference. 
D.  An application must be submitted within six (6) months following the pre-application conference. 
E.  The pre-application conference shall include the members of the EMS and any additional personnel as may be needed by the Director. 
F.  The EMS and other affected City agencies will review all data submitted and advise the applicant of significant items which should be considered prior to submittal of their proposal. 
G.  It is the intent of the City that all requirements be identified during the pre-application conference. However, no person may rely upon any comment concerning a proposed development, or any expression of any nature about the proposal, made by a participant at the pre-application conference, as a representation or implication that the proposal will be ultimately approved or rejected in any form. 
H.  A prospective applicant may bring members of his project team, such as, but not limited to, the project engineer, land planner, architect, surveyor, or other person who will assist in the preparation of an application. A prospective applicant may provide an informal sketch plan to aid in the discussion. However, such an informal sketch plan shall not be reviewed in any way for compliance with the standards and requirements of this LDC, and shall be used only as an aid to the conduct of the pre-application conference. 
10.01.02   Determination of completeness.
A.  All applications shall be complete before acceptance for review and decision-making. A determination of completeness is a determination that all required documents and plans have been submitted in sufficient number, and that all fees have been paid. A determination of completeness is not a determination of compliance with substantive standards and criteria. 
B.  The EMS shall determine, within ten (10) days of receipt of an application, whether the application is complete. 
C.  If the EMS determines that the application is not complete, the EMS shall send notice to the applicant identifying the deficiencies. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days from the date of notice to correct the deficiencies. Until the applicant corrects the deficiencies, no further action shall be taken for processing the application. If the applicant fails to correct the deficiencies within the thirty (30) day period, the application shall be deemed withdrawn. 
D.  If the EMS determines that the application is complete, the application shall be processed for review and action in accordance with the procedural requirements set forth in this chapter. 
10.01.03   Responsibilities for final action.
The table below identifies the types of applications and the entity that is responsible for the final decision regarding the application. 
Table 10.01.03. Types of applications and entity responsible for final decision. 

 
EMS = Staff Development Review Committee ZBA = Zoning Board of Appeals 
Sec. 10.02.00 - Submittal requirements. 
10.02.01   Submittal requirements for all applications.
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  Signature of applicant required. 
All applications shall be signed by the applicant, and shall state his name and address. 
2.  The name and address of the owners of the land, and required signature of owner if different from applicant. 
3.  The community or area in which is located the land proposed to be reclassified and the street name and street number, if any, or if none, the location with respect to the nearby public roads in common use; 
4.  A property survey conducted no more than two (2) years prior to the filing of the application, containing the legal description, boundaries, land area, and existing improvements located on the site. Where two (2) or more parcels are included within a proposed development, the survey shall include all parcels that are part of the proposed development, including all phases. The survey shall be prepared and sealed by a surveyor registered in the State of Georgia. 
5.  The area of the land proposed to be reclassified stated in square feet if less than one (1) acre, and in acres if one (1) or more; 
6.  The present zoning classification for the subject property. 
7.  Other information to support the application as specified in this chapter and as may be required by the Manager. 
B.  Campaign contributions. 
1.  If applicant has made, within two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the applicant's application, campaign contributions aggregating $250 or more to any member of the governing authority, it shall be the duty of the applicant and the attorney representing the applicant to disclose the following in the application: 
a.  The name of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution or gift was made; 
b.  The dollar amount of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application; and 
c.  An enumeration and description of each gift having a value of $250.00 or more made by the applicant to the local government official during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the zoning amendment. 
d.  In the event that no such gift or contribution were made, the application shall affirmatively so state. 
2.  Such disclosure shall be required to be filed at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing. 
10.02.02   Submittal requirements for site development plans.
A.  Site plan submittal. 
1.  Erosion and sedimentation control plans. Plans must be prepared if required to meet the minimum requirements as contained in this LDC. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
2.  Data required for site plan. 
a.  Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of twenty four (24) hour local contact responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  The following maintenance statement shall be included on the plans; "The installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities and shall be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." 
3.  Map and plan requirements. Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 
Table 10.02.02. Map contour intervals. 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the twenty five (25) foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters. 
i.  Delineate the 100-foot horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
k.  The following flood damage prevention criteria: 
i.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all structures; 
ii.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood-proofed; 
iii.  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria in Section 3.02.18(B); 
iv.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
10.02.03   Submittal requirements for building permits.
A.  Application for building permit. 
1.  All applications for building permits, including single-family residential, agricultural buildings, and accessory uses shall be accompanied by a minimum one (1) site plan any may need as many as five (5) depending on the type of project drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the lot, the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, the setback lines of the building on the "permit lot", the various easements on the lot and such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this LDC are being observed. 
2.  The following is required on the site plan before the site plan is considered by the governing authority and any permits are approved. 
a.  Topography (MSL) existing and proposed; 
b.  Drainage plans; 
c.  Location and size of ingress/egress; 
d.  Water and sewer mains and services, both existing and proposed; and 
e.  Water and sewer services as well as fire hydrants in the lot and the specific meter size and location. 
3.  Period of Validity. 
a.  Any building permit shall become void if the work involved has not begun within six (6) months after the date of issuance of the permit or if the work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the work of development is commenced; provided that extensions of time and periods not exceeding six (6) months each may be allowed in writing by the Manager or his/her designee. 
b.  Any unapproved deviation from the site plan shall cause the Manager or his/her designee to not issue a certificate of occupancy. 
4.  Single family residential, agricultural buildings, and their accessory uses, site plans need not be drawn to scale, but must be accurate as to dimensions of lot and proposed building and all building setbacks must be indicated on the plan. 
5.  The applicant for a building permit shall submit a certificate with his application which certifies that the lot which he proposes to develop is a lot of record. When the lot in question does not meet the lot width and lot area requirements of this LDC then the applicant shall certify that such lot was a lot of record prior to the adoption of this LDC or is a lot which has been created through governmental taking of property. 
6.  Flood damage prevention. Any applications for a building permit which proposes to develop properties which have been duly identified as having a flood hazard potential must provide adequate technical information and comply with all the flood protection provisions in Chapter 3 of this LDC. 
7.  Wetland permit required. For any application for a building and/or development permit which proposes to develop properties which have been identified as having potential wetlands areas, except those exempted activities listed in Chapter 3, the applicant must document receipt of a nationwide, regional, general or individual permit or a letter of clearance that jurisdictional wetlands are not located on the subject property from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Clean Water Act before any local building and/or development permit will be issued by the governing authority. 
8.  Sanitation permit required. For any application for a building and/or development permit that proposes the use of on-site, privately provided sewage disposal, a sanitation permit is required to comply with the Tift County Health Department. The application for such sanitation permit shall; 
a.  Show plainly and distinctly the location of the sanitation facility to be constructed, the nature of such facility and the legal owner of the real property upon which the facility is to be constructed. 
b.  Distinctly show that the provisions, rules and regulations for individual sewage disposal systems, are fully and completely adhered to. 
c.  Be supported by a map delineating contour lines at a minimum of two (2) feet intervals. 
10.02.04   Reserved.
10.02.05   Submittal requirements for subdivision plats.
A.  Preliminary Plats. 
1.  Title block and north arrow. The plat will show the name of the proposed subdivision, its location, the name, address and registration number of the surveyor preparing the plat and the date of the plat. A north arrow shall be included with a notation referencing the bearings to magnetic north, astronomical north or grid north. 
2.  General layout. The plat shall show information as to the proposed street layout and widths, layout of lots with a notation as to the minimum size and width of lots and proposed open space if any. Any lands to be dedicated will be clearly identified. The plat shall be drawn to scale. Scale, total acreage of the site and total number of lots created shall be indicated. Lot and block identification and building setback lines shall also be indicated. 
3.  Topography. The plat shall show existing contour lines dashed and any proposed contour lines solid, both set of lines to be at two (2) foot intervals, mean sea level (M.S.L.). Prominent drainage features such as lakes, depressions, streams, and floodplain areas that could affect the design of the subdivision, shall be shown. Engineering data showing the high water elevation and how it was established shall be submitted with the plat. 
4.  Existing features. The plat shall show the locations and names of existing and platted property lines, streets and their rights-of-way, railroads and their rights-of-way, public and private rights-of-ways, sanitary sewer and size, water mains and size, bridges, culverts, storm drainage and size, easements, parks and other public open spaces, land lot and land district lines, city limits lines, and names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. Groups of trees and wetland areas shall also be indicated. 
5.  Location map. The plat shall include a small-scale map of sufficient clarity so that the location of the proposed subdivision can be readily determined. 
6.  Water and sewer. A statement from the subdivider shall be submitted with the preliminary plat that will describe the method by which sanitary sewer and water facilities will be provided. 
7.  Future tract plan. In cases where a subdivision is to be developed in stages with additional plats being filed with the governing authority at a later date, the filing of the initial plat will be accompanied by a future tract plan, a reasonably accurate plat in sketch form of the entire tract which will show the future street system and topography for the entire tract. 
8.  Wetlands. Approximate location of wetlands boundaries shall be delineated on the preliminary plat. All preliminary plats delineating wetlands shall have on the face of said preliminary plat the note: 
"No fill or work shall be permitted within jurisdictional wetlands without a prior permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers." 
B.  Improvement plans. The plans for the required public improvements shall be prepared for the approval by the EMS prior to the construction and only after approval of the preliminary plat. Such improvement plans shall show the proposed locations, sizes, types, grades and general design features of each facility and shall be based on reliable field data. Improvement plan approvals are valid for twenty-four (24) months. If the subdivision is sold prior to completion and final platting, a mandatory review by the EMS shall be required. Failure to comply may result in revocation of construction permit. 
1.  The improvement construction drawing shall be submitted on white background prints. The sheet size shall be twenty four (24) inches by thirty six (36) inches unless another size is approved by the Manager. The drawing shall include the following information: 
a.  Construction plans. The developer shall provide the plan and profile of each proposed street indicating the existing ground surface elevation and proposed street grade surface elevation including extensions, except where street runs into an existing street, for a distance of 100 feet. Design shall be in accordance with good engineering practices. 
b.  Street-typical sections. A typical section of each proposed street shall be submitted, showing the width of pavement and the rights-of-way. 
c.  Water supply, sanitation systems, and stormwater drainage. The plan and profile of proposed water and sanitation, storm drainage or other drainage systems, with grade and sizes indicated are required. Floodplain areas should also be indicated on the plan. Stormwater drainage shall be consistent with applicable ordinances of the governing authority and other applicable governmental agencies. Water and sewer systems shall be approved by the EMS and all relevant state agencies. The plat shall not be recorded until the developer submits to the Manager all final permits required for the construction of all improvements from other state, local or federal agencies. 
d.  Utility service agreement. A developer's agreement for utilities service shall be required before final improvement plan approval is granted. 
e.  Other public improvements. A plan shall be prepared for parks, recreation or other public use areas and improvements if included in the approved preliminary plat. 
f.  As-built drawings. The designing surveyor or engineer shall submit to the Manager two (2) sets of white background prints of certified as-built drawings prior to recording of the final plat. 
C.  Final Plats. Filing the final plat with the Manager shall include the following: 
1.  An application containing: 
a.  The name and address of the persons developing the subdivision and his agent(s); 
b.  Zoning of the property to be subdivided; 
c.  Whether or not the subdivision will be developed in phases; 
d.  Plans for serving the proposed subdivision with sewer and water facilities; 
e.  A complete list of deviations, if any, from the approved preliminary plat; 
f.  A copy of the agreement for providing the necessary water and sewer facilities; and 
g.  A fee to cover the cost of investigation and review of the preliminary plan, construction plans, and the final plat will be charged at time of application, as established in this LDC. 
2.  Sheet design. The final plat shall conform to all of the items listed under the preliminary plat and the requirements thereof, as set forth in this LDC and shall be drawn in black ink. 
3.  The final plat shall be drawn to scale. If necessary, more than one (1) sheet may be used as long as a key map is provided to relate each sheet to the entire platted area. 
4.  Surveyor certificate. The following certificate shall be entered on the face of the plat. Placement of this certificate may vary as necessary: 
I certify that all measurements are correct and were prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision; the field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of one (1) foot in ____________ feet and an angular error of per ____________ angle point, and was adjusted using ____________ rule; the plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one (1) foot in ____________ feet; monument and pin locations are correctly shown by the symbols ____________ and the pins are ____________ (type of metallic material and length). 
Signed ____________ (Seal) (Date) ____________ 
Surveyor, Georgia Registration No: ____________ 
5.  The surveyor must certify whether or not the property is located in a special flood hazard zone and indicate the informational source and zone of the property. If the property is located within a flood hazard zone, then the limits of the zone must be shown. 
6.  Proposed lots located in any flood zone shall be delineated on the plat and shall require a certificate of elevation to insure future construction meets applicable ordinances regarding the floodplain. 
7.  Any identified wetlands must be indicated on the final plat, and proof of compliance with any U.S. Army Corp of Engineers requirements for wetlands must be submitted prior to recording of the final plat. 
8.  Owner certificate. The following certificate shall be entered on the face of the plat. Placement of this certificate may vary as necessary: 
We, the undersigned owner(s) and/or mortgagee(s) of the subdivision, hereby offer to dedicate and/or reserve for public use the rights-of-way, easements and other public areas as designated on this plat. 

 
9.  Approvals. 
The following spaces shall be provided in the form listed below for approval by all agencies having jurisdiction. Placement on plat may vary: Approved by the Tift County Health Department, Tift County, Georgia 

 
10.  Surveying data. The final plat shall contain the location, bearing, and length of every street line, lot line and boundary line whether curved or straight. A note will be made on the plat as to whether curved or straight. A note will be made on the plat as to whether curved dimensions are arc or chord distances. Easement lines (and width), land lot and land district lines will be shown. 
11.  The final plat shall also identify each tract within the proposed subdivision by block and lot number. 
12.  All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals to the nearest 1/100 of a foot, and all angles shall be shown to the nearest second. The error of closure shall not exceed one in 10,000, or as defined by the technical standards required by O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, of the Law Governing the Practice of Professional Engineering and Surveying, as amended. The final plat shall have a note listing the following: 
Total Acres ____________ 
Total Lots ____________ 
13.  Monuments 
The final plat shall show the accurate location, material and description of all monuments. A permanent master bench mark shall be established within or adjacent to the site by transfer of levels, not less than third order accuracy, from the nearest approved bench mark of known mean sea level (M.S.L.) elevation showing its location on the final plat and recording its elevation on the final plat to the nearest 1/100 of a foot. 
14.  Easements. In addition to the requirements for the preliminary plat the final plat shall show the location and width of all public utility easements and drainage easements where required. 
10.02.06   Submittal requirements for rezoning applications.
A.  Application for text amendment. In the case of a text amendment, the application shall set forth the new text to be added and the existing text to be deleted. 
B.  Application for map amendment. An application for a map amendment shall include the following information: 
1.  The community or area in which is located the land proposed to be reclassified and the street number, if any, or if none, the location with respect to the nearby public roads in common use; 
2.  A plat of the land in question, and a description by metes and bounds, bearings, and distances of the land, or if the boundaries conform to the lot boundaries within a subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the land records of Tift County; then the lot, block, and subdivision designations with appropriate plat reference; or the map and parcel number according to the current tax mapping system of Tift County; 
3.  The present zoning classification and the classification proposed for such land; 
4.  The name and address of the owners of the land; and the names and addresses of abutting property owners; 
5.  The area of the land proposed to be reclassified stated in square feet if less than one (1) acre, and in acres if one (1) or more; 
6.  The application number, date of application, and action taken on all prior applications filed for the reclassification of the whole or part of the land proposed to be reclassified. 
10.02.07   Submittal requirements for PDR and PDO site plans.
In addition to the requirements of Section 10.02.01 (A) and Section 10.02.06, application for rezoning to Planned Development Rural (PDR) and Planned Development Urban (PDO) shall include: 
A.  A conceptual development plan which shall demonstrate the ability of the proposed use(s) to be located on the site in compliance with the standards of this LDC. The conceptual development plan shall be of sufficient detail to bind the applicant to the features depicted on the conceptual development plan, and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Project name. 
2.  Vicinity map showing zoning districts and existing land use within 500 feet of the boundaries of the site. 
3.  Total area in acres and square feet. 
4.  Current and proposed zoning classification, together with a summary of the applicable development standards for the proposed zoning district. A planned development shall include drawing notes detailing the proposed standards for site design and development for the PDR or PDO zoning district. 
5.  Natural features, including topography at two (2) feet intervals, surface drainage, surface waters, flood plains, watershed areas, groundwater recharge areas, general location of wetlands, and the general location of wooded areas. 
6.  General soils. 
7.  Location with respect to any designated overlay districts. 
8.  General location of existing and proposed roads and utility rights-of-way or easements. 
9.  Location of existing property lines within the development site, if applicable. 
10.  General location of existing and proposed development by type of use. 
11.  Proposed residential density and dwelling unit types, if applicable. 
12.  Location of proposed open spaces, recreational areas, and public buildings and uses, indicating those areas reserved or dedicated for public use. 
13.  General plan for the provision of utilities and infrastructure. 
B.  Proposed legal instruments which shall demonstrate improvement, operation, and maintenance of any common property within a PDR or PDO development, including streets, drives, service areas, parking areas, recreational and community facilities, and open space. 
10.02.08   Submittal requirements for amendments to the Land Development Code.
A.  Applications for amendment of this LDC shall be made in the form of proposals for amendments of the text, standards, and other criteria. Proposals to amend the Zoning Map shall meet the requirements set forth in Section 10.02.06. 
B.  In addition to the application requirements set forth in Section 10.02.01(A), the following information shall be provided: 
1.  Identification of the specific provision proposed for amendment; 
2.  The proposed modifications in a strikethrough and underline format; 
3.  A detailed explanation of the rationale and justification for the requested amendment; and 
4.  A detailed explanation of the potential impacts of the modification on the development of the City of Tifton. 
10.02.09   Requirements regarding performance bonds.
A.  A maintenance bond, in the amount equal to 115% of the total value of the improvements, shall be required as a guarantee to the governing authority for all materials and workmanship of any minimum improvements installed in a subdivision. 
10.02.10   Specifications for digital file submittals.
A.  General requirements. 
1.  All drawings shall be geographically referenced to the US State Plane coordinate system, NAD 83, GA West Zone, US Survey Feet. 
2.  All features depicted in the drawings shall be surveyed after construction. The governing authority will spot check all coordinates to ensure accuracy. Water system features shall be surveyed at a horizontal accuracy of ≤ 0.5 ft and vertical accuracy of ≤ 0.5 ft. Sewer system features shall be surveyed at a horizontal accuracy of ≤ 0.5 ft and a vertical accuracy of ≤ 0.1 ft. 
3.  The following feature geometry types shall be shot directly using the survey instrument: 
a.  All point features (hydrants, valves, sewer manholes, etc.); 
b.  All line features at all endpoints, bends, and turns (pipes, etc.); and 
c.  All polygon features at all corners and bends (project boundaries, lots, right-of-ways, etc.). 
[4]  The following feature types are acceptable: Line, Polyline, Text, and Insert. 
B.  Layering. 
1.  All required layers (as listed in this section) shall contain only the features that are described for that layer. For example, the BOUNDARY_LINE layer shall only contain the boundary line and not such features as north arrows or parcels. 
2.  All required layers shall be present in the drawing except for features that do not pertain to a particular project. For example, some commercial projects may not contain sewer taps as part of the construction and should not be included in the drawing. 
3.  All layers shall be clearly differentiated from each other. For Example: 
a.  Two (2) layers having the names "WATER_LINE" and "WATER_LINES" shall not exist in the same drawing. 
b.  SEWER_LINE_TEXT and SEWER_TEXT shall not exist in the same drawing. 
4.  All text shall appear on separate layers from the layers they annotate. For example, text describing a sewer line shall be on the SEWER_LINE_TEXT layer not the SEWER_LINE layer. 
5.  Text leaders shall be placed on the text layer, not the feature layer. For example, the leader for the diameter of a water pipe shall be on the WATER_LINE_TEXT layer, not the WATER_LINE layer. Leaders shall be drawn using Line features not Leaders. 
C.  Drawing. 
1.  All layers shall conform to the proper geometry type (line, polygon, text) as indicated in the table below. 
Table 10.02.10. Digital file specifications. 

 
2.  All polygon type features shall be completely closed. To accomplish this, lines may need to be duplicated on more than one (1) layer. 
a.  Subdivision parcels shall be closed figures on their layer (not closed with the subdivision boundary). 
b.  Road edge-of-pavement shall be drawn as closed polygons. 
c.  Where a polygon feature extends beyond the edge of the plan, the property boundary (repeated on the polygon feature's layer) shall be used to close the polygon. 
d.  All edges on polygon features shall be snapped together at the vertices. Gaps in polygon boundaries shall not be accepted. 
3.  Sewer features. 
a.  Sewer lines and sewer taps shall be digitized with proper directionality: lines shall be drawn from the uphill node to the downhill node or flipped after the lines have been digitized. 
b.  All tangents between sewer manholes shall be drawn with a single line. 
c.  All tangents shall be snapped at endpoints intersecting at the exact center of the manhole. No gaps shall exist between tangents. 
d.  Manholes shall be symbolized consistently with a circle centered exactly on the tangent endpoints. 
4.  Water features. 
a.  Water lines shall be digitized with all straight-line pipes consisting of only two (2) points. Straight-line pipes shall begin and end at the following features (nodes): hydrants, valves, meters, pumps, tees, crosses, and valves. 
b.  Curves may be digitized with enough vertices to capture the curve geometry. Curves or arcs may also be used to designate curved pipe. 
c.  All water lines shall be continuous, with pipe endpoints snapped to each other at endpoints (nodes). 
d.  End-of-line caps shall be drawn to differentiate end-of-lines from lines that extend beyond the extent of the drawing. Caps shall be drawn for lines that are to be permanently capped when the project is complete, not for lines that are temporarily capped pending inspection. 
D.  Annotations. 
1.  Any non-standard water and sewer lines shall be annotated as such. Line diameter, material, ownership, etc. that does not conform to standard practice shall be noted in the corresponding annotation layer. For example, standard subdivision sewer lines are 8" in diameter. Any other diameter shall be annotated on the SEWER_LINE_TEXT layer. 
2.  All addresses and lot numbers shall be number data type (that is, no text or symbols (#, -, ft, _, ", ', etc.)). If the lot does not have a number, this layer shall be blank. 
E.  File naming and revisions. 
1.  File names shall correspond exactly to the subdivision name and shall be consistent from one (1) version to the next. The file name shall contain the drawing finalized date (in YYMMDD format) as part of the name. There shall be no blank spaces in the name, only underscores. An example file name for the November 10, 2003, final plat for the third phase of the Monarch Village subdivision is: "Monarch_Village_3_031110." 
2.  File finalized dates shall only be updated by the contractor/developer. 
F.  Deliverable format. All files shall be delivered on single disk media in AutoCAD (release 2005 or higher) DWG format. CDs, 4½" floppies, and Zip disks are all acceptable media. Files shall not be spanned over more than one (1) disk. 
Sec. 10.03.00 - Notice requirements. 
10.03.01   Zoning decisions.
A.  Posting of property. 
1.  Not less than fifteen (15) or more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date set for the public hearing on any application for a map amendment (other than a map amendment initiated by the Planning Commission or the governing authority), the Manager or his/her designee shall erect a sign on the land proposed to be reclassified. 
2.  Such sign shall be erected within ten (10) feet of the boundary line of the property which abuts the most traveled public road; and, if no public road abuts thereon, then such sign shall be erected to face in such a manner as may be most readily seen by the public. 
3.  The sign shall show the application number, the present zoning classification, the proposed zoning classification, the scheduled date, time, and place of public hearing, and the telephone number to call for further information. 
4.  Removal of sign. Any such sign shall be maintained at all times by the Manager or his/her designee until a decision on the application has been made by the governing authority. 
5.  Notice to interested parties. A notice shall be given to the applicant and the body conducting the public hearing of the date, time, and place of the public hearing. All application files shall be placed in the custody of the Manager or his/her designee and be open to public inspection during regular office hours. 
B.  Publication of Notice. 
1.  At least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days notice of the time, place, and purpose of said hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within Tift County, Georgia. 
2.  Such notice shall also state the application number and date, and shall contain a summary of the proposed amendment, if a text amendment, and in the case of a map amendment, the location of the property, its area, the name of the owner or their authorized agent, and the present and proposed zoning classification use for the property affected. 
3.  Advertisement to include disclosure. 
a.  Further, such advertisement shall advise the public pursuant to O.C.G.A. 36-67A-3 that any applicant or opponent of a proposed rezoning action who has made campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official of the local government which will consider the application within two (2) years of the date of the application shall be required to file a disclosure with the City of Tifton: 
i.  The name and official position of the local government official to whom campaign contributions were made; and 
ii.  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the opponent to the local government official during the five (5) years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the proposed rezoning action and the date of each contribution. 
b.  Such disclosure shall be required to be filed at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing. 
10.03.02   All other decisions.
A.  Notice of public hearing shall be given. 
1.  Before making its decision on any appeal, request for a variance, or any other matter within the ZBA's authority, said ZBA shall hold a public hearing thereon. 
2.  At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be sent to the appellant or petitioner, and to the owners of all properties either adjoining the property with which the hearing is concerned or situated directly across a public right-of-way from said property. 
3.  Such notice shall contain the name of the appellant or petitioner, the date, time, and place set for the hearing, and a brief statement of the nature of the hearing. 
B.  Public notice in newspaper. The ZBA shall give a public notice of the hearing in a newspaper published and circulated in Tift County and the City of Tifton, Georgia, by advertisement published at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
Sec. 10.04.00 - Procedural requirements. 
10.04.01   Procedures for action by the environmental management staff.
A.  Generally. 
1.  Compliance Review. For permit applications eligible for final approval by the City staff, the appropriate staff person shall review the application and all supporting materials to determine compliance of the application with applicable standards and criteria set forth in this LDC and applicable codes. 
2.  Decisions by Staff. The staff shall issue the permit or provide a written justification for the denial of the permit. 
3.  Appeals. Actions by the staff are subject to the administrative appeals procedure set forth in Section 10.05.00. 
B.  Application Review Process. 
1.  For applications to be submitted to the Planning Commission or City Council, the EMS shall review the application and all supporting materials and provide a report regarding compliance of the application with applicable standards and criteria within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application. The EMS shall provide an analysis and recommendation regarding the following: 
a.  Consistency of the application with the City or County Comprehensive Plan; 
b.  Compliance of the application with the application requirements and development standards set forth in the LDC. 
2.  The EMS shall transmit a copy of the compliance report to the applicant. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days to correct any deficiencies noted in the report and submit revised or additional documents. Upon receipt of the materials provided by the applicant to correct any deficiencies, the EMS shall prepare a revised compliance report. 
3.  For matters subject to final approval by the EMS, the compliance report shall be filed with the application as support for approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application by the EMS. 
4.  For matters subject to final approval by the ZBA or City Council the compliance report will be forwarded together with the application and supporting materials for review, recommendation, and final action by the designated entity. 
5.  Actions by the EMS are subject to the administrative appeals procedure set forth in Section 10.05.00. 
6.  It shall be the responsibility of the EMS to coordinate the administrative review responsibilities. 
C.  Development Permit. No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the governing authority without first obtaining a permit from the Manager or his/her designee to perform such activity. 
1.  Review of regulations. 
a.  The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the governing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. 
b.  They shall review the zoning regulations, stormwater management regulations, subdivision regulations, flood damage provision regulations, and other provisions of this LDC and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdiction. 
2.  Erosion and sedimentation control plan required. 
a.  The application for a permit must include the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. 
b.  Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in Chapter 3 this LDC. 
D.  Approval of revisions to a recorded plat. 
1.  Where located on an existing road or street, the combination of previously platted lots, where the total number of lots does not increase and the resultant lots are equal to the current standards of the governing authority as determined by the EMS, shall be subject to administrative approval. 
2.  Such plats shall conform fully to the requirements of this LDC. 
E.  Approval of exempt plats. 
1.  Any plat submitted for recording to the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Tift County that is not subject to this Section shall comply with O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d), as amended. 
2.  All plats exempt from the standard review process must be assigned a map and parcel number by the Tift County Board of Tax Assessors if a new lot is being created. 
3.  Resurveys of existing parcels which do not involve a map and parcel change must be verified by the Manager and by the Tax Assessor's office. 
4.  All exempt plats, which include resurveys of lots of record, exempt resubdivisions and exemptions by definition must be approved as exempt prior to recording. 
5.  All plats submitted for exemption must be submitted as an original with five (5) black line or blue line copies. 
6.  The original plats will be retained by the Manager or his/her designee. The copies will be stamped, signed and dated to allow recording. 
F.  Minor Subdivisions & Exempt Subdivisions. 
1.  Where a proposed subdivision involves no public improvements and requires a minimum level of engineering design, the Manager or his/her designee may approve the waiver of the requirements of filing a preliminary plat and may recommend approval of the final plat by the EMS. 
2.  A plat and application shall be submitted to the Manager or his/her designee which shall conform fully to the requirements of these regulations. 
3.  Where the minor subdivision is located on an existing road or street, the combination or recombination of previously platted lots, where the total number of lots does not increase, and the resultant lots are equal to the current standards of the governing authority as determined by the EMS, shall also be subject to administrative approval. Such plats shall conform fully to the requirements of this LDC. 
G.  Procedures for Preliminary Subdivision Plat. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary plat is to safeguard the subdivider from unnecessary loss of time and expense in preparation of a subdivision plat which does not conform with the specifications of this LDC. The preliminary plat requires accuracy of scale and dimension. Public agencies having jurisdiction will review preliminary plats regarding matters within their jurisdiction. During the review process, the subdivider or his agent may be called upon for consultation. 
2.  Filing. Any person desiring to subdivide land shall file an application as specified in Section 10.02.05 of this LDC. 
3.  Review of preliminary plat. 
a.  Upon receipt of the filing of the preliminary plat, the Manager or his/her designee shall prepare those materials for presentation to the EMS. 
b.  The EMS shall review the preliminary plat for technical compliance with the LDC, the Comprehensive Plan, and other ordinances of the governing authority that might impact the proposed land subdivision. 
c.  The EMS shall, with or without modification, approve or disapprove the preliminary plat to the extent that it has jurisdiction. 
d.  If the plat is rejected, the respective reviewing agency shall provide a written statement specifying all aspects where the plat fails to comply. 
e.  The EMS shall recommend in writing approval, postponement or disapproval within thirty (30) days of submission. 
4.  Approval of preliminary plat. 
a.  Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the EMS, the developer is authorized to proceed with the preparation of the required improvement plans. No developer shall proceed with any construction or any other work in the proposed subdivision before obtaining approval of the improvement plans in writing. 
b.  Preliminary plat approval grants the developer a maximum time of eighteen (18) months within which he shall submit his subdivision improvement plan. A time extension may be granted by the EMS before the expiration of the eighteen (18) month period. If an extension is granted, it shall be for not more than twelve (12) additional months. 
c.  Failure to submit improvement plans within this time period, including extension if any, shall invalidate preliminary plat approval and require resubmission of preliminary plat. 
d.  Additionally, if, in the opinion of the EMS, substantial changes have been made to the approved preliminary plat, the revised plat shall be resubmitted as a new preliminary plat. 
5.  Postponement. Action is delayed for specific reasons which shall be noted and transmitted in writing to the developer by the EMS. Postponed preliminary plans may be reconsidered by the EMS without resubmittal. 
6.  Disapproval. The EMS shall deny the application for the subdivision if the developer's plans are not in compliance with this LDC. The specific reasons for disapproval shall be stated in writing to allow for correction. For further consideration, the developer must revise and resubmit his plans as though they were a completely new preliminary plat. 
H.  Procedures for Improvement Plans. 
1.  General requirements. 
a.  Subdivision plats receive their second official consideration as "improvement plans." 
b.  These plans shall be approved by the EMS who shall certify that the improvement plans are in conformance with this LDC, official specifications of the governing authority, and with the requirements of the approved preliminary plan. 
c.  No developer shall proceed with any construction work in the proposed subdivision before obtaining this approval. 
2.  Professional engineer or consultant required. Should certain design calculations be required to resolve flow problems, possible erosion or drainage problems, or other detailed design problems which might be encountered in the process of preparing the required improvement plan, the Manager or his/her designee shall be authorized to require the services of a professional engineer or consultant in the improvement plan design process. Should such services be required, such plans shall reflect the engineer or consultant's state registration. 
3.  Filing. Any person desiring to subdivide land shall file an application as specified in Section 10.02.05 of this LDC. 
4.  Approval. Upon approval of the improvement plan by the EMS, and upon securing all required development permits, the developer is authorized to proceed with construction of the physical improvements in the subdivision, and may proceed with the preparation of the final subdivision plat. 
5.  Denial. The EMS shall deny the application for the subdivision improvement plans if the developer's plans are not in compliance with this LDC. The specific reasons for disapproval shall be stated in writing to allow for correction. For further consideration, the developer must revise his plans to conform to the requirements of this LDC, and then submit the revised plans to the EMS as though they were a completely new set of plans. 
I.  Procedures for Final Subdivision Plat. 
1.  Conformance. 
a.  The final plat shall conform with the approved preliminary plat and improvement plan. 
b.  If desired by the subdivider, he may submit only that portion of the preliminary plat he proposes to record and develop at that time, provided that such portion conforms with all requirements of this LDC. 
c.  The record plat, also known as the final plat, is to be prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia. 
d.  No plat of a land subdivision shall be recorded unless the plat conforms to the requirements of the LDC, and the governing authority has formally accepted dedication of any proposed streets and encroachments. 
2.  Filing. 
a.  Filing the final plat with the Manager or his/her designee shall include those items listed under Section 10.02.05 of this LDC. 
b.  At the time of filing with the Manager or his/her designee, a certificate of filing shall be furnished to the applicant which will include the time and date of filing. 
3.  Environmental Management Staff Review. 
a.  The EMS shall review the final plat for technical compliance with the Land Development Code, the Comprehensive Plan, and other ordinances or regulations that might have an impact on the proposed land subdivision. 
b.  The EMS shall recommend in writing, approval, postponement or disapproval. 
c.  If the final plat is disapproved, the reasons therefore shall be stated and the subdivider shall be so informed. The EMS shall have authority to reject the final plat if they find that it does not conform with the approved preliminary plat, the approved improvement plan or with this LDC. 
d.  If the plat is rejected, the EMS shall provide the subdivider with a written statement specifying all the respects in which it does not conform. 
4.  Recording a plat. The City of Tifton shall release the plat for recording as follows; 
a.  Upon satisfactory compliance with this LDC; 
b.  After the required bond or guarantee has been posted. 
5.  Distribution. The Manager or his/her designee shall distribute the final plat to the departments and agencies of the governing authority, utility companies, and others as established by the policies of the governing authority. 
6.  Map and parcel number assigned. Any plat approved through the subdivision process shall be assigned a map and parcel number by the Tift County Tax Assessors' office. 
J.  Procedures for Site Development Plans. 
1.  The EMS shall review the site development plan for technical compliance with the LDC, the Comprehensive Plan, and other ordinances that might have an impact on the proposed development of land. 
2.  The EMS shall recommend in writing, approval, postponement, or disapproval. 
3.  The EMS shall not approve the site development plan if the developer's plans are not in compliance with this LDC. The specific reasons for disapproval shall be stated in writing to allow for correction. For further consideration, the developer must revise his plans to conform to the requirements of this LDC, and then submit the revised plans to the EMS. 
4.  No developer shall proceed with any construction work on the proposed development without obtaining approval of the site development plan. 
K.  Certificate of Occupancy or Completion. 
1.  Certificate of occupancy or completion required. A certificate of occupancy or completion issued by the Director or his/her designee is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
a.  A building hereafter erected; 
b.  A building hereafter altered so as to affect height, the side, front, or rear yard; 
c.  Any building or premises where a change in the type of use will occur; or 
d.  A manufactured home or mobile home dwelling hereafter sited and connected to utilities. 
2.  Issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. 
a.  Upon payment of all required fees, the Director or his/her designee shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy or completion if the proposed use of land or buildings is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this LDC, and if the building, as finally constructed, substantially complies with the sketch or plan submitted and approved for the building permit. 
b.  One (1) copy of all certificates of occupancy or completion issued which contain a statement of the intended use of the applicable property and other pertinent information, signed by the owner or his agent, shall be kept on file in the office of the Manager or his/her designee. 
3.  Denial of certificate of occupancy or completion. 
a.  A certificate of occupancy or completion shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this LDC and substantially complies with the sketches or plans submitted for obtaining the building permit. 
b.  Any unapproved deviation from the site development plan shall cause the Director or his/her designee to not issue a certificate of occupancy. 
c.  When a permit is denied, the Manager or his/her designee shall provide in writing his reasons for denying the permit within ten (10) days after said request. 
4.  Permits and licenses void when issued in conflict. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this LDC shall be null and void. 
L.  Right-of-Way Utilization Permit - Reserved. 
M.  Tree Removal Permit - Reserved. 
N.  Temporary Use Permit - Reserved. 
10.04.02   Procedural requirements for PDR and PDO applications.
Approval of a site conceptual development plan and rezoning for the PDR or PDO district shall include the condition that such legal instruments are properly recorded and shall be binding on the development of the site. 
10.04.03   Procedures for action by the Historic Preservation Commission.
A.  An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be reasonably required by the Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) with applications involving demolition being required to be accompanied by post demolition plans for the site and shall be filed by the applicant with the HPC. 
B.  Not earlier than twenty (20) days nor later than seven (7) days prior to the review of a Certificate of Appropriateness by the HPC, the HPC shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application of the filing of such application and shall afford the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard in connection with the determination on such application. 
C.  The HPC shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that a proposed material change in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
D.  The HPC shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that a proposed material change in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
E.  In making its determination to either approve or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness the HPC shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors; 
1.  The historical and architectural value and significance of the property involved; 
2.  The architectural style of the property involved; 
3.  The general design, arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style; and 
4.  The pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
F.  In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the HPC shall not consider the interior arrangement of property or the interior use of property which does not have any effect on exterior architectural features. 
G.  The HPC may seek such outside technical advice concerning its decision on any application as its members deem necessary, provided that any expenses incurred in connection with such technical advice must have the prior approval of the City Council or Board of Commissioners. 
H.  The HPC shall approve or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property or by the owner or occupant of a structure, site, object, or work of art located within a historic district. 
I.  Failure of the HPC to act within such forty-five (45) days shall constitute approval of an application with no other evidence of approval being required. 
J.  Evidence of approval of an application shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the HPC. 
K.  Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be furnished by written record within ten (10) days of a decision thereon to the applicant and to all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the HPC. 
L.  In the event the HPC denies an application, it shall specify its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The HPC may at its option suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it denies the application. The applicant, if the applicant so desires, may make modifications to the plans and application and may resubmit another application at any time. 
M.  In circumstances where the application seeks a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the denial of the application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be binding upon the staff charged with issuing building permits and, upon denial of such application no building permit shall be issued with respect to work or changes covered by such application. 
N.  Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this section would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of any specific property, the HPC, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to such provisions, or to interpret the meaning of such provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variations, the HPC may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will in its judgment best fulfill the purpose of this LDC. 
O.  Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the Historic Preservation Commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the City Council. 
1.  Any such appeal must be filed with the Manager within fifteen (15) days after the date of receipt of notification to such appellant by the commission of its determination. 
2.  Upon appeal the City Council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the HPC, if the City Council finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. 
3.  The decision of the City Council shall be made within forty-five (45) days of the filing of such appeal. 
4.  Appeals from decisions of the City Council may be taken to the Tift County Superior Court. 
10.04.04   Procedures for action by the City Council.
A.  Generally. Within the city limits of the City of Tifton, Georgia, the governing authority shall be the Mayor and City Council of the City of Tifton, Georgia. 
B.  Rezoning Procedures. 
1.  General conditions. 
a.  Zoning regulations, including the zoning map, may be amended by the governing authority on their own motion, on petition, or on recommendation of the Planning Commission, but no amendment shall become effective, unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. 
b.  Before enacting an amendment to these regulations, the governing authority shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon as set forth in this LDC. 
2.  Application for amendment. 
a.  Applications for amendment of these regulations may be in the form of proposals for amendment of the text of these regulations or proposals for amendment of the zoning maps. 
b.  Applications shall be in the form specified in Section 10.02.00. 
c.  No application for a zoning change affecting the same parcel of property or part thereof shall be accepted by the Manager or his/her designee until the expiration of at least six (6) months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning request by the governing authority. 
3.  Referral to Planning Commission. 
a.  After the routine monthly application acceptance deadline, the Manager or his/her designee shall transmit a copy of the completed application to the Planning Commission, and applicable staff members, for review and recommendation. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall review each application for consistency with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, and the adopted standards for exercise of the zoning powers. 
c.  The Planning Commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to submit a report to the governing authority. 
d.  The EMS report and Planning Commission recommendations shall then be transmitted to the governing authority. 
4.  Standards for exercise of zoning powers. In order to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City of Tifton and the residents thereof against the unrestricted use of property, the following standards, and any other factors relevant to balancing the above-stated public interest, shall be considered by the governing authority in making any zoning decision: 
a.  The existing land use pattern; 
b.  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and near districts; 
c.  The existing population density pattern and the possible increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities; 
d.  Whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed amendment reasonable; 
e.  Whether the proposed change will adversely influence existing conditions in the neighborhood or the community at large; 
f.  Potential impact on the environment, including, but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion, and sedimentation, flooding, air quality, and water quality and quantity; 
g.  The reasonableness of the costs required of the public in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and public safety necessities when considering the proposed change; 
h.  Whether the proposed change will be detrimental to the value, improvement, or development of adjacent or nearby property in accordance with existing regulations; 
i.  Whether the proposed change is out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood, area, or City of Tifton; 
j.  Whether the proposed change will constitute a grant of special privilege to the individual owner as contrasted with the adjacent or nearby neighborhood or with the general public; and 
k.  The extent to which the zoning decision is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, as duly amended. 
i.  The Comprehensive Plan is established as official policy of the City of Tifton. 
ii.  As such, the goals and policies of the Plan, and the resultant Future Land Use Plan, shall serve as the guide under which areas are divided into zoning districts. 
5.  Additional Restrictions and Standards may be required. 
a.  Provided, that the governing authority may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood; and 
b.  Provided that wherever the governing authority shall find in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations that any term, condition or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said governing authority shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing. 
C.  Removal of Recorded Subdivision. 
1.  After a subdivision has been recorded, the property owner or his agent may petition the governing authority for permission to remove the subdivision plat from the land records of Tift County. 
2.  The governing authority may permit such removal providing that no lot in the subdivision has been sold. 
3.  Upon giving its permission for such removal, the governing authority shall release bonds or cash posted by the property owner pursuant to the provisions of Section 10.02.09. 
D.  Amendments to LDC text. Action by the governing authority regarding proposed amendments to the LDC text shall be taken at an advertised public hearing, and shall be based on the following information: 
1.  The EMS compliance report and recommendation; 
2.  The recommendation of the Planning Commission; 
3.  The application and supporting documentation; and 
4.  Testimony during the public hearing. 
Sec. 10.05.00 Appeals. 
10.05.01   Applicability.
A.  The ZBA shall hear and decide upon appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Manager or his/her designee in the enforcement of this LDC. 
B.  Appeals to the ZBA may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the governing authority affected by any decision of the Manager or his/her designee. Such appeals shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the date of notification of the decision appealed from by filing with the Manager, and with the ZBA, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Manager or his/her designee shall forthwith transmit to the ZBA all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
C.  The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the governing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with this LDC; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the ZBA. 
10.05.02   Stay of proceedings.
An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Manager or his/her designee certifies to the governing authority after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the ZBA or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Manager or his/her designee, and on due cause shown. 
10.05.03   Action on appeals.
A.  Before making its decision on any appeal, request for a variance, or any other matter within the ZBA's authority, the ZBA shall hold a public hearing, in conformance with the provisions and notice requirements of this LDC. 
B.  The appellant and any public agency or private individual shall be entitled to present evidence on matters before the ZBA board, and the ZBA may request technical service, advice, data, or factual evidence from the Manager or his/her designee and the governing authority for assistance in reaching decisions. 
C.  The ZBA may, in conformity with the provisions of this LDC, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Manager. The board may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the Manager or his/her designee to carry out the decisions of the ZBA. 
10.05.04   Appeals to Superior Court.
Appeal from the Governing Authority. Any party aggrieved by any decision of the Mayor and City Council, the Zoning Board of Appeals, or the Tift County Airport Authority may seek review of such decision by the Tift County Superior Court, as provided by law. 
Sec. 10.06.00 - Enforcement and penalties. 
10.06.01   Enforcement.
A.  General Remedies. In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of these regulations, the Manager or his/her designee or any adjacent or neighboring property owner or occupant who would be damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use, or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land. 
B.  Enforcement Authority. Upon determination by the Manager or his/her designee that reasonable grounds exist to believe that there exists any violation of any provision of this LDC, the building permit or a landscape plan, the Manager or his/her designee shall be entitled to take any, all or any combination of the following actions, or to cause such actions to be taken, as the Manager or his/her designee in his sole discretion shall determine to be appropriate: 
1.  Give written notice to the applicant, owner, developer, landscape contractor and/or other appropriate persons of the existence of such violations, the nature and extent of the violations, the actions necessary to correct the violations, and the time limit within which remedial actions must be taken; 
2.  Suspend or revoke any or all building permits and land disturbance permits issued; 
3.  Issue stop work orders in connection with any or all construction, work or other activity then being conducted upon the lot pursuant to any building or construction license, permit, or any land disturbance permit which has been issued; 
4.  Declare any bond or security given pursuant to this LDC forfeited in the event of circumstances authorizing the forfeiture following the giving of written notice to the principal and any surety thereon of intention to so do and the failure of the circumstances giving rise thereto to be remedied within sixty (60) days thereafter, to take all actions necessary to collect the proceeds thereof, and to proceed to remedy the circumstances giving rise to the forfeiture upon collection of the proceeds of the bond or security; 
5.  Institute civil proceedings to effectuate remedy of the circumstances giving rise to the violations; and 
6.  Take such other actions as are appropriate under the circumstances in order to obtain compliance with the provisions of this LDC consistent with applicable law and available resources of the governing authority. 
C.  Stay of enforcement. Filing of an appeal to determination of Manager or his/her designee to the ZBA or filing of an application for rezoning with the governing authority will automatically stay enforcement until the appeal or rezoning question is resolved. 
D.  Historic properties. The Manager or his/her designee shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or of any site, structure or object of art located in a historic district, except to the extent that such changes are made in compliance with the provisions of this LDC and to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to any such historic property or to any site, structure or object of art located in a historic district and to issue citations to any person engaged in any such activity. 
E.  Erosion control. 
1.  Notice of violation. 
a.  The Manager or his/her designee will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
b.  If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined in this LDC has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions or with the provisions of this LDC, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. 
c.  The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. 
d.  If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply with the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this LDC. 
2.  Investigation authority. The Manager or his/her designee shall have the power to conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this LDC, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
3.  Access for inspections to be permitted. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the governing authority who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
10.06.02   Penalties.
Any person who is convicted of violating a provision of this LDC, or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements of this LDC, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any building or structure or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and approved under this LDC, shall, upon conviction, be penalized as provided in Chapter 1, Section 1-11 of the Code of ordinances for the City of Tifton. Each day of continued violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
10.06.03   Revocation and suspension of license/denial of permit.
A.  In addition to other remedies and/or penalties provided herein, upon recommendation of the Director of Environmental Management, the city manager shall conduct a hearing to determine whether or not a licensee's license should be revoked or suspended or the denial of a permit. 
B.  The City Manager shall have the authority to suspend or revoke the license of a person, to discipline a licensed person or deny the issuance of a permit upon a finding that the licensee or applicant has committed any one of the following acts: 
1.  Obtaining a license or permit by fraud or misrepresentation or otherwise knowingly giving false or forged evidence; 
2.  Being convicted or found guilty of or entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a criminal act constituting a felony in any jurisdiction which directly relates to the practice of residential or general contracting or the ability to practice contracting; 
3.  Performing any act that assists a person or entity in the prohibited unlicensed practice of contracting if the licensee or applicant knows or has reasonable grounds to know that the person or entity is unlicensed; 
4.  Knowingly combining or conspiring with an unlicensed person by allowing his or her license to be used with the intent to evade the requirements of Title 43, Chapter 41 of the Official Code of Georgia, the City of Tifton Code of Ordinances or this LDC; 
5.  Failing in any material respect to comply with the provisions of Title 43, Chapter 41 of the Official Code of Georgia or violating any rule, regulation or order of the State Licensing Board for Residential and General Contractors, the City of Tifton Code of Ordinances or this LDC. A conviction or plea of nolo contender to a violation of the City of Tifton Code of Ordinances or this LDC shall be prima facie evidence that the license or permit holder has violated this subsection; 
6.  Abandoning a construction project in which the contractor who is the individual license holder or a business organization or permit holder for whom the license holder is a qualifying agent is engaged or under contract as a residential or general contractor. A project may be presumed abandoned after 90 days if the contractor has ceased work on or terminated performance on the project without just cause and without proper notification to the owner, including the reason for the termination, cessation, or abandonment; 
7.  Signing a statement with respect to a project or contract falsely indicating that the work is bonded; knowingly and falsely indicating by written statement issued to the owner that payment has been made for all subcontracted work, labor, and materials and for all materials furnished and installed which statement is reasonably relied upon and actually results in a financial loss to the owner; or falsely indicating that workers' compensation and general liability insurance are provided; 
8.  Committing fraud or deceit in the practice of contracting, including falsely advertising, representing, or holding himself or herself or an affiliated business organization out as having a valid and current license or permit; 
9.  Committing gross negligence, repeated or persistent negligence, negligence resulting in a significant danger to life or property or repeated violations of Title 43, Chapter 41 of the Official Code of Georgia or violating any rule, regulation or order of the State Licensing Board for Residential and General Contractors, the City of Tifton Code of Ordinances or this LDC; 
10.  Proceeding on any job without obtaining applicable permits and inspections; 
11.  Using or attempting to use a license that has expired or has been suspended or revoked; 
12.  Knowingly, intentionally or negligently engaging any subcontractor to perform work within the scope of the general or residential construction contract which requires a license under Title 43, Chapter 14 of the Official Code of Georgia who does not possess a current and valid license for such work; or 
13.  Failing to satisfy within a reasonable time the terms of a final civil judgment obtained against the licensee or permit holder. 
C.  Upon consideration of the recommendation of the Director of Environmental Management and a finding by the city manager that ground or grounds may exist for the suspension or revocation of a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or the denial of a permit, then the city manager shall cause a written notice to be issued to the holder of such license or applicant, requiring such holder or applicant to show cause why the holder's license should not be revoked or suspended or permit denied. The notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing which shall not be less than five days nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the notice. The notice may be served by certified mail, statutory overnight delivery or by personal service on the licensee or applicant. The written notice shall state the alleged violations that may authorize possible suspension or revocation of such license or the denial of the permit. 
D.  At such hearing the holder of the license or applicant shall have the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked or permit denied and shall be entitled to the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence in favor of suspension or revocation, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceeding transcribed or recorded at the license holder's or applicant's expense. 
E.  Following the conclusion of such hearing the city manager shall, within 30 days of the date of such hearing, render his decision. The City Manager may take any one or more of the following actions against any license holder or applicant found to have committed any one or more of the acts listed in subsection (B) of this section: 
1.  Place the license holder or applicant on probation or reprimand the license holder or applicant; or 
2.  Revoke a license, including the license of a person as an individual as well as that of a qualifying agent of a business organization together with the interest of the business organization qualified thereby in such license; suspend such a license for a stated period of time not exceeding one year; or deny the issuance or renewal of the license; 
3.  Suspend the ability of the applicant to apply for a permit for a specified period of time; 
4.  Require financial restitution to a consumer for financial harm directly related to a violation of a provision of this chapter; 
5.  Require continuing education; or 
6.  Assess costs associated with the investigation and prosecution. 
The city manager shall determine whether the license in issue should be suspended or revoked and, if suspended, then the duration of such suspension. The fee for reinstatement of the license shall be $250.00. 
F.  Upon the suspension or revocation of such license or denial of a permit then the city manager shall cause the license holder or applicant to be notified in writing within ten days of such decision of the nature of such decision and the grounds therefor and thereupon the license shall immediately become suspended or terminated or permit denied in accordance with such decision. In the event a license is suspended or revoked, the license holder shall immediately upon receipt of such notice cease and desist from all activity authorized under such license in accordance with such decision and physically surrender such license to the finance director. 
G.  If the city manager determines that grounds do not exist to deny a permit or to suspend or terminate such license, or decides to not deny the issuance of a permit or suspend or terminate such license notwithstanding the existence of grounds therefor, then the city manager shall promptly notify the license holder or applicant thereof. 
H.  An appeal from the decision of the City Manager shall be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in Section 10.05.00 of this Chapter. However, an appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not stay the decision of the city manager due to the inherent risk to cause imminent peril to life and/or property. 
( Ord. No. 2015-05 , 3-2-2015) 
Appendix 1. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS MANUAL FOR STREETS, DRAINAGE, AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 1. - Introduction. 
The following technical criteria and design standards shall be used as a supplement to the City of Tifton Unified Land Development Code (ULDC) and all other related City of Tifton Ordinances. These may include, but are not limited to: the City of Tifton Subdivision Ordinance, Flood Hazard Reduction Ordinance, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Ordinance, Utilities Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, and all other ordinances which regulate the development of all land, public and private, within unincorporated City of Tifton. 
The following technical standards shall be used as the minimum design criteria for development or redevelopment within City of Tifton. Development and redevelopment includes all residential, commercial, industrial or institutional development performed within the County's jurisdiction, as described in Sections 1.1 and 1.2 below. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions required under this Technical Guidance Document and those contained within other City of Tifton Ordinances or regulations, the most restrictive or the Staff Development Review Committee's (SDRC) interpretation shall apply. 
1.1   Applicability.
This Technical Standards Manual shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt as outlined below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that invoices other land development activities of one acre or more. 
2.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more. 
3.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the SDRC to be a hotspot land use. A hotspot is any area located within a drainage basin that is known to have historical drainage issues related to flooding. 
4.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria in items 1 and 2 above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
1.2   Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from these standards: 
1.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project. 
2.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures. 
3.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for those activities, unless located in hotspot areas, as defined in Section 1.1 above. 
4.  Repairs to any storm water management facility or practice deemed necessary by the SDRC or County's Engineer. 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
2.1   Interpretation of certain terms or words.
Except As specifically defined herein, all words in the Technical Standards Manual have the customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of these standards, certain words or terms used herein are defined as follows: 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. All pronouns used herein shall be deemed to include the masculine, the feminine and non-personal entities. 
Whenever reference is made in the Technical Standards to another section of this manual, all parts of that section are deemed to be included in such reference. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
The word "may" is permissive. 
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
2.2   Definitions.
The definitions set forth in the Tifton-City of Tifton Unified Land Development Code (ULDC) are incorporated herein by reference and shall have the same definitions herein as set forth in the ULDC. Other important definitions include: 
Development or Land Development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate storm water runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Sec. 3. - General provisions. 
3.1   Plan review and approval.
The development of land within City of Tifton, Georgia shall require the submittal of plans, plats, or construction drawings as may be required by the ULDC and these Standards to the City of Tifton Staff Development Review Committee (SDRC). Approval of these documents must be received prior to the initiation of any development activities. 
3.2   Staff development review committee.
As outlined in the ULDC, the Staff Development Review Committee (SDRC) is responsible for the review and approval of development plans to which this Technical Standards Manual applies. All applications for development within unincorporated City of Tifton must be submitted to the SDRC for review and shall include all required applications, application fees, plats, development and building plans, and reports as necessary. Refer to the ULDC or other applicable ordinances for additional details of submittal requirements. 
3.3   Responsibility and liability.
Approval of plans, plats, or construction drawings by City of Tifton shall not imply nor transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principals of engineering, surveying, architecture, landscape architecture, or any other profession, from the professional corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans, plats, or construction drawings were prepared and sealed. 
3.4   Design professional.
All development plans submitted to the County for review must conform to the applicable standards and specifications established herein by the County, and must be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Georgia registered design professional. The design professional must be a Professional Engineer, Registered Architect, Registered Land Surveyor, Registered Landscape Architect or other qualified design professional licensed by the State of Georgia. 
3.5   As-builts for subdivisions.
Before final plat approval or the issuance of a building permit, the Owner of a land development must submit as-built drawings to the County for review and final approval. The owner shall submit one full size (size D - 24"x36") or larger set of drawings and a set of plans in electronic format. As-builts shall include all utilities, roads, storm drainage and detention pond structures, or other information as required by the SDRC. As-builts shall be certified by a registered design professional stating that the all improvements have been built in accordance with the plans and specifications. 
Sec. 4. - Requirements. 
4.1   Required improvements.
Except as otherwise provided by the ULDC, a Developer shall provide, install and pay for the following improvements to serve their development: 
A.  Water supply and distribution 
B.  Sanitary sewage collection 
C.  Sewage disposal systems 
D.  Road grading and surfacing 
E.  Storm drainage 
F.  Road name signs 
G.  Electricity 
H.  Natural gas (optional) 
I.  Traffic control devices 
Utilities shall be located where possible in accordance with the proposed utility location detail. 
4.2   Easements.
Easements having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and located along the side or rear lot line shall be provided as required for utility lines, underground mains, cables and drainage. 
Maintenance easements shall be provided when deemed necessary by the SDRC. When a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or intermittent stream, a stormwater or drainage easement of at least twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided from the top edge of each bank. Such easements may be used as a location for Pedestrian Ways, bikeways and other amenities which do not conflict with the basic maintenance function of such easements. 
4.3   Permits.
As outlined in the ULDC, a developer may be required to obtain the following permits from the County for development within City of Tifton: 
• Land Disturbance Activity Permit 
• Subdivision Permit 
• Building Permit 
• Driveway Permit 
• Water System Extension Permit 
• Sanitary Sewer Extension Permit 
• Applicable Zoning Permits 
• Applicable Variances 
The developer shall consult the SDRC on any other County permits that may be required which are not listed herein. 
Nothing in these Technical Standards shall impose any obligation on City of Tifton to obtain or assist in obtaining permits, approvals, and/or clearances from other local, state or Federal agencies having jurisdiction over elements of a project. It is solely the developer's responsibility to obtain all such required permits, approvals, and/or clearances. The developer shall furnish the County with copies of all such permits, approvals and/or clearances before authorization to proceed with development is requested. 
Sec. 5. - Street design standards and specifications. 
5.1   Design standards.
All roads and bridges constructed in City of Tifton shall be designed in accordance with the latest editions of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) design guides and specifications as well as Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) Standards except as provided in these technical standards. 
5.2   Street classification.
Six (6) functional classifications are identified by the City of Tifton Subdivision Ordinance and the Tifton-City of Tifton Thoroughfare Plan. Any street not indicated on the thoroughfare plan will be classified by the SDRC. The six classification categories are as follows: 
A.  Major Arterial Street: A street which is designated as such on the Thoroughfare Plan and which is intended to provide, within an identified planning period, swift, safe and convenient traffic movement within and through the county. A major thoroughfare. 
B.  Secondary Arterial Street: A street which is designated as such on the Thoroughfare Plan and which is intended to provide easy and convenient traffic movement within the county. 
C.  Collector Street: A street which is designated as such on the Thoroughfare Plan and which is intended to collect traffic from local streets and direct it safely to secondary major streets. 
D.  Dead-end Streets: A street having only one end open for access to another street, and the other end being abruptly terminated with no turnaround (excludes cul-de-sacs). Future development of dead-end streets is not permitted within City of Tifton. 
E.  Marginal Access Street: A street generally parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street providing access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
F.  Local Street: A street used for local circulation in areas providing access to abutting property. Local streets serving residential areas shall be designed to discourage use by through traffic. 
5.3   Minimum right-of-way widths and dedication requirements.
The Thoroughfare Plan illustrates the functional classification of streets and the general location of future arterial and collector streets in the County. The right-of-way dedication requirements expressed below shall correspond to the functional classifications illustrated on the Thoroughfare Plan. Should a proposed subdivision adjoin an existing unimproved roadway, the developer shall dedicate additional right-of- way to meet the minimum right-of-way requirement for the applicable functional classification of the adjoining street. 
Table 5.3.a. Minimum right-of-way and pavement widths 

 
*local roadways are also known as rural minor roadways. 
If a median is included as part of the site plan, minimum median width for a divided street shall be at least ten (10) feet measured from back of curb to back of curb. 
Right-of-ways should be truncated twenty-five (25) feet at all intersections of right-of- ways and mitered at forty-five (45) degrees to meet intersection right-of-ways An example of this is shown in the attached detail drawings. 
5.4   Roadway sectional composition.
The applicable standard shall be based on functional classification and the predominant zoning through which a street passes. See latest edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) Standard Specifications for the Construction of Roads and Bridges for specifications of referenced asphaltic concrete types. For all street classifications, before asphalt pavement is placed, a bituminous prime shall be applied to the base material in accordance with GDOT specifications. Application rate shall be a minimum of 0.15 gallons and a maximum of 0.20 gallons per square yard. 
For typical roadway cross sections with asphalt pavements or concrete pavements, see the attached typical details. 
5.4.1 Local Streets. 
• 1 ½" - 12.5 mm Asphalt SuperPave (165 lbs/sq. yd.) top course or  1 ½" - 9.5 mm Asphalt SuperPave (165 lbs/sq. yd.) top course 
• 6" - Graded aggregate base (GAB) or  6" - Soil cement (Soil cement shall be mixed in place) 
Base shall be compacted to 98% maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM D698. 
5.4.2 Collector Streets (for residential, office, institutional, and commercial developments). 
Asphalt Pavement: 
• 1 ½" - 12.5 mm Asphalt SuperPave (165 lbs/sq. yd.) (top course) 
• 2" - 19 mm Asphalt SuperPave (220 lb/sq. yd.) (binder) 
• 6" - Graded aggregate base* (GAB) or  6" - Soil cement** (Soil cement shall be mixed in place) 
Base shall be compacted to 98% maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM D698. 
* Graded aggregate base may include crushed concrete, limerock or granite. 
**For soil cement, a mix design by a licensed Geotechnical Engineer in the state of Georgia must be submitted to the SDRC's Engineer for approval. 
Concrete Pavement: 
• 7" - Concrete pavement per specifications detailed in Section 5.5.5. 
• 4" - Graded aggregate base course compacted to 98% maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM D698. 
5.4.3 Arterial Roads (including industrial roads). 
Asphalt Pavement: 
• 1 ½" - 12.5 mm Asphalt SuperPave (165 lbs/sq. yd.) (top course) 
• 2" - 19 mm Asphalt SuperPave (220 lb/sq. yd.) (binder) 
• 3" - Asphaltic base 25mm Asphalt Superpave 
• 8" - Graded aggregate base* (GAB) or  8" - Soil cement** (Soil cement shall be mixed in place) 
Base shall be compacted to 98% maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM D698. 
* Graded aggregate base may include crushed concrete, limerock or granite. 
**For soil cement, a mix design by a licensed Geotechnical Engineer in the state of Georgia must be submitted to the SDRC's Engineer for approval. 
Concrete Pavement: 
• 8" - Concrete pavement per specifications detailed in Section 5.5.5 
• 4" - Graded aggregate base course compacted to 98% maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM D698. 
5.4.4 Commercial Development. 
A.  Heavy Duty 
Asphalt Pavement: 
• 2" - 12.5 mm Asphalt SuperPave (220 lbs/sq. yd.) (top course) 
• 3" - 19 mm Asphalt SuperPave (330 lbs/sq. yd.) (binder) 
• 8" - Graded aggregate base* (GAB) or  8" - Soil Cement** (Soil cement shall be mixed in place) 
Base shall be compacted to 98% maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM D698. 
* Graded aggregate base may include crushed concrete, limerock or granite. 
**For soil cement, a mix design by a licensed Geotechnical Engineer in the state of Georgia must be submitted to the SDRC's Engineer for approval. 
Concrete Pavement: 
• 8" - Concrete pavement per specifications detailed in Section 5.5.5. 
• 4" - Graded aggregate base course compacted to 98% maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM D698. 
B.  Light Duty 
Asphalt Pavement: 
• 2" - 12.5 mm Asphalt SuperPave (220 lbs/sq. yd.) (top course) 
• 8" - Graded aggregate base* (GAB) or  8" - Soil Cement** (Soil cement shall be mixed in place) 
Base shall be compacted to 98% maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM D698. 
* Graded aggregate base may include crushed concrete, limerock or granite. 
**For soil cement, a mix design by a licensed Geotechnical Engineer in the state of Georgia must be submitted to the SDRC's Engineer for approval. 
Concrete Pavement: 
• 7" - Concrete pavement per specifications detailed in section 5.5.5. 
• 4" - Graded aggregate base course compacted to 98% maximum dry density per standard proctor test ASTM D698. 
5.5   Subgrade, base and pavement material and construction specifications.
5.5.1 Testing. All tests and data described below shall be conducted or provided and paid for by the paving contractor of developer. Test results shall be submitted to the SDRC's Engineer for review and/or approval. Testing shall be performed by a licensed Geotechnical Engineer (or his/her authorized representative working under his/her direct supervision) in the State of Georgia who has been prequalified by the GDOT for Area Classes 6.04a or 6.04b and must be approved by the SDRC. A list of GDOT prequalified consultants is available on the GDOT's website. 
5.5.2 Subgrade. All fill materials proposed for use in roadway construction that could affect the performance of pavements, curbs or utilities should meet the given requirements for structural fill. Structural fill material should be free of organics, deleterious material, debris and rocks greater than six (6) inches. Fill soils should have a plasticity index less than 20, a liquid limit less than 40 and a Standard Proctor (ASTM D698) dry density of at least 100 pcf. 
Embankments shall be constructed in eight to twelve inch lifts. Individual lifts shall be compacted using sheep's foot rollers, vibratory compactors, pneumatic tire rollers or other equipment capable of obtaining the required compaction. The surface of the completed subgrade shall be bladed to a smooth and uniform texture. The centerline profiles shall conform to the established elevations with an acceptable tolerance of +/- ½ inch. The acceptable tolerance under a template conforming to the designed cross-section shall be +/- ¼ inch. 
Soil density tests shall be performed on roadway fills four (4) feet in height and greater. The compaction tests will be performed to within twelve (12) inches of the final grade of the subgrade. For the fills requiring compaction tests they shall be compacted to ninety-eight (98) percent of maximum dry density per the standard proctor test (ASTM D698, AASHTO T99). One set of compaction tests shall be performed on every other twelve (12) inch lift at one hundred-foot intervals along the roadway fill section. A licensed Geotechnical Engineer in the state of Georgia (or his/her authorized representative working under his/her direct supervision) shall perform the tests. Where the subgrade compaction is determined to be less than the required degree, the developer shall remove, replace, and/or recompact the section in question, or use other means approved by the Engineering Department, until the density is determined to meet the required limit. Copies of all test results shall be submitted to the SDRC. 
The compaction of the top twelve (12) inches of the subgrade shall be inspected by proof rolling. The subgrade shall have sufficient stability to support any and all types of construction equipment used to construct roadway without "pumping" (vertical and/or horizontal displacement of the subgrade). The "proof-roll" compaction inspection of the subgrade shall be by a vehicle with a minimum gross vehicle weight of 24,000 pounds, fully loaded with a minimum of 16 tons (32,000 lbs) of graded aggregate (54,000 lbs total weight minimum). The weight of the proof-roll inspection vehicle and the accompanying load shall be shown on a printed "load-out" ticket from a reputable quarry. Representatives of the SDRC shall be present and approve all subgrades. The contractor, at the contractor's expense, shall correct any areas not passing the proof-roll inspection. 
The contractor shall be responsible for contacting the SDRC at least three (3) days prior to any proof-roll to schedule an on-site inspection of the proof-roll. Failure to perform all testing and arrange the on-site inspection may lead to a denial of acceptance of the road by the County. It may also lead to additional testing requirements at the contractor's expense. 
5.5.3 Graded Aggregate Base (GAB). GAB may include limerock, crushed concrete base or granite. GAB materials should be tested for GDOT compliance by a licensed Geotechnical Engineer (or their authorized representative working under their direct supervision) in the State of Georgia who shall be approved by the SDRC. 
A.  Placement of the base material shall be inspected and approved by the SDRC as specified below. The paving contractor/developer is responsible for requesting such inspections at least three (3) days in advance, and placement of base shall not be done until such inspections have been scheduled. 
B.  The compacted base course (graded aggregate or crusher run) shall have sufficient stability to support any and all types of construction equipment used to construct the roadway without "pumping" (vertical and/or horizontal displacement of base due to any number of factors including too much water, not enough compactive effort, etc.), regardless of compaction. The "proof-roll" compaction inspection of the graded aggregate base shall be by a vehicle with a minimum gross vehicle weight of 24,000 lbs, fully loaded with a minimum of 16 tons (32,000 lbs) of graded aggregate (54,000 lbs total weight minimum). The weight of the proof-roll inspection vehicle and the accompanying load shall be shown on a printed "load-out" ticket from a reputable quarry. A licensed Geotechnical Engineer in the State of Georgia (or their authorized representative working under their direct supervision) must certify all proof-roll compaction inspections. A representative of the SDRC shall be present for all proof-roll compaction tests of all graded aggregate bases in the unincorporated areas of City of Tifton. The contractor, at the contractor's expense, shall correct any areas not passing the proof-roll inspection. 
C.  The graded aggregate base thickness, as required in this Technical Standards Manual, shall not be deficient in any area by more than ½ total inches. Any deficient area shall be corrected by adding additional quantities of the same materials and rebuilt to the desired thickness. The contractor, at contractor's expense, and during the proof-roll compaction inspection process, shall do the measurement. Three holes shall be dug every 1500 feet or one hole per each 500 feet, to confirm the required thickness. At least one hole shall be dug for any areas less than the above footage. A representative of SDRC shall determine the hole locations and confirm the depth of graded aggregate base. 
5.5.4 Soil Cement. A mix design for soil cement must be designed by a licensed Geotechnical Engineer in the state of Georgia and must be submitted to the Engineering Department for approval. Soil cement should be a minimum of 6" thick. The mix design should include forming pills of the proposed subgrade soils with different amounts of cement to determine an appropriate cement content to be used and to determine if the proposed soil materials are suitable or require blending/replacement. In-place soil-cement shall be cored, and the cores shall be measured for thickness and compression tested to determine if the required 3000 psi strength is obtained at 7 days. A minimum of 1 core per 500 feet of roadway in alternating lanes should be taken with no less than two (2) cores for each section of roadway. Individual core thicknesses should be no less than ½ inch below the required thickness with an overall average thickness at or above the specified value. Corrective work for cores below the thickness requirements or compressive strength will be required in accordance with GDOT Standard Specifications. 
5.5.5 Concrete Pavement. 
A.  Concrete pavement compressive strength shall be four thousand (4,000) psi at twenty-eight (28) days. Concrete test cylinders will be taken from each batch poured for every seven hundred fifty (750) feet of street-paving construction. These shall be tested according to ASTM C31-69 and C39-72 to ascertain the twenty-eight day compressive strength. 
B.  A concrete slump test (ASTM C143-74) will be conducted at the same time that the cylinders are made. The concrete shall not be accepted which has a slump value greater than 2 ½ inches. 
C.  Core samples shall be made at intervals of not less than five hundred (500) feet and not more than one thousand (1,000) feet of paving. A core sample report must be approved by the SDRC prior to final plat approval. 
5.5.6 Asphalt Pavement. 
A.  Placement of asphalt shall be inspected and approved by the SDRC as specified below. The paving contractor/developer is responsible for requesting such inspections at least three (3) days in advance, and placement of asphalt shall not be done until such inspections have been scheduled. 
B.  Core samples shall be taken of the asphalt at intervals of not less than three hundred (300) feet and not more than five hundred (500) feet. Samples shall be taken from the center of the travel lane and samples shall alternate between travel lanes. The thickness of the asphalt shall not be less than ¼" from the plan dimensions. A core sample report must be approved by the SDRC prior to final plat approval. 
5.5.7 Subdrains (Cross drains). Subdrains may be required at the SDRC's discretion depending on roadway and groundwater conditions on site. Refer to section 6.17 for technical criteria and design standards concerning subdrains. 
5.6   Design speed and grade.
Table 5.6.a. Design Speed and Grade 

 
5.7   Curb and gutter.
Concrete curbs and gutters shall be constructed with Portland Cement Concrete having a twenty-eight (28) day breaking strength of three thousand (3,000) psi. Slip form or machine curb and gutter shall have expansion material minimum of one-half (1/2") inch thick with a maximum spacing of one hundred (100') feet and abut a solid structure where one (1) day's pour abuts a previous day's pour. Construction joins 1/4 - 1/3 the depth of the gutter shall be sawed or tooled at a maximum spacing of ten (10) linear feet. Concrete curb and gutter shall meet GDOT Standard 9032B, modified to eighteen inches (18") for commercial/parking lots and twenty-four inches (24") for all local and collector roadways designed with curb and gutter. When a standard curb is used, it shall be a minimum of six inches (6") (GDOT Std. 9032B Type 2 curb) in height. Curb cuts shall also be in accordance with GDOT Std. 9032B, Details of Recessed Curb. Typical details for curb and gutter, as well as curb cuts, are illustrated in the attached detail drawings. For major arterial roadways, the design must meet all applicable GDOT standards. Design and spacing requirements for curb and gutter are included in section 6.7.1. 
5.8   Sight distance and alignment.
All driveways shall be located and streets aligned so as to provide at least the horizontal and vertical sight distances as listed below. All sight distances shall be determined by the methods found in the latest edition of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets (AASHTO). 
5.8.1 Horizontal Site Distance. Horizontal sight distance refers to the ability to detect objects in the roadway while negotiating a horizontal curve. The distance is measured from a point at which the height of the driver's eye is 3.50 feet above the roadway to a stationary object having a height of six (6) inches above the roadway. 
Table 5.8.a. Minimum Horizontal Site Distance 

 
5.8.2 Vertical Site Distance. Vertical site distance refers to the ability to detect an object in the roadway while negotiating the crest of a hill. The distance is measured the same as for horizontal curves. 
Table 5.8.b. Minimum Vertical Site Distance 

 
5.8.3 Minimum Horizontal Radii of Centerline Curvature. 
Table 5.8.c. Minimum Horizontal Radii 

 
5.8.4 Tangents. Between reverse curves there shall be not less than the following minimum tangents. 
Table 5.8.d. Minimum Tangents 

 
5.8.5 Super Elevation. The design of arterial and collector roadways may require the super-elevation of the travel surface on horizontal curves, as determined by design speed, in accordance with AASHTO Standards. The design and horizontal alignment for local streets serving residential areas should avoid the use of super-elevation where possible, as required by design speed. In all instances, the maximum super-elevation rates shall be in accordance with AASHTO and GDOT Standards. Under no circumstance is a curved street of any classification to be reverse super-elevated. 
5.8.6 Intersections. In approaches to intersections, there shall be a leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding two (2) percent for a distance of not less than fifty (50) feet from the nearest right-of-way of the intersecting street (refer to typical details). 
5.9   Minimum cul-de-sac specifications.
A.  Permanent cul-de-sacs shall be limited in length so that each cul-de-sac serves as street access for no more than twenty-five (25) lots. 
B.  Cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a right-of-way of not less than 100 feet. 
C.  Paving within the turnaround shall have an outside diameter of not less than eighty (80) feet. 
D.  Islands are prohibited in cul-de-sacs. 
E.  For typical cul-de-sac layout, refer to attached details. 
5.10   Acceleration and deceleration lanes.
Table 5.10.a. Minimum Deceleration Lane Design 

 
For any driveway or street located on a major thoroughfare, except driveways serving one (1) to five (5) single-family residences, a deceleration lane shall be provided. The minimum length for deceleration lanes at all new street locations shall be as shown above except that either the SDRC or the GDOT district traffic and safety engineer, as applicable, may specify longer or shorter deceleration lanes based on grade, distance from an intersection, design speed, etc. 
The Georgia DOT will determine the need for and design of acceleration lanes on state routes. 
The SDRC shall determine the need for and design specifications for acceleration lanes along county streets. 
Typical sections for the addition of deceleration and widening sections are included in the attached typical detail drawings. 
5.11   Turn lanes.
Turn lanes, left and right, shall be designed in accordance with the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). The developer/contractor shall be responsible for the installation of turn lanes and intersection improvements where a new roadway meets an existing paved roadway within the County. The developer/contractor shall resurface all lanes within the improvement area when turn lanes are required. 
5.12   Driveways.
5.12.1 Driveway Dimensions. Residential driveways shall have a maximum width of twenty-four (24) feet measured at the right-of-way line from back of curb to back of curb (or edge of pavement if there is no curb). 
Commercial, industrial, manufactured home park and multi-family development driveways shall have a maximum width of forty (40) feet measured at the right- of-way line (back of curb to back of curb or from edge of pavement if there is no curb). For those businesses with frequent or heavy freight traffic, the SDRC will approve driveway widths and radii in excess of forty feet on a case by case basis. 
Two way drives will be a minimum of twenty-four feet in width measured at the right-of-way line from back of curb to back of curb. 
5.12.2 Typical Driveway Details. For typical driveway details, refer to the attached typical details. 
5.13   Street resurfacing (if required).
A.  All work shall be in conformance with the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges, latest edition. 
B.  All weak areas shall be removed and repaired with proper full depth patches. All debris (soil, GAB, and asphalt) shall be removed and disposed of properly. 
C.  The surface to be overlaid shall be thoroughly cleaned and all debris removed. 
D.  A track coat of asphalt (AC-10 or AC-20) shall be applied to the entire surface to be overlaid. 
E.  The overlay thickness shall be 1 - 1 ½" inches of 9.5 mm SuperPave asphalt concrete. For lifts of 1 ½" inches or greater, 12.5 mm SuperPave asphalt concrete shall be used. The maximum lift thickness shall be 2" inches. 
F.  Prior to placing the overlay, a leveling course of 4.75 mm SuperPave asphalt concrete shall be used where necessary or as determined by the SDRC or Road Department. 
G.  The County will evaluate the existing pavement conditions and determine the overlay thickness using the methods in the Asphalt Institute's manual, Asphalt Overlays for Highway and Street Rehabilitation. For all streets other than residential, actual traffic counts will be obtained and coring, or other acceptable methods of obtaining the actual existing pavement thickness, will be utilized. In no case shall an overlay thickness be less than one (1) inch. 
H.  For typical street resurfacing and replacement and saw cuts, refer to the attached typical details. 
5.14   Street and traffic signs.
Developers shall be responsible for placing street signs and traffic signs in accordance with these regulations. Signs and posts shall be installed in accordance with the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and must meet clearance, height above pavement, and all other applicable regulations. All required signs shall be in place prior to the occupancy of any structure and must be inspected and approved by the SDRC prior to the acceptance of a roadway by the County. 
Sign posts shall be square tube with break-away support. Signs shall be Telespar (or approved equal) and meet the following criteria: 
• Square posts 
• 7/16" pre-punched holes on 1" centers 
• 14 Gauge 
• Steel with Pre-galv Plus coating 
• Corner bolted 
• Anchor a minimum of 36" 12-gauge tubing (1" - 2" left exposed above the surface) 
• Shall have the following dimensions (or as approved by SDRC): 
Table 4.14.a. Street Post Dimensions 

 
5.14.1 Street Name Signs. Major street name signs shall be installed above the intersecting local street name sign. All street name signs shall be mounted parallel or nearly parallel to the street and shall be visible on both sides. A street name sign shall be installed for every street at an intersection. 
Standard street name signs shall be extruded nine (9) inch blanks with six (6) inch letters. County road signs shall be white on green, and private road signs shall be white on blue. 
5.14.2 Traffic Signs. Traffic control devices to include signs, signals, street markings, etc., shall be installed by the developer. The type and location of traffic control devices shall be determined by the SDRC's Engineer based upon the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition. 
Stop signs shall be installed at every intersection. Stop signs shall be 30-inch unless at an intersection of 45 mph road or greater. In this case, a 36-inch stop sign is required. Speed limit signs shall be 24-inch by 30-inch. All other signs shall be in accordance with the MUTCD. 
5.15   Striping and pavement marking.
The contractor shall be responsible for the installation of pavement markings to include, at a minimum, centerline striping, edge of pavement striping, stop bars, raised pavement markers (turtles), words, directional arrows and chevrons (hatches). Additional pavement markings may be required at the SDRC Engineer's discretion. All pavement markings except centerline striping and edge of pavement striping shall be thermoplastic. Stop bars shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches, and words, chevrons, and directional arrow dimensions shall be in accordance with GDOT Standards (see GDOT details t01 through t19). 
5.16   Utility locations.
In order to promote uniformity in installation and more effective and less damaging maintenance, a uniform system for locating utilities is hereby established. The locations are noted in the typical details. Applicable utilities and their locations shall be noted on subdivision construction plans and as-built drawings. 
Detection tape for utilities may be required at the discretion of the SDRC. Detection tape shall be composed of a solid aluminum foil encased in a protective plastic jacket. Tapes shall be color coded in accordance with APWA color codes with the following legends: Water Systems, Safety Precaution Blue, "Caution: Water Line Buried Below". Colors may be solid or striped. Tape shall be permanently printed with no surface printing allowed. Tape width shall be minimum 2-inches when buried less than 10-inches below the surface. Tape width shall be minimum 3-inches when buried greater than 10-inches and less than 20-inches. Detection tape shall be equal to Lineguard Type III Detectable or Allen Systems Detectatape Wire. In addition, prior to backfill of trench the Contractor shall furnish and install 14 gauge coated copper wire. The wire shall be installed along the pipe during the backfill operation. Wire shall be brought up at each hydrant. 
5.17   Sidewalks (if applicable).
A.  Sidewalks are required for all developments on parcels which connect to an existing sidewalk system (a neighboring parcel has a pre-existing sidewalk). In this case, the sidewalk will be carried across/through the development, aligning to the existing sidewalk system. 
B.  Sidewalks shall be five (5) feet wide and shall be designed in accordance to all applicable American Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. 
[C].  Sidewalks shall be constructed only on individual lots that have been permitted for construction. 
[D].  For typical sidewalk cross-sections, refer to the attached typical details. 
5.18   Landscape islands/traffic dividers (if applicable).
In order to promote uniformity in the configuration and construction of landscape islands/traffic dividers ("islands/dividers") within the right-of-way at entrances to residential, commercial, industrial or institutional developments, a uniform standard is hereby established. 
A.  Where an island/divider is planned, the right-of-way shall be a minimum eighty (80) feet in width at the connecting public road. The right-of-way shall remain eighty (80) feet in width for a distance of 150 feet at which point the right-of-way will taper to the appropriate right-of-way width as required in Section 5.3. 
B.  The island/divider shall be delineated with curb and gutter regardless of whether curb and gutter is required in the remainder of the development. 
C.  The island/divider shall be at least 100 feet long and shall not be more than sixteen (16) feet in width from the back of curb to back of curb with a sixteen (16) foot travel lane on each side of the island/divider. 
D.  No signs or structures shall be allowed in the island/divider. No trees or plants shall be placed in the island/divider that will block a person's view of oncoming traffic travelling within the connecting roadway. Any object encroaching into the right-of- way or obstructing the view of oncoming traffic shall be removed. 
Sec. 6. - Stormwater design standards and specifications. 
6.1   General requirements.
An adequate drainage system, separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and including any necessary ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water for all applicable land developments. Sizing and location of all drainage structures shall be the responsibility of a qualified Georgia registered design professional. The County shall require the use of on-site control methods such as retention or detention to mitigate the stormwater and drainage impacts of the proposed land developments. The SDRC shall not approve any preliminary plat of a subdivision that does not make adequate provisions for storm and flood water runoff channels or basins as determined by the SDRC's Engineer. 
No building permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or no development permit shall be issued for the development of land, if an adequate system of drainage and stormwater management is not present throughout the land to be developed. 
For development or redevelopment projects, on-site control methods, such as retention or detention, shall be provided for the ENTIRE site when, 
A.  The amount of impervious surface is 5,000 square feet or more, regardless of whether the impervious surface is new or being replaced. 
B.  When the land disturbance activity associated with the proposed development/redevelopment is 1 acre or more. 
6.2   Method of design and capacity.
Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM), latest edition, and the County Stormwater Design Standards as outlined below. Copies of all design computations shall be submitted along with required plans. 
Drainage improvements shall consider and accommodate, as necessary, potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area as well as from within the site. The drainage improvements shall be designed to prevent effects on the upstream drainage system and increases in runoff to downstream systems for each of the design storms to the extent practicable. 
6.3   Runoff computation.
The designer should consult Table 2.1.1-2 in the GSMM when deciding which hydrologic method to utilize. The following general applications should be applied: 
A.  For all drainage areas less than 25 acres, the Rational Method shall be used. 
B.  For all drainage areas greater than 25 acres, the SCS method or similar Unit Hydrograph Method shall be used. Computer methods with routing capability may also be used. 
6.4   Design frequency.
A.  The 100-year average return frequency storm shall be used for the design of all onsite storm water conveyance systems. 
B.  The 100-year average return frequency storm shall be used for all offsite drainage which enters the site and/or is conveyed through the site by the storm system. 
C.  Detention systems shall be designed to meet standards 3, 4 and 5 of the GSMM. 
6.5   Rainfall estimation.
A.  For the Rational method, Georgia Soil Conservation rainfall intensities shall be used. 
B.  For the SCS method, the 24-hour rainfall depths as shown in the TR-55 Manual shall be used. 
6.6   Runoff coefficients/Curve numbers.
A.  For the Rational method, standard runoff coefficients shall be used. 
B.  For the SCS method, the curve numbers as shown in the TR-55 Manual shall be used. 
6.7   Pre-development site conditions.
A.  For redevelopment sites, all existing impervious areas shall be treated as unimproved (i.e. forested) in the pre-development analysis. 
For new development sites, existing conditions shall be defined as the conditions of the site at the time of application for a Land Disturbance Permit. 
6.8   Inlet design.
6.8.1 Spread Limits. 
A.  The maximum allowable spread in the roadway shall be based on the 2-year design storm and shall be limited to no more than six (6) feet of spread in the roadway gutter. Inlets shall be located along the roadway at sufficient intervals to intercept flows before they exceed the maximum spread limit. In no instance shall inlet spacing exceed three hundred (300) feet. 
B.  The formulas for gutter flow shall be used to determine the spread in the roadway. 
C.  At sag locations, the roadway shall have a minimum of 0.5% longitudinal slope within fifty (50) feet of the level point in the sag. For large flows, flanking inlets may be required on either side of the low point to prevent exceeding the spread limit. 
6.8.2 Capture Efficiency. 
A.  For the 10-year design storm, the capture efficiency for inlets on grade shall be no less than 90%, and the capture efficiency for inlets at sump locations shall be 100%. 
B.  At sump locations, the capacity of the inlet shall be determined using the weir equation unless precast boxes with special inlets are used, which may be designed with the orifice equation. The minimum curb transition/apron length on either side of the basin shall be six (6) feet for inlets open on three (3) sides. 
C.  Inlets shall not be allowed in the radius section at intersections, except where flows are very small, road grades are very flat, or the entire intersection is in a sag condition. 
D.  Within a piped drainage system, an adequate number of manholes or inlets shall be constructed to provide for cleaning and maintenance of the stormwater system. In no instance shall spacing exceed three hundred (300) feet between structures. 
6.8.3 Weir Opening Height. For inlets, the minimum allowable weir opening height shall be four (4) inches and the maximum allowable weir opening height shall be eight (8) inches. Trash racks shall be used as necessary or as required by the SDRC. 
6.9   Pipe design.
A.  The Manning equation shall be used for pipe design, assuming pipe flowing full. 
B.  The orifice equation shall be used to check the required headwater depths at all catch basins, junction boxes or pipe inlets along the system to predict and prevent surcharge conditions. 
C.  Alternatively, a computer model using the Standard Step method or other approved energy-based method may be used to compute the hydraulic profile. 
D.  For complex systems, the SDRC may require computation of the hydraulic profile. 
E.  Minimum pipe size shall be 15" in diameter when using curb and gutter. A minimum of 18" diameter pipes are required for all ditch sections (i.e. driveway pipes), except for sock drain systems. 
F.  The maximum slope for all drainage pipe shall be 10%. In cases where steep slopes are inevitable, the design professional should use concrete anchors or other factory recommended anchor systems. Details shall be provided on the construction plans. 
G.  In the case, due to cover restrictions, dual pipes (double barrel) must be used, headwalls will be required. No more than two (2) pipes will be allowed at a crossing if a larger pipe or structure cannot be installed due to cover restrictions. 
6.10   Detention ponds.
Detention ponds, either dry or with permanent pool, shall be designed in accordance with the GSMM to accommodate Minimum Standards 3, 4, and 5 of the GSMM, including Stream Channel Protection for the 1-year, 24-hr storm event, Overbank Flood Protection for the 2- through 25-year storm events and Extreme Flood Protection for the 100-year storm event. Ponds shall be designed to reduce the post-development peak flows of the 1- through 100-year storm events to the pre-development rates. An emergency spill way shall be provided to accommodate a storm event exceeding the 100-year storm. 
Inlet pipes shall be placed so that the invert of the pipe is above the permanent pool elevation. Riprap, or other energy dissipation methods, should be utilized at the end of an outlet to prevent scouring and erosion. 
Outlet structures shall be designed to prevent clogging in accordance with the GSMM. 
An adequate maintenance access easement of twenty (20) feet must be provided around the entire perimeter of a detention pond. The access easement shall be sloped toward the pond with a slope no less than 1% and no greater than 5%. 
The maximum depth of a pond shall be 10 feet. 
6.10.1 Fences. 
A fence shall be placed around the perimeter of all detention ponds to prevent unauthorized entry. Fences shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height and shall be chain-link. Barbed wire use is prohibited. 
At least one access gate shall be provided for the entry of maintenance vehicles. Gates shall be placed to allow for easy access, and to avoid obstacles or destruction of property or other utilities (i.e. trees, power poles and lines, hydrants, sidewalks, other structures, etc.). 
6.11   Outfall structure design.
Rip-rap shall be installed around the top and sides of all outfall pipes. On steep slopes, the last joint of pipe on a plain end outlet shall be a full eight (8) foot joint. A precast headwall or an approved reinforced concrete headwall is required for all pipe outfalls thirty-six (36") inches and over. Where a drainage outfall is an substantial distance above the bottom of a stream or ditch into which it empties, a junction box with a rip- rapped stub will be required. 
6.12   Energy dissipation.
A.  Energy dissipation measures shall be installed at all pipe outlets to prevent downstream channel erosion. Rip-rap aprons shall be designed in accordance with Georgia Stormwater Management Manual guidelines for Storm Drain Outlet Protection or other approved method. 
B.  Precast manhole sections may be adapted for use as energy dissipaters at outfalls. The energy dissipater shall be designed so as not to adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the system. 
C.  Grouted rip-rap may be used in high velocity conditions or where safeguarding of the material is needed. The SDRC may require rip-rap to be grouted on steep slopes and/or high velocity conditions or when stabilization of the rip-rap is needed. 
6.13   Roadway culvert design.
A.  Roadway culverts refer to structures installed under the roadway which convey flows from existing creeks, live streams, or drainage channels that originate upstream of the site and carry offsite flows through the site. 
B.  The design of all roadway culverts shall comply with GDOT and FEMA guidelines. 
C.  The following table shall be used for the design of all roadway culverts. 
Table 6.12.a. Culvert Design 

 
D.  The permanent impoundment of water on the upstream side of the culvert (i.e., dams) is not permitted. 
6.14   Open channel design.
A.  Open channels refer to all overland diversions, existing and proposed, which convey storm flows through the site. 
B.  Grassed channels - where steep slopes, highly erosive soils, or other conditions prevent the proper establishment of grass by seeding & mulching, sod or manufactured erosion control mats will be required. Where grassing is required, the work will not be accepted until grass is well established as determined by the SDRC. 
C.  For all open channels, which cross or border on building lots, and where the 100- year flow exceeds 50 CFS, the 100-year flood line shall be computed and the lowest floor elevations shall be set at least two (2) feet above the flood elevation. 
6.15   Pipe construction materials.
A.  Design Loading - At a minimum, all pipe materials shall be capable of supporting H-20 loading under minimum cover. All HDPE pipe shall also be of sufficient thickness to meet the design load requirements for the proposed cover height. Greater design loadings shall apply to industrial, commercial, or special situations as appropriate. 
B.  Minimum Cover - Two (2) feet minimum cover shall be required for all pipe materials in the right-of-way, measured from the outside top of the pipe to the finished subgrade at the lowest point. Minimum cover requirements may be reduced based on class of pipe being utilized only if extenuating circumstances exist. In these cases, Class V RCP will be required. 
C.  Bedding - Minimum bedding standards for High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE) pipe shall be such that stone bedding (i.e. No. 57 stone) shall be placed to half of the pipe diameter for all depths greater than four feet and/or in accordance with manufacturer's specifications, whichever is greater. 
D.  Storm Drain - All storm drain pipes located under roadways that are accepted by the County for long-term maintenance, shall be constructed of reinforced concrete pipe (RCP - Class 3 or better) meeting Georgia Department of Transportation Standards. All longitudinal storm drain pipes shall be reinforced concrete pipe (RCP - Class 3 or better) or High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE). All pipes shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches and must be designed and installed with adequate cover in accordance with manufacturer's specifications. In situations where the SDRC has reason to suspect that a pipe system may have not been installed properly, the SDRC may require at their discretion, video inspections of pipe systems to be provided at the Owner's expense prior to acceptance of the system. 
E.  Side Drains - All side drain pipes (driveway pipes) located within the public right-of- way or dedicated County easements that are accepted by the County for long-term maintenance, shall be constructed of HDPE or reinforced concrete pipe (RCP - Class 3 or better) meeting Georgia Department of Transportation Standards. The minimum diameter of all pipes shall be 18 inches and shall meet the standards set forth in section 6.15.C above. 
F.  All other pipe systems not within the public right-of-way shall be constructed of reinforced concrete pipe (RCP - Class 3 or better) or HDPE meeting Georgia Department of Transportation Standards. In the case where HDPE pipe originating from private property is joined to RCP, in the right-of-way, a transition structure, approved by the SDRC, must be provided at the right-of-way line by the Owner. 
All pipes must have a minimum diameter of 15 inches and must be designed and installed with adequate cover in accordance with manufacturer's specifications. The minimum cover for pipes, which run along individual lot property lines in residential developments, shall be increased to three feet to account for the potential for damage due to residential fence construction. 
In situations where the SDRC has reason to suspect that a pipe system may have not been installed properly, the SDRC may require at their discretion, video inspections of pipe systems to be provided at the Owner's expense prior to acceptance of the system. 
6.16   Inlets and manhole construction.
A.  Inlets and manholes shall be constructed in accordance with GDOT Standard Specifications. 
B.  All structures deeper than four (4) feet must be constructed with steps. 
C.  The minimum drop from the edge of the roadway to the throat of the inlet shall be six (6) inches for the standard two foot (2') offset from the road. Greater offsets shall require greater drops to achieve the desired 25% cross-slope for the apron. 
6.17   Subsurface drainage (if applicable).
Subdrains may be required at the SDRC's discretion depending on roadway and groundwater conditions on site. 
A.  Subdrains shall be constructed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
B.  Subdrains shall be installed within 2 1/2' of the back of the curb and shall be properly connected to a permanent drainage structure such as a catch basin, or routed to a suitable location off the right-of-way. 
C.  All subdrains shall have a minimum of two (2) feet of cover. 
D.  Subdrains shall be installed prior to the base course. 
E.  Subdrains are required on both sides of the street where mucking out and backfilling have been done, or where the water table is within two (2) feet of the road centerline elevation. 
F.  Subdrains must be inspected and approved during installation. 
6.18   Miscellaneous drainage requirements.
A.  The required roadway and developed land drainage shall be directed to a drainage channel within the immediate drainage basin provided the receiving channel has existing sufficient capacity or is improved to provide sufficient capacity for conveyance of the outfall flows. Under extenuating circumstances where this is not feasible, the design engineer shall document a good faith effort of the attempts made to provide the required information to the SDRC in compliance with the above provisions. 
B.  Damming Structures - No dams or structures serving as dams to impound water, or any portion of such a structure shall be allowed in the right-of-way. This further means that no County road shall pass over such a structure without approval from the appropriate agencies. 
C.  Drainage Outfall into a Pond or Lake - Where a drainage outfall discharges into a pond or lake, rip rap shall be placed under and around the end joint as needed and on slopes at the end of the pipe. The outfall invert elevation must be above the normal pool elevation of the lake. 
D.  Drainage Outfall into a Stream or Ditch - Where a drainage outlet is a substantial distance above the bottom of a stream or ditch into which it empties, a drop structure (junction box) with a stub or other approved outfall design must be used. In all other instances, the outfall will be required to have rip rap placed under and around the end joint as needed and on slopes at the end of the pipe. All discharge pipes 36" and over shall have a precast headwall or site-built reinforced concrete or masonry headwall. 
E.  Stabilization of Open Channels - All open channels used for conveyance of roadway drainage shall be properly stabilized to prevent erosion, and shall require rip rap at all direction changes exceeding 25 degrees or as directed by the SDRC. 
F.  Drainage Easements - Drainage easements of the following widths shall be provided and dedicated for maintenance and public use: 
Table 6.17.a. Drainage Easements 

 
1.  For minor ditches with open channel flow, the required easement width shall be determined from the equivalent pipe size required to carry the flow and the easement width (listed above) corresponding to that calculated pipe size. 
2.  For major ditches or channels, the easement width shall be centered on the ditch or channel and be equal to the maximum top width of the ditch plus twenty (20) feet. 
6.19   Rip rap.
Stone shall be hard quarry, fieldstone or recycled concrete (see Section 6.20 below) which will withstand exposure to water and weathering. Stone shall vary in size from 6" minimum to 24" maximum, and the gradation shall be such that approximately 60% of the rip-rap is 10" in size. All rip-rap shall be hand placed or satisfactorily machine placed. 
6.20   Crushed concrete.
Crushed, recycled concrete may be used in place of stone riprap. The concrete shall be clean and free of foreign materials, reinforcing wire and/or steel. Gradation and size shall meet the requirements of traditional riprap. 
6.21   Location.
Drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, and shall be constructed in accordance with the GSMM and these standards and specifications. Catch basins shall be located at low points of streets. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual, unobstructed easements at least twenty (20) feet in width for drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road right-of-way and with satisfactory access to the road. 
6.22   Discharge.
Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot or land development site to adjacent lots, land development sites, or vacant properties. Storm water shall not be discharged directly to streams, lakes, rivers, tidal waters or any other environmentally sensitive area. It shall be directed toward natural overland drainages. If water must be discharged to a stream, or other water body the water quality flowing into the stream must meet or exceed the water quality in the receiving waters. The water quantity flowing into the stream must be evaluated to ensure the stream channel can accommodate the increased flows and not disrupt or degrade the ecology of the water body. 
It shall be County policy that an increase in the elevation of flooding on an adjacent property(s) shall be unacceptable. In situations where flood elevations on an adjacent property will be increased due to development and/or construction of a stormwater management system/facility, the required conveyance level of service may be increased by the SDRC to result in no impact to the adjacent property(s). This requirement may be waived at the SDRC's discretion if the adjacent property owner(s) provides a permanent drainage easement between the two property owners. The easement shall provide that the owner of the impacted property acknowledges that an increase in flood elevations will occur on their property as a result of the proposed development. Additionally, the easement shall include at a minimum a map showing the extent of the pre-development and post-development 100-year floodplains. The easement must be recorded with the County as an attachment to the affected property's land deed and shall be binding on all future property owners. 
6.23   Grading and site drainage.
Lots or land development sites shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and drainage for individual lots or land development sites shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Buildings and parking lots shall be appropriately drained to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets. All disturbed or graded ground areas of a building site not used for buildings or open storage areas shall be appropriately stabilized and grassed or covered with plants or landscaping materials. 
6.24   Stormwater management plan report.
All development projects must submit a stormwater management plan report outlining the hydrologic and hydraulic impacts of the site on the stormwater system. At a minimum, this report must include the following sections: 
• Certification by a Qualified Registered Design Professional 
• Project Narrative 
• Existing Conditions Hydrologic Analysis 
• Post-Development Hydrologic Analysis 
• Stormwater Management System Design 
• Downstream Analysis 
• Erosion & Sedimentation Control Plan 
• Planting Plan (if applicable) 
• Operations & Maintenance Plan 
The following subsections outline the requirements for each of the elements outlined above. 
6.24.1 Professional Certification. Each report should begin with the following statement and be signed and sealed by the professional who prepared the report: "I, (Name of Professional), a Registered (Professional Engineer / Land Surveyor/other qualified design professional) in the State of Georgia, hereby certify that the grading and drainage plans for the project known as (Project Name), lying in Land Lot ( ____________ ), of the ( ____________ ) District, located at (address), City of Tifton, Georgia, and identified on tax map ( ____________ ) as parcel ( ____________ ), have been prepared under my supervision, and, state that in my opinion, the construction of said project will not produce storm drainage conditions that will cause damage or adversely affect the surrounding properties. This (Day) day of (Month), (Year)." 
6.24.2 Project Narrative. A brief narrative should be provided with the report outlining the project. 
6.24.3 Existing Conditions Hydrologic Analysis. The existing conditions hydrologic analysis should provide the reviewer with a comprehensive evaluation of the site conditions prior to development of the project. 
The designer should provide the following information with the Existing Conditions Hydrologic Analysis element of the report: 
A.  Existing Conditions Narrative 
• A written description of the existing conditions found at the site 
• Analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site 
• Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
B.  Existing Conditions Map 
An existing conditions map should be provided with the report including but not limited to the following: 
• Topography (2-ft. or less contour interval) of existing site conditions. 
• Perennial/intermittent streams, wetlands, lakes and other surface water and water resources features. 
• Natural Resources Inventory and Site Fingerprinting data per the procedures outlined in Section 1.0 of the Green Growth Guidelines (as necessary). 
• Drainage basin and sub-basin delineations. 
• Drainage basin and sub-basin delineations for each contributing drainage area upstream of the project site on an appropriate map. 
• Existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities. 
• Direction of flow and discharge points from the site including sheet flow areas. 
• Any area of significant depression storage. 
• Federal, State and local buffers and conservation areas. 
The map should provide a clear understanding of the drainage patterns present throughout the site as well as drainage onto the site from upstream/adjacent areas. 
C.  Existing Conditions Information 
Pertinent information should be included in the report in table format that will enable the reviewer to understand how various parameters were applied in existing conditions analysis. Additionally, tables should be included documenting the results of the modeling. 
• A table listing the acreage, soil types and land cover characteristics for each sub-basin. 
• A table listing the total acreage, composite curve number and time of concentration for each sub-basin. 
• A table listing the peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes from each sub-basin. 
• A table listing the peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each drainage area upstream of the project site. 
• A table listing the peak runoff rates and maximum water surface elevations for all detention facilities studied as part of the existing conditions analysis. 
D.  Existing Conditions Model Diagram 
A diagram of the hydrologic model for the existing site should be provided with the report showing each flow node. 
6.24.4 Post-Development Hydrologic Analysis. The proposed conditions hydrologic analysis should provide the reviewer with a comprehensive evaluation of the site conditions following development of the project. The designer should provide the following information with this element of the report: 
A.  Proposed Conditions Narrative 
A written description of the proposed site conditions after construction should be provided. The narrative should describe the pertinent information and assumptions as to how the proposed conditions were analyzed by the designer. 
B.  Proposed Conditions Map 
A proposed conditions map should be provided with the report including but not limited to following: 
• Topography (2-ft or less contour interval) of proposed site conditions. 
• Perennial/intermittent streams, wetlands, lakes and other surface water features. 
• Drainage basin delineations showing the location of each drainage sub- basin. 
• Proposed stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities. 
• Direction of flow and discharge points from the site including sheet flow areas. 
• Location and boundaries of proposed natural resources feature protection areas. 
• The map should provide an overview of the various drainage patterns proposed for the site as well as drainage onto the site from upstream areas. 
C.  Proposed Conditions Tables 
Tables should be included in the report that will allow the reviewer to understand how the applicable parameters were developed and utilized in modeling the proposed conditions for the site. Additionally, tables should be included documenting the results of the modeling. 
• A table listing the acreage, soil types and land cover characteristics for each sub-basin. 
• A table listing the total acreage, composite curve number and time of concentration for each sub-basin. 
• A table listing the peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes from each sub-basin. 
• A table listing the peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each drainage area upstream of the project site. 
• A table listing the peak runoff rates and maximum water surface elevations for all detention facilities studied as part of the proposed conditions analysis. 
D.  Proposed Conditions Model Diagram 
A diagram of the hydrologic model for the proposed site should be provided with the report showing each flow node. 
6.25   Stormwater management system design.
The stormwater management system design should provide the reviewer with a comprehensive description of the proposed stormwater management system components on site. The designer should provide the following information in the report: 
6.25.1 Stormwater Management System Map. 
• The stormwater management system map should document the various components of the stormwater runoff system for the site. 
• Location of all structural and non-structural stormwater controls 
• Location of all existing stormwater controls to remain after development 
• Location of all proposed stormwater controls 
• Location of all proposed impoundment type controls (i.e. detention ponds, stormwater ponds, stormwater wetlands, etc.) 
• Location of all natural resource areas that will be incorporated into the stormwater management plan for the site. 
• Location of all conveyance structures 
• All impoundment type controls should be labeled with the following information as a minimum: maximum water surface elevations; depth and storage volumes for the design storm(s); and depth of maximum water surface if the design storm event is exceeded (i.e. top of dam) as well as volume calculations. 
• All inlets to conveyance structures should be labeled with the following information: maximum design water surface and maximum potential water surface elevations. 
• All pipes should be labeled with the following: length, diameter, material of construction and slope. 
• Map showing all contributing drainage areas/sub-basin delineations. 
• Soils Map, NWI Map (if necessary), USGS Quad Map, FEMA Map. 
• Geotechnical information from the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) for the site indicating soil types, seasonal high ground water, and percolation rates (if necessary). 
6.25.2 Narratives. The following narrative information should be provided: 
• Narrative describing that the proper structural stormwater controls have been selected for the site conditions. 
• Design calculations and elevations for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales, areas of overland flow, etc. 
• Design calculations and elevations for all structural water quality controls to be utilized for water quality improvement. 
• Design calculations showing that the design meets the applicable requirements as set forth herein. 
• Type of storm routing software utilized for design (if applicable). 
6.25.3 Downstream Analysis. The downstream analysis should provide the reader with a comprehensive picture of the downstream areas and their capacity to accommodate stormwater runoff from the proposed development. 
• Maps 
a.  Drainage basin delineations showing the point at which the contributing area of the project represents 10% of the total drainage basin area as defined in Section 2.1.9.2 of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (latest edition). 
b.  Identify culverts, channels and other structural stormwater controls that the stormwater runoff from the site will eventually pass through prior to the 10% point as identified above. 
• Narratives 
a.  Provide a narrative with associated calculations to how the demonstrate was performed and to show that no adverse impacts will occur after construction of the proposed site. 
6.25.4 Planting Plan. A planting plan should be included in the report for all water quality controls that utilize vegetation as a pollutant removal method. 
6.25.5 Operations & Maintenance Plan. A narrative of what maintenance tasks will be required for the stormwater controls specified for the site as well as the responsible party(s). The designer should consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (latest edition) for additional insight on this issue. 

















APPENDIX 2. - FATS, OIL AND GREASE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 

Sec. 1. - Purpose. 
The Purpose for this program is to minimize the introduction of Fats, Oil, Grease and Grit from food service facilities, repair shops and carwashes into the city of Tifton's wastewater collection system. The main components of the program are the proper sizing, installation, and maintenance of grease interceptors, sand/grit separators and oil/water separators. In order to ensure efficient sewage treatment, protect the sanitary sewer system and to prevent sanitary sewer system overflows, the Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department has developed a Fats, Oil and Grease Management Program. 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this document, have the meaning indicated in this section. 
a.  City. The City of Tifton 
b.  Domestic Water. Wastewater from sanitary fixtures such as toilets and urinals. 
c.  Food Service Facility. Any facility, which cuts, cooks, bakes, prepares, or serves food, or which disposed of food related wastes. 
d.  Garbage Grinder. A device that shreds or grinds up solid or semisolid waste materials into smaller portions for discharge into the sanitary sewer. 
e.  Grease. A material composed primarily of fats, oil and grease from animal or vegetable sources. The terms fats, oil and grease shall be deemed as Grease by definition. Grease may also include petroleum-based products. 
f.  Hauler or Transporter. One who transfers waste from the site of a user to an approved site for disposal for treatment. The hauler is responsible for assuring that all Federal, State and local regulations are followed regarding waste transport. 
g.  Interceptor or Separator or Trap. A device so constructed as to separate, trap and hold fats, oil, grease, sand and grit substances from the wastewater discharge by a facility to prevent these substances from entering the sanitary sewer. 
h.  "Under-Sink" or Inline Grease Trap. A device placed under or in close proximity to sinks or other facilities likely to discharge grease in an attempt to separate, trap or hold oil, and grease substances to prevent their entry into the sanitary sewer system. 
i.  User. A source of discharge to the sanitary sewer of City of Tifton. 
j.  Waste or Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried domestic or industrial wastes form dwellings, commercial establishments, industrial facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, contributed to the sanitary sewer system. 
Sec. 3. - General criteria. 
a.  Installation Requirements for New food Service Facilities - All proposed or newly remodeled food service facilities connected to the City of Tifton's Sanitary Sewer System shall be required to install an approved properly operated and maintained grease interceptor. All interceptor units shall be installed outdoors of the Food Service Facility building unless the user can demonstrate to the City of Tifton that an outdoor interceptor would not be feasible. All interceptor units shall be of the type and capacity approved by the City of Tifton. 
b.  Requirements for Existing Food Service Facilities - All existing food service facilities connected to the City of Tifton's Sanitary Sewer System are expected to conduct their operations in such a manner that grease is captured on the user's premises and then properly disposed. Existing Food Service Faculties will be handled under the City of Tifton's Fats, Oil and Grease Management Program in the following manner: 
i.  City of Tifton will periodically inspect each Food Service Facilities on an as-needed basis to assure that each facility is complying with the intent of the Grease Management Program. The as needed inspection shall be determined by the Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department. 
ii.  Each Food Service Facility in the Vicinity of any problem areas will be inspected. The facilities' grease control practices and the adequacy of their grease control interceptor/equipment will be assessed. The inspections will typically result in one of the following actions: 
1.  Facilities equipped with an appropriate and adequately sized grease interceptor who are meeting the intent of the Grease Management Program through effective grease control practices will be commended for their compliance. 
2.  After written notice and an opportunity to defend, facilities not in compliance shall be required to develop and submit, to the City of Tifton, a proposed plan designed to achieve compliance through improved housekeeping and/or increased maintenance and pumping of the existing grease interceptor/equipment. 
3.  Facilities that are not successful in achieving compliance with the intent of the Grease Management Program through improved housekeeping and increased maintenance and pumping of the existing grease interceptor/equipment will be required to install the necessary interceptor/equipment to bring the facility into compliance. 
c.  Prohibited Discharges - Domestic Wastewater shall not be discharged to the grease interceptor unless specifically approved, in writing, by the City of Tifton. 
d.  Floor Drains - Only floor drains which discharge or have the potential to discharge grease shall be connected to a grease interceptor. 
e.  Garbage Grinders - food grinders shall not be connected to a grease interceptor 
f.  Location - Each grease interceptor shall be installed and connected so that it is easily accessible for inspection, cleaning and removal of the interceptor grease at anytime. Grease interceptors required under this management program shall be installed outdoors of the food service facility on the users premises and constructed in such a manner so as to exclude the entrance of dirt, landscaping, surface water and storm water. The best location is in an area outside of an exterior wall, but upstream from the domestic wastewater drain line(s). A grease interceptor may not be installed inside any part of a building unless approved in writing by the City of Tifton. The user bears the burden of demonstrating that an outdoor grease interceptor is not feasible. 
Sec. 4. - Design criteria. 
Note: a copy of the design has been attached to this document as appendix A 
a.  Construction of Interceptors - Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the city plumbing standards and outdoor units shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention. All alternative grease removal devices or technologies shall be subject to the written approval of City of Tifton. Such approval shall be based on demonstrated removal efficiencies of the proposed technology. 
b.  Access to interceptor - Outdoor grease interceptors shall be provided with two (2) manholes terminating 1-inch above finished grade with cast iron frame and cover. All grease interceptors shall be designed and installed to allow for complete access for inspection and maintenance for inner chamber(s) as well as viewing and sampling of wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
c.  Load-Bearing Capacity - In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the grease interceptor shall be designed to have adequate load-bearing capacity (example: vehicular traffic in parking or driving areas). 
d.  Inlet and Outlet Piping - Wastewater discharge to the grease interceptor shall enter only through the inlet pipe of the interceptor. The inlet pipe shall extend below liquid level and discharge 18 to 22 inches from bottom of interceptor. The outlet pipe consist of a polylok PL625 outlet filter with pipe bracing extended to the interceptor floor and a tee branch installed 18 to 22 inches from bottom of interceptor. Each grease interceptor shall have only one inlet and one outlet pipe. 
e.  Interceptor Sizing - 
i.  Outdoor grease interceptors shall not have a capacity of less than 1,000 gallons nor exceed a capacity of 3,000 gallons. No matter what the calculated capacity using the following formulas, the minimum interceptor size shall be 1,000 gallons. If the calculated capacity using the formula exceeds 3,000 gallons, then multiple units in series shall be installed. The size of a grease interceptor shall be approximated by the following method. 
1.  Restaurants: 
(S) × (GS) × (HR) × (LF) = Interceptor capacity, where 
(S) = Number of Seats in Dining Area. 
(GS) = Gallons of Wastewater per Seat. (25 gallons/seat) 
(HR) = Number of Hours Open. 
(LF) = Loading Factor: 
1.25 interstate freeways 
1.0 other freeway 
1.0 recreational area 
0.89 main highways 
0.5 other highways 
2.  Hospitals, Nursing Homes, other commercial kitchens with varied seating capacity: 
(M) × (GM) × (LF) = Capacity in gallons, where 
(M) = Meals per day 
(GM)= Gallons of wastewater per meal (5 gallons/Meal) 
(LF) = Loading Factor 
1.0 With dishwasher 
0.5 Without dishwasher 
ii.  Under-sink or in-line grease interceptors shall meet Plumbing and Drainage Institute Standards PDI-G101: Grease interceptor designs represent minimum standards for normal usage. Installations with heavier usage require more stringent measures for which the user is responsible and shall pay the cost to provide additional measures if required by the City of Tifton. City of Tifton reserves the right to evaluate interceptor sizing on an individual basis for facilities with special conditions, such as highly variable flows, high levels of grease discharge or other unusual situations that are not adequately addressed by the formula. All under-sink or in-line grease interceptors shall include; a flow control device, removable baffle assembly and cross bar, deep seal trap covered by lid, securing bolt(s). Unit shall be installed so that at all times it is easily accessed for inspection and cleaning. 
Sec. 5. - Grease interceptor maintenance. 
a.  Pumping - All grease interceptors shall be maintained by the user at the user's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater and bottom sludge's and solids. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the interceptor form which the waste was removed or any other grease interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be disposed, is strictly prohibited. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to inspect the grease interceptor during the pumping or maintenance procedure to ensure that the cleaning is done properly and that all fittings inside the interceptor are in working condition. 
b.  Pumping Frequency - 
i.  Outdoor grease interceptors must be pumped out completely a minimum of once every three months. 
ii.  Under-sink or in-line grease interceptors must be pumped out completely a minimum of once every month. 
iii.  Sand/Grit interceptors shall be cleaned out completely of all contents a minimum of once per year to prevent the carryover of sand, grit and debris into the sanitary sewer system. 
iv.  Oil/water interceptors shall be cleaned out every six (6) months to prevent the carryover of petroleum products into the sanitary sewer system. 
v.  Grease interceptors may need to be pumped more frequently as needed to prevent the carryover of grease into the sanitary sewer system. Pumping frequency may be extended past the minimum period if it can be demonstrated by the user and approved by the City of Tifton. 
c.  Pump Out Order - When the oil and grease concentrations exceed the City of Tifton's maximum discharge limits and /or the combined depth of bottom and top solids exceeds 33% of the total depth of the trap, City of Tifton will issue a Pump out Order to the user. The user shall have ten (10) calendar days from the date of the letter to comply. Where an emergency exists, a written or verbal warning shall be give to the user, and the user will have 24 hours to comply. 
d.  Disposal of Interceptor Pumped Material - All waste removed from each grease interceptor shall be recorded on a proper manifest form. (see appendices) Also, all waste removed from each grease interceptor must be disposed at a facility approved to received such waste in accordance with the provisions of this program. This manifest will require signatures from the originator, transporter and disposer in order to maintain and establish accountability. The approved manifest is a multi copy form. In no way shall the pumped material be returned to any private or public portion of the sanitary sewer system. 
i.  The originator shall: 
1.  Sign the manifest form and maintain such record on premises for a period of three (3) years. 
2.  Upon receipt of the completed copy of the manifest from the transporter, the originator must provide a copy of the manifest within fifteen (15) days to the Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department. A manifest is considered completed after the commercial waste is delivered and disposed of at the commercial waste disposal or processing facility and the manifest has been signed and completed by the disposal or processing facility. 
3.  Keep a copy of all manifests for a period of three (3) years on site and shall make available for inspection by the Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department Grease Trap Coordinator. 
4.  Report any spills to the Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department upon becoming aware of a spill that could impact any surrounding areas such as storm drains, adjacent streams or ground surface where the transporter has removed waste from the facility's grease interceptor system. Failure to notify the Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department of a spill will constitute a violation and fines may be added to the commercial waste originator as well as the transporter. 
ii.  The Transporter Shall: 
1.  Utilize a manifest for each location being serviced. 
2.  A Transporter must remove the entire contents of any commercial tank that is serviced and disposed of such contents only at a facility authorized to receive such waste. 
3.  Sign the transporter portion of the manifest and leave a copy of the manifest with the originator. 
4.  Present the manifest to the disposal operator to complete and sign the disposal section, and shall leave one copy of the manifest with the disposal site operator. 
5.  Send a completed copy of the manifest to the originator with the signature of the disposal site operator within thirty (30) days. 
6.  Keep one copy of the completed manifest form demonstrating delivery to the disposal site operator for their records and shall maintain such records for a period of three (3) years. 
7.  Ensure that the manifest contains all the information required on the manifest. 
8.  Transporter shall provide a copy of the commercial waste transporter permit for the tank truck to each disposal site where the transporter disposed of commercial waste. 
iii.  Disposal Site: 
1.  A processing or disposal facility of commercial waste shall maintain copies of all manifests for tank pumping at their principal place of business for a period of three (3) years and make such records available for inspection. 
e.  Additives - Any Additive(s) placed into the grease interceptor or building discharge line system on a constant, regular or scheduled basis shall be reported to the City of Tifton. Such additives shall include, but are not limited to commercially available bacteria or other additives designed to absorb, consume or treat fats, oil and grease. The use of additives shall in no way be considered as an alternative technology or a substitution for maintenance procedures required herein. 
f.  Chemical Treatment - Chemical treatments such as drain cleaners, enzymes, acids and other chemicals designed to dissolve purge or remove grease shall not be allowed to enter the grease interceptor. 
g.  Flushing - Flushing the grease interceptor with water having a temperature in excess of 140 Degrees Fahrenheit shall be prohibited. 
Sec. 6. - Administrative requirements. 
a.  Initial Data Acquisition - All Food Service facilities will be asked to complete a data sheet to establish the grease interceptor database. A copy of the form has been attached to this document as Appendix B. The Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department database will be updated with additional or modified information after each yearly inspection. 
b.  Administrative Fees - No fee will be charged for an annual inspection by the Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department Grease Trap Coordinator. 
c.  Inspection and Entry - Authorized personnel of the City of Tifton, bearing proper credential and identification, shall have the right to enter upon all properties subject to this program, at any time and without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or record review, as part of this program. 
d.  Record Retention and Reporting - All users must keep a record of any cleaning or maintenance of their grease interceptor. The following records must be kept on site at the food service facility for a period of three (3) years: 
i.  Manifest are required for all grease interceptors and shall contain the following information; 
1.  Food Service Facility (generator) information, including name, address, volume pumped, date and time of pumping and generator signature verifying the information; 
2.  Transporter information, including company name, address, license plate number, permit number, driver name and driver signature verifying transporter information; and 
3.  Receiving information, including facility name, address, date and time of receiving, EPD permit number and signature verifying receipt of the waste. 
4.  Manifest must be mailed, faxed or electronically submitted to the Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department Grease Trap Coordinator within fourteen (14) days of interceptor maintenance. 
Sec. 7. - Enforcement. 
Generally, all violation identified by the City of Tifton/Tifton-Tift county Utilities Department are reviewed, evaluated and addressed by the appropriate enforcement response. The Majority of enforcement actions begin with issuance of an initial notice of violation. This letter describes the nature of the violation and informs the user that any additional violation may result in an escalated enforcement action. Once the user has been notified of a violation or has knowledge of a condition which is a violation, the user may be allowed up to ten (10) calendar days to correct the noncompliance before escalation of the enforcement process occurs, this ten (10) calendar day period applies only to the initial violation. Any violations occurring after this period will be evaluated according to plan procedures. Enforcement of these regulations shall be in accordance with the provisions of the City of Tifton Code of Ordnances Section 1-11. Failure to comply with this program will be grounds for a citation to be issued to appear in Municipal Court and/or discontinuance of service. Emergency conditions require immediate correction of non compliance. 
Pretreatment Enforcement Response Plan 
Introduction The purpose of this document is to present a plan for uniform enforcement actions to deal with user noncompliance with applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1972 as amended and the City of Tifton Sewer use ordinance and enforced by the City of Tifton Code of Ordnance Section 1-11. 
User Inventory It is the responsibility of the Tifton-Tift County utilities Department to maintain an inventory of users that have or are required to have pretreatment interceptors. The following list includes a number of resources used by the Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department for indentifying facilities: 
1.  Telephone Listings. 
2.  Previous Survey results. 
3.  Restaurant Directories. 
4.  Sewer Connection Permits. 
5.  Site Visits. 
6.  Reports from other related industries. 
7.  Citizen reports 
8.  Referrals from other agencies (Environmental Health, etc.) 
9.  Contact from potential restaurants. 
10.  Observation by sampling/surveillance/inspection/ personnel. 
11.  Newspaper/Trade journal or business magazine articles. 
12.  Chamber of Commerce. 
All new service facilities are subject to requirements by the Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department Fats, Oil and Grease Management Program and are added to the master list of regulated facilities. 
Compliance Monitoring Procedures. Compliance monitoring activities conducted by Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department are necessary to identify and document violation that can be presented as admissible and irrefutable evidence in administrative actions and legal proceedings in accordance of the City of Tifton Code of Ordnances Section 1-11. Industrial compliance with applicable regulations is determined and evaluated through: 
1.  Report Data Forms user. 
2.  Inspections conducted by the City of Tifton/Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department. 
3.  Surveillance sampling and analysis conducted by City of Tifton/Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department. 
4.  Evaluation of application information by City of Tifton/Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department. 
Data Screening. The majority of the data to be screened and evaluated is generated through manifest, inspections and sampling. All data generated by these activities are reviewed by the Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department on a weekly and monthly basis. Each violation noted and appropriate enforcement action initiated. The specific response and time frames are detailed in the Enforcement Response section. Screening and tracking of reports submitted as part of a schedule of compliance are reviewed at least twice monthly. Action is taken if required reports are not received or if milestones are missed. Tracking of timely submission of information and other data is done on a database made specifically for that purpose. 
Identification of violations. The identification of a violation of pretreatment requirements, regardless of the severity, will initiate the enforcement process. Discovery of a violation may occur as result of any number of activities that include: 
1.  Review of surveillance/sampling results. 
2.  Review of user manifests. 
3.  Spill/accidental discharge reports form user. 
4.  Notification of violation by the user. 
5.  Site visits/inspections. 
6.  Other information provided by the user's employees. 
7.  Observation provided by the public or private citizen. 
8.  Review of compliance scheduled requirements. 
9.  Review of agreed judgment requirements. 
10.  Information provided by other agencies. 
Once violations are identified, it is the responsibility of the City of Tifton/Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department to implement the appropriate enforcement response required in the plan. When determining an appropriate response, particularly on that includes the imposition of penalties and/or fines, the specific procedures outlined in the Enforcement Response Section must be followed. However, additional criteria may be used in determination including: 
1.  Magnitude of violation. 
2.  Duration of violation. 
3.  Effects of the violation. 
4.  Compliance history or the commercial user. 
5.  Good faith of the commercial user. 
Enforcement Procedures. Generally, all violation identified by the City of Tifton/Tifton-Tift County Utilities Department are reviewed, evaluated and addressed by the appropriate enforcement response. The majority of enforcement actions begin with issuance of an initial notice of violation. This letter describes that nature of the violation and informs the user that any addition violation may result in an escalated enforcement action. Once the user has been notified of a violation or has knowledge of a condition which is a violation, the user may be allowed up to ten (10) calendar days to correct the noncompliance before escalation of the enforcement process occurs. This ten (10) calendar day period applies only to the initial violation. Any violations occurring after this period will be evaluated according to plan procedures. Emergency conditions require immediate correction of non compliance. 
Enforcement Remedies Available. The following list of administrative enforcement remedies: 
1.  Notice of violation. 
2.  Consent orders. 
3.  Show cause hearing. 
4.  Compliance orders. 
5.  Cease and desist orders. 
6.  Administrative fines. 
7.  Judicial review 
8.  Emergency suspensions. 
9.  Termination of discharge. 
10.  Injunctive relief. 
For further information or definitions of these enforcement remedies, consult the City of Tifton sewer use ordinance section. 
Grease Trap Coordinator Responsibilities. 
1.  The Grease Trap Coordinator oversees all collection and screening of data, organization of enforcement actions, review of actions taken and general management of enforcement response procedures. They are authorized to administer enforcement remedies from Notice of violation to termination of services. Enforcement will be in conformance with ordinance. 
2.  The Grease Trap Coordinator will assist all users in developing and implementing a waste minimization plan pertaining to the disposal of fats, oil, grease and solid particles. 
3.  The Grease Trap Coordinator will offer education materials, training and workshops regarding the minimization of these wastes. 
Exhibit A. - Pretreatment interceptor. 

Concrete grease/solids interceptor requirements: 
-  Con-Seal lined interior where needed 
-  Epoxy sealed exterior where needed 
-Inlet/Outlet  traffic rated manhole covers, where applicable 
-Polylok  PL625 Outlet filter - installed in tank going to sanitary sewer 
-  6" outlet sample port - All sample ports must be housed in a cast iron valve box with lid 
-  Filter needs to sit on 6" PVC pipe "pedestal" 
-Interior  plumbing Schedule 40 PVC 
Tank interior: 
-  Inlet "T" shall be 18" to 22" from the tank floor 
-  Baffle "T" shall be 18" to 22" from the tank floor 
-  Outlet "T" shall be a Polylok PL625 filter with brace 
Sample port design: (as shown in illustration above) 
6"  outlet sample port will be a "cross" design with a bottom depth extending 8" to 10" for sampling device. 
6x4  cross 
6x6  cross 
6x4  double "Y" Concrete grease/solids interceptor requirements: 
Exhibit B. - Application. 
General Information: 
1.  Customer Information: 
1.  Name: _____ 
2.  Address: _____ 

 
2.  Mailing Address: (if different from above) 

 
3.  Designated Contact: 
Name: _____ Title: _____ 
Phone #: _____ E-Mail: _____ 
4.  What is the seating capacity of your facility? _____ 
5.  What are the days and hours of operation (include prep and clean up)? _____ 
6.  Commercial Waste Hauler Information: 
a.  Hauler Name: _____ 
Address: _____ 

 
Telephone Number/Fax Number: _____ 
Georgia F. O. G. Permit Number/ Expiration Date: _____ 
(Note: All Commercial Waste Haulers in Georgia must have a State F. O. G. Permit Number and operate under the State Laws; all companies must provide you with a manifest for disposal.) 
7.  Recycling 
a.  Do you recycle the used Grease/ Oil at your location? ( i.e. fryer grease, motor oil)  Yes ____________ No ____________ 
8.  Does your company have a pollution prevention measures implemented?  Yes ____________ No ____________ 
If yes, attach the pollution prevention measures that are implemented. 
Name: _____ Title: _____ 
Signature: _____ Date: _____ 
_____
For Grease Trap Coordinator Use Only 
Location Account #: _____ 
Size and Location of Pretreatment Interceptor/Trap: _____ 
_____
Last Known date of Inspection: ____________ 
Last Know date of Interceptor/trap service: ____________ 
Cleaning Cycle: ____________ Days 
Condition of Interceptor/Trap: 
_____
Photo Survey: Yes ____________ No ____________ 
Operational Characteristics: 

 
Exhibit C. - Manifest. 




APPENDIX 3. - NATURAL GAS DEPARTMENT CONSTRUCTION MANUAL 

MATERIAL APPROVAL PROCEDURE 
It is necessary that any material or component designed to transport gas be approved for use in the application for which it will be used. An approved material (or component) is any material (or component) that has a City stock room carries has been approved by the Office of the Gas Superintendent and the Warehouse Manager for use in the distribution. 
Procedure for Having New Materials Approved for Use 
Anyone desiring to have a new material approved for use shall forward the request in letter form to the Gas Superintendent. The letter should include the following: 
(a)  A complete description of the material. 
(b)  The purpose for which the material is to be used. 
(c)  Any advantages it has over materials now in use. 
(d)  Manufacturer literature describing the material (as applicable). 
(e)  The name, address and phone number of manufacturer's representative. 
(f)  Recommendation of whether the item should be stocked or ordered for each job and estimated annual usage. 
The Gas Superintendent shall make a preliminary investigation to determine if the item should be tested. If it appears that the item would be beneficial to city operations, warehouse manager will perform all necessary steps to ensure that the material meets City gas standards. 
If it is determined that the item would be beneficial but has only limited application, the item will be added to the approved manufacturer's list if it is determined that the approved item will be used in sufficient quantity to justify it being carried in inventory. 
Sec. 1. - Material specifications. 
All materials furnished shall be manufactured in the United States and shall meet the applicable requirements of the Pipeline Safety Regulations, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Latest Edition and any other applicable requirements and specifications listed in these specifications. 
Cathodic Protection Test Station. Cathodic protection test station shall be constructed at the locations shown in the plans as shown on the detail in the plans. Each cathodic protection test station shall conform to the following. 
Post: Post consist of super-tough polycarbonate plastic. 
Conduit: Conduit and conduit straps shall be rigid steel and shall be zinc-coated (galvanized). Conduit shall be single tap and equal to those as manufactured by Crouse-Hinds. Conduit bushings shall be installed in the buried end of the conduit to properly protect the bond wire. 
Plastic Cover: Plastic cover shall be yellow in color constructed from polycarbonate plastic with two or three binding posts as specified in the plans. 
Wire: Wire shall be stranded or solid single conductor copper cable insulated with high molecular weight polyethylene (HMW/PE) and shall be No. 12 AWG. 
Connection to Main: Connection of wire to mains shall be accomplished by the Cadweld connection process utilizing a weld metal of copper oxide and aluminum. 
Protective Cap: Protective cap shall protect the connection of the wire to the steel pipe meeting the requirements of the Pipeline Safety Regulations, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Latest Edition, Part 192,471 - External Corrosion Control: Test Leads. 
Flanges. Flanges shall be raised face, carbon steel meeting the requirements of ASTM A105 and ANSI B16.5. Flanges shall be of the welding neck type and shall be ANSI Class 150. Studs, nuts and bolts shall be as specified by the flange manufacturer. 
Insulation Spacers. Insulation spacers shall be constructed of a non-conductive material and shall prevent electrical shorts between the steel line pipe and metallic structures in close proximity. Insulation spacers shall be equal to the FRP insulation spacer-Type No. 120 as specified by the flange manufacturer. 
Materials For Concrete. 
Cement: All cement shall be standard Portland Cement Class B. 
Fine Aggregate: The fine aggregate shall consist of clean, hard, durable uncoated particles of sand or stone. When incorporated in the concrete mixture, fine aggregate shall be free from frost, frozen lumps, injurious amounts of dust, mica, soft or flaky particles, shale, alkali, organic matter, loam or other deleterious substance. 
Ninety-five percent (95%) of the fine aggregate shall pass a one-quarter inch (1/4") screen; not more than twenty-five percent (25%) shall pass a fifty (50) mesh sieve, and not more than five percent (5%) by weight shall pass a one hundred (100) mesh sieve. 
In no case shall fine aggregate be accepted containing more than three percent (3%) by dry weight nor more than five percent (5%) by dry volume, nor more than seven percent (7%) by wet volume of clay, loam or silt. If any samples of fine aggregate show more than seven percent (7%) of clay, loam or silt, after twenty-four (24) hours settlement after shaking in an excess of water, the material represented by the samples will be rejected. 
Fine aggregate shall be of such quality that mortar composed of Portland cement and the fine aggregate made into 2" x 4" cylinders in the same proportions as will be used in the concrete mixture shall show compressive strength at seven and twenty-eight days equal to or greater than the compressive strength at seven and twenty-eight days equal to or greater than the compressive strength of cylinders composed of mortar of the same proportions of Portland cement and the standard Ottawa sand. For proportioning test cylinder, Portland cement and fine aggregate and standard Ottawa sand shall be measure by weight, and the same Portland cement shall be used with the Ottawa sand as with the fine aggregate to be tested. 
Coarse Aggregate: Coarse aggregate shall be clean and washed gravel or crushed stone. The gravel or crushed stone shall be clean, hard, durable uncoated particles. It shall contain no vegetable or other deleterious matter, and shall be free from soft, thin, elongated, or laminated pieces. 
Water: Water for concrete work shall be fresh, clear and free from oil, acid, alkali, or organic matter. 
Pavement Removed And Replaced. Pavement removed shall be replaced with pavement meeting the requirements of the State of Georgia Department of Transportation's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction for the type of pavement involved. Pavement shall be replaced as shown in the details on the plans. Traffic plates must be provided and maintained by the Contractor and shall remain in place until the pavement is replaced as required. Traffic interruption shall be minimal. 
Seeding. Materials for grassing of public rights-of-way disturbed during construction shall meet the requirements of Section 890-SEEDS AND SOD of the State of Georgia Department of Transportation's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Latest Edition. Where grassing is disturbed adjacent to residential or commercial lawns or beyond public rights-of-way, the type of plant material shall match that of the adjacent areas meeting the following minimum requirements. 
Seeds: All seeds shall meet the requirements of the Georgia seed laws, rules and regulations except that the requirements as to purify, germination and noxious weeds shall be: 

 
Fertilizer: All fertilizer shall be 5-10-10 grade and shall meet all the requirements of the fertilizer laws of the State of Georgia. Fertilizer shall be undamaged at the time of application. 
Agriculture Lime: Agriculture lime shall be pulverized limestone meeting the following requirements: 
Total Carbonates, not less than 85% 
Passing 10 mesh screen at least 100% 
Passing 100 mesh screen at least 25% 
Mulch: Mulching material shall be wheat, rye or oat straw, sericea lespedeza or other approved hay. Material shall be in good condition, dry enough to adhere to asphalt and free from weeds and foreign materials. 
Steel Line Pipe. All steel line pipe shall be Electric Resistance Weld (ERW), Grade X42/ meeting the requirements of API 5L, Specifications for Line Pipe, 1988 and shall be new and unused. Steel line pipe shall be manufactured in the United States and shall bear the mark of the manufacturer. Before any work begins, the pipe manufacturer shall furnish the Superintendent mill test certificates on all steel line pipe delivered. Steel pipe shall have diameters and wall thicknesses as specified and shall be double random (42') lengths and beveled for welding. 
Steel Line Pipe Coating 
Plant Applied Coatings. 
Buried Steel Line Pipe. All buried steel pipe must have plant applied coating shall be fusion bonded epoxy (F.B.E.) applied electrostatically to an average plant thickness of 14 mils with a minimum thickness at any point of 12 mils terminating six inches (6") from the ends of the pipe. Coating specifications, procedures and electrical inspection shall be in accordance with the National Association of Pipe Coating Applicators (NAPCA) Specifications and Plant Coating Guide, Latest Edition and as required by the coating manufacturer. 
Directionally Drilled Steel Line Pipe. Plant applied coating of directionally drilled steel line pipe will be a multi-layer combination of the same coating application as specified above for buried steel line pipe plus an additional plant applied durable coating designed to be applied over fusion bonded epoxy coating for harsh to severe installation conditions. Additional coating will be applied electrostatically to an average plant thickness of 20 mils with a minimum thickness at any point of 20 mils terminating six inches (6") from the ends of the pipe. Total multi-layer coating system shall be an average plant thickness of 34 mils with a minimum thickness at any point of 32 mils. Coating specifications, procedures and electrical inspection shall be in accordance with the National Association of Pipe Coating Applicators (NAPCA) Specifications and Plant Coating Guide, Latest Edition and as required by the coating manufacturer. 
Stenciling. The following minimum information shall be stenciled to the exterior of plant applied coatings. 
Name of Coating Applier 
Name of Pipe Manufacturer 
Pipe O.D. in Inches 
Pipe Wall Thickness in Inches 
Type of Pipe Manufacture and Grade 
Tape Coatings. Welded joints, fittings and damaged areas of the coating shall be wrapped with a tape coating having a minimum thickness of 35 mils and shall be compatible with the specified coating. Tape coatings shall be supplied with the necessary primer and of the type and grade recommended by the tape manufacturer. The applicator of the tape coatings must demonstrate his abilities to properly apply the selected type(s) of tape coating(s) in the presence of the Superintendent. The Superintendent may require the applicator to be qualified under his written procedures if it is questionable that his work produces unacceptable results. 
Cold Applied Tape. Cold applied tape shall be equal to Tape Coat H35 Gray/Internal Primer as specified by manufacturer. 
Heat Shrink Sleeves. Heat shrink sleeves shall be equal to those as manufactured by Canusa. 
Heat shrink sleeves shall be used on weld joints subjected to pull-back during boring and drilling operations. 
Temporary Silt Fence. Temporary silt fence shall meet the requirements of Section 171 - TEMPORARY SILT FENCE for the State of Georgia Department of Transportation's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Latest Edition for Type "C" or Type "B" Fences as called for. 
Threaded Fittings. Threaded fittings shall be constructed of carbon steel meeting the requirements of ASTM A105 and ANSI B16.11. Threaded fittings shall be ANSI Class 3000. 
Valve Boxes. Valve Boxes shall be of the cast iron roadway, sliding adjustable type. The boxes shall have a minimum inside diameter 5-1/4" and a minimum bottom bell inside diameter of 8". The length shall be adjustable from 36" to 48" and, if necessary the minimum thickness of metal at any point shall not be less than 5/16". The top section shall have a flange at the bottom to prevent external loads from being supported by the valve. Valve boxes shall be painted inside and outside with a good bit mastic paint. 
Line Markers. Line markers will be made of a composite material, 4" width, in lengths ranging from 62-78 inches as needed and will be yellow in color, either single or double sided with all emergency information installed when received. Carsonite or its equal. 
Welding Fittings. Welding fittings shall be butt weld, Grade B, seamless steel with a minimum yield strength of 35,000 psi meeting the requirements of ASTM A106 and ANSI B16.9. Welding fittings shall be Standard Weight, Pipe Schedule Number 40 in accordance with ANSI B36.10. 
PE Plastic Pipe And Tracer Wire. PE Plastic Pipe must be SDR 11, PE 2406 or 3408 in 500 FEET ROLLS. Tracer wire will be #12 coated stranded or solid copper. Also, either 2" or 4" caution tape, with gas line buried below on tape will be installed. 
Gas Meters. City of Tifton will use the following meters for residential customers; Sensus 275 and 415 or American 250 and 425 
City of Tifton will use the following meters for small commercial customers; 
Sensus 750 and 1000 
American 800 and 1400 
City of Tifton will use the following meters for large commercial / industrial customers; Dattus 5M and Up and American or Sense Turbine meters 
Regulators/Relief Devices. City of Tifton will use the following regulators for residential customers; 
Fisher 252 or equal 
City of Tifton will use the following regulators for small commercial customers; 
Sensus 143-80 and 243 and Fisher 202 ,102 or equal 
City of Tifton will use the following regulators for large commercial / industrial customers; 
Sensus, American or Fisher - 2" or Larger with associated relief valves when needed. 
Relief Valves used: 
Fisher 1805,627 or equal 
Fisher EZR or equal 
Plastic Pipe Fittings. Perma-Sert, Con-Stab, Tri-Fusion or similar fittings will be used in the City of TIFTON's Natural Gas System 
Sec. 2. - General construction methods. 
Scope of the work. All construction procedures and techniques used shall meet the applicable requirements of the Pipeline Safety Regulations. Operator shall meet the applicable requirements of the Pipeline Safety Regulations, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Latest Edition. All such procedures and techniques shall be conducted in accordance with safe and accepted pipeline construction practices. Anyone performing work on the City of Tifton natural gas system must be B31Q qualified. 
Service Installation. These standards set forth the requirements for installing services in the City's natural gas system. Generally, a single service shall be run to serve a single customer or group of customers. 
(See Appendix E Procedures # 0861,0871-0911,0901,0941) 
Location. The standard meter set location is three to five feet from the front building wall on the side of the house for a single-family residential structure and ten (10) feet from the front building wall for commercial buildings. Normally, the meter set and point of service entry should be on the side opposite the driveway of where vehicular traffic is predominant. Deviation from this location should only be considered due to site constraints. If deviation is required, consideration should be given to minimizing the amount of service line under pavement. Services should be run in a straight line at right angles to the street. That portion of a service paralleling a building should not be nearer than 2 feet to the foundation wall. 
Septic tanks, large trees (and their accompanying root structures), heavily landscaped areas, storm water pipes, and sanitary sewer/septic lines should be avoided when running services. Services should be run in a walk or driveway only if no better route is available. 
Prior to any excavating, a request for locates of other underground facilities should be made the 811 one call system. In addition, the City or its designated agent shall spot all gas facilities within the scope of the job site as required by appropriate state law. 
Excavating. In general, the procedures for installing mains / services should be followed when excavation for service lines is performed. (See B31Q procedures # 0861 - Steel Pipe and # 0901 - For Plastic Pipe Installation).Trench bottoms should be free of rocks, cinders, sticks or other debris that might cause damage to the pipe and or its coating. (See B31Q procedure # 981 for proper back-filling of trench.) 
When opening the paving over a main for tapping, the normal cut should not exceed 48" × 48" where possible. However, in unpaved areas, these dimensions may be more liberal. 
Paved streets or walks should not be cut except over the main for tapping or where other underground facilities or construction conditions make it necessary. 
Trenching in lawns must be performed with care to allow returning the surface to acceptable condition. Sod should be cut into blocks, carefully removed before the trench is started, and set aside for replacement upon completion of the backfill. 
Service Depth. Services should be run with a minimum cover of 18 inches from the main to meter location. In the event that a service crosses a roadway drainage ditch, there should be a minimum of 24 inches cover measured from the bottom of the ditch. In all cases, adequate protection of the service from damage must be considered. 
In addition, it may be necessary to provide additional cover from main to property line where required by state highway. 
Service Construction Inspection. New service construction should be inspected by superintendent or his designee, as necessary, to assure compliance with Construction Standards. 
Pressure Testing. Before being placed into operation, each new service shall be pressure tested in accordance with Procedures # 0561,0571,0591 located in Appendix E of operators O&M Procedures Manual. Services may be pressure tested together with a main extension when feasible. 
Services and mains shall be purged when testing. When purging services, an ell should be used on the riser or standpipe to direct the flow of gas away from the building. When purging a main a purge stack must be used as required by Procedures # 1641-1651 located in Appendix E of O&M Procedures Manual. 
Backfilling ( Appendix E Procedure # 0981- O&M Procedures Manual). When installing pipe in a trench, it shall be bedded to have a good bearing on undisturbed or well tamped soil. It is important that service risers be properly supported by bearing sufficient to minimize strain on meter set components. 
Backfill shall be made to a level 8 inches above the service pipe with soil that is free of rocks, stumps, cinders, paving material or other debris that could damage the pipe or its coating. Backfill should be completed in layers to ensure proper compaction. 
New Services Not in Use. When a service is not placed in operation upon completion of the installation, one of the following must apply until the customer is supplied with gas 
(a)  The service cock or valve shall be locked. 
(b)  The customer's piping must be physically disconnected from the gas supply and the open pipe ends sealed. 
A record of each service installed shall be retained by using the all in one form. (See O&M Procedures Manual for form.) All location measurements shall be taken from the nearest intersecting street. 
Services Equipped with an Excess Flow Valve (EFV). All new residential, single-meter services must be equipped with an excess flow valve (EFV). 
An excess flow valve (EFV) shall be installed as close as practical to the service line connection to the main on all single residential service lines installed/inserted from the main. 
Sec. 3. - Joining of pipe. 
These requirements apply to the design and installation of plastic and steel piping and components in the City of TIFTON's Natural Gas System. 
Joining of Plastic. Plastic pipes may be heat fused together or to fittings. Plastic pipe made from equivalent resins or the same color may be heat fused in accordance with the City's O/M Procedures Manual. Except for electro-fusion, plastic pipe of different colors (and thus different resins) may not be heat fused to each other, including fittings. 
Plastic pipe may not be joined by a threaded joint or miter joint. 
Tools and Equipment. Tools required for plastic fusion shall be specifically designed for that purpose. General use equipment, such as portable generators shall be of good quality. 
Heating Tools. Heating tools shall be electric and have thermostatic controls. Heating tool faces shall match the dimensions of the pipe and fittings to be joined. Faces shall be coated with a Teflon coating or other approved non-stick coating. 
The Teflon coating on all heating tools and faces shall be cleaned of the residual melted plastic after each use. The heating tools and faces shall be cleaned using a clean natural fiber rag, paper towel or soft wooden stick. The heating tool and faces shall be re-coated with Teflon by the manufacturer when the coating becomes scratched, wears thin or otherwise becomes unserviceable. Do not use Teflon sprays or abrasives on heater faces. 
Each heating tool should be checked weekly. A pair of "tempil sticks" can verify that the thermometer is indicating accurately. With the thermometer indicating the desired temperature, 400-450 degrees Fahrenheit for most fusion work, the low temperature "tempil stick" (400 degrees Fahrenheit) is brushed across the heating tool (not on the surface which will contact pipe or fitting). A liquid smear will indicate that the low temperature limit has been exceeded. The high temperature "tempil stick" (450 degrees Fahrenheit) is used in a similar manner. A dry mark on the face will indicate that the upper temperature limit has not been exceeded. These indications prove that the heating tool faces are within the temperature range for proper heat fusion. 
A pyrometer can also be used to check heating tools. To ensure proper calibration of the pyrometer simply touch the probe to a piece of ice. The LED should read 32 degrees Fahrenheit. To check the calibration of the heating tool, touch the probe to the iron's face. The desired temperature is 400-450 degrees for most fusion work. 
Generators. Generators shall have sufficient capacity (10,000 kw required) to power the heating tools and other equipment to be used. Generally, the generator should have 25% more capacity than the power requirement of the largest heating source to be used. 
Static Electricity. When plastic gas lines are broken or being purged, static electric charges can build up. Static electric charges are caused by particulate matter in the gas contacting the pipes inside wall and fittings at high flow rates. This static electric charge will "flow" down the pipe wall with the gas and collect on metal fittings or at the end of the pipe. The static electric charge must be conducted to the ground to remove any potential danger. A grounding method is a soapy water saturated cloth wrapped around the pipe and in contact with wet earth or a ground rod. A Static Electricity Eliminator Device may be used to provide the necessary grounding and static spray. 
Steel Pipe. In general, steel mains shall be joined by welding using joint design and procedures set forth in the City of TIFTON Weld procedures manual. 
Oxy-acetylene welding of pipe joints will normally be used for pipe sizes 1 inch O.D. and smaller. For pipe sizes larger than 1 1/2 inches O.D. shielded electric arc welding of pipe joints will normally be used. 
Pipe ends prepared in the field for welding shall be beveled to the same angle as mill beveled pipe by using oxy-acetylene flame cutting or other approved means. 
The factory applied coating cutback is normally adequate to prevent any welding difficulties when welding epoxy coated pipe. Precautions should be taken to insure ventilation is adequate during welding. 
Only welders qualified to API 1104 or DOT standards will be permitted to weld. 
Visual inspection shall be made to ensure that welding is performed in accordance with the specified welding procedure, and where considered necessary a weld should be cut out in order to test the quality of the welding. 
Marking of Plastic Pipe Joints. To ensure quality control measures for jointing pipe, and to monitor the weld quality of each person the following steps will be performed. Every qualified person making a connection between pipe and or between pipe and fitting will mark on the pipe the following information: 
(a)  The Name of the Company performing the work. 
(b)  The initials of the person making the weld and the last six digits of their social security number or their employee number.  (Example - CITY TIFTON - TE - 123456) 
Only a black/white permanent-type markers shall be used. 
Joint Records. The location of each fitting and the type of fitting (excluding couplings) shall be recorded, along with the location of the joint. The measurements will consist of distance from paving edge, distance from the center line of the road in two directions (longitudinal & lateral), and depth as measured from the undisturbed ground level to the top of the fitting. When magnesium anodes are installed with uniform spacing, it is necessary to record only the number, size and spacing used. 
Plastic Pipe Joints. No person may make a plastic pipe joint unless that person has been qualified. 
No person may carry out the inspection of joints in plastic pipes required unless that person has been qualified by appropriate training or experience in evaluating the acceptability of plastic pipe joints made under the applicable joining procedure. 
(A)  Heat-fusion Joints. Each heat-fusion joint on plastic pipe must comply with the following: 
(1)  A butt heat-fusion joint must be joined by a device that holds the heater element square to the ends of the piping, compresses the heated ends together, and holds the pipe in proper alignment while the plastic hardens. 
(2)  An electro-fusion joint must be joined utilizing the equipment and techniques of the fittings manufacturer or equipment and techniques shown, to be at least equivalent to those of the fittings manufacturer. 
(B)  Mechanical Joints. The City will not use compression fittings as permanent repairs. 
(C)  Requalification for Plastic Pipe Joints. A person must be re-qualified under an applicable procedure located in Appendix E of the O&M Manual if during any 12-month period that person: 
(1)  Does not make any joints under that procedure; or has 3 joints or 3 percent of the joints made, whichever is greater, under that procedure that are found unacceptable by testing. 
(2)  Or a person must be re-qualified under an applicable procedure by performing the appropriate qualification test at least once every 12 months. 
Sec. 4. - Joining procedures for plastic pipe. 
All joints in polyethylene plastic piping systems shall be made in accordance with the procedures contained herein, or the "Generic Butt Fusion Joining Procedure for Polyethylene Gas Pipe," available separately and published by the Plastics Pipe Institute. All plastic joining procedures have been qualified in compliance with the U.S. Department of Transportation's Pipeline Safety Regulations Minimum Federal Safety Standards, Sub-part E, Part 192.283. These procedures have been proved by test or experience to produce strong gas-tight joints. 
Three joining processes are approved for joining polyethylene plastic piping and fittings in the City's system. These processes are externally applied heat fusion joining, mechanical joining, and electro-fusion. 
The City or its designated agent shall inspect the completed joint for proper installation. 
Externally Applied Heat Fusion Joining Procedures. The following procedures apply to pipe and fittings made from medium density polyethylene (PE) 2406 and 3408 resin meeting ASTM specifications. 
Plastic pipe and fittings manufactured from resins of different densities shall be joined by mechanical joining or electro-fusion methods. 
Fusion joints should not be made where the pipe surface has been in contact with grease, diesel fuel, oil, diesel soot, or other petroleum hydrocarbons. 
Safety Precautions. Electrical heating tools used for plastic fusion are potential sources of ignition. Therefore, appropriate precautionary measures shall be taken before using the equipment in areas where combustible mixtures may be present. 
Heated tools shall be handled carefully to avoid injury to personnel or damage to plastic pipe surfaces. 
Where necessary, suitable gloves should be worn when making fusion joints . 
Butt Fusion Joints. All butt fusion joints shall be made by a fusion alignment machine designed for this application and approved by the City. The following steps shall be followed when making butt-fusion joints. 
[a]  Ensure that the proper faces are on the heating tool and clean. The heating tool should be connected to the power source and pre-heated during preparation of pipe. 
(b)  Where necessary, remove all frost, ice, or snow from O.D. and I.D. surfaces of areas to be fused by lightly tapping or gently scraping the solids until they flake off the pipe ends. 
(c)  Wipe each pipe end (or fitting) clean with a clean dry non- synthetic cloth, inside and outside, to remove dirt, water, and other foreign materials. 
(d)  Place pipe ends (fitting) into fusion machine clamps and tighten as appropriate. Ends should extend approximately one inch past clamps for facing. Bring pipe ends (fitting) together and check for alignment. 
(e)  Insert the appropriate facing tool between the pipe ends (fitting) and close ends against rotating facing blades with adequate pressure. Ends should be machined square to smooth, flat surfaces. Operate facer until machine has bottomed out against stops on facing unit. Separate pipe ends (fitting). After power to facer has been turned off and the tool has stopped rotating, remove facer unit. Remove cuttings from pipe ends (fitting) and check ends for complete facing. If incomplete, repeat facing operation until ends is square. 
(f)  Bring pipe ends (fitting) together and check for alignment, gap and out-of-roundness. 
Ends should meet squarely and completely over the entire surface to be fused. Where necessary, adjust line-up clamps as appropriate. Proper alignment is necessary to obtain uniform heating of the pipe ends (fitting) and uniform bead at the fused joint. 
Where necessary, the pipe ends (fitting) should be wiped with a clean dry non-synthetic cloth to remove moisture, dirt, or other foreign substances. Avoid touching the areas to be fused with hands. 
Be sure the lineup clamp is sufficiently tightened to restrain the pipe (fitting). Verify that heating tool faces are clean. A tempil stick, thermo-couple probe, or equivalent may be used periodically to ensure that heating tool faces have reached the correct temperature (400-450°F&pm;10°). 
(g)  Insert the heating tool between the aligned pipe ends (fitting). Bring ends in contact with the heating tool without exerting pressure. The heating cycle starts when the pipe ends (fitting) are completely flush against the heating tool faces and a bead of molten material is first visible around the complete circumference of both pipe ends (fitting). As the melt bead develops, maintain contact with pipe ends (fitting) and heater face with zero pressure using the torque control handle. Keep both pipe ends (fitting) in contact with the heater for prescribed period of time or until the melt bead width is the appropriate size (see Table Below). A bead of molten polyethylene will form and expand as the polyethylene melts. Exerting pressure should be avoided because the molten plastic will be displaced from the fusion area resulting in an unsatisfactory joint. 

 
a.  Heating time ranges are normally for ideal conditions at temperatures ranging from 55°F - 85°F and no wind. However, when fusing in cold weather conditions, the time required to form the initial melt bead will automatically extend the total melt time cycle. The upper range on the heating time should be used when fusing in temperatures below 55°F and the lower range used in temperatures above 85°F. When fusing pipe sizes 8 inch diameter and greater, it is preferred that sight fusion procedures be used. 
b.  Joint must be held firmly in place. 
c.  Time required before removing the fused joint from the equipment. Light handling and making an additional fusion on the same fitting may be performed after this cooling period. 
d.  Time required after removing the joint from the fusion equipment before testing or subjecting the joint to bending, burying, pressure testing, or similar handling and backfill stresses. 
(h)  Carefully move the pipe ends away from the heating tool and remove the tool. No melted plastic should remain on the tool. If melted plastic remains, cut off the melted pipe ends (or fitting where required) and perform the procedure again. Where necessary, a new fitting should be used. 
(i)  Bring the heated pipe ends (fitting) together quickly to form a uniform bead around the entire circumference of the pipe. Do not slam together as this may cause excessive displacement of melt, resulting in a poor quality fusion. Sufficient pressure should be applied to roll back the melted material to produce a properly formed weld bead. The fused joint must be held steady, with no additional pressure, for the specified hold time (see Table Above). Over-pressuring the melt will cause the bead to overlay itself and could result in a sub-quality fusion. The melt would be pushed to the outside diameter and inside diameter of the fusion, creating a possible non-fused area in the center of the fusion joint. Under-pressure could result in inadequate fusion due to insufficient contact in the melt area. Also, extreme care should be exercised to maintain contact pressure during fusion cooling even if the bead exceeds the desired width (see Table Above for the appropriate thickness of each bead after fusion). Reversing the pressure will cause porosity in the fused area. Allow the joint to cool during the prescribed cooling time (see Table Above). Inspect the joint for a uniform, nonporous appearance. If for any reason there is a question regarding the quality of the joint, cut it out and start over. Remove the lineup clamps and allow the joint to cool to air temperature as indicated. The fused joint should be allowed to cool for the appropriate cooling time for rough handling before applying stress (see Table Above). 
Saddle Fusion Joints. Service connections using multi-saddles and punch tees shall be heat fused to plastic mains using the following procedure. The fusion procedure should be performed with the aid of an application tool designed for this procedure. Manufacturer's operating instructions shall be followed for the appropriate application tool. 
High volume punch tees and branch saddles are heat fused to mains in the same manner as the service size fittings. Be sure that the proper heater aces are used for the particular fitting being used. 
(a)  Ensure that heating tool faces are the correct size for the joint to be made and clean. The heating tool should be connected to the power source and preheated during preparation of pipe. 
(b)  Where necessary, remove all frost, ice, or snow from surface areas to be fused by lightly tapping or gently scraping the solids until they flake off the pipe. 
In cold weather, It may be necessary to condition fittings to a more appropriate temperature by keeping them in the cab of the truck or other suitable means. This will reduce exposure to extremely low temperatures making it easier to heat the area to be fused. 
(c)  Wipe surface of the main with a clean dry cloth to remove moisture, dirt, or other foreign substances. The saddle fitting also must be clean and dry. 
(d)  Lightly roughen the surface of the main and the inside base of the saddle fitting in line with the pipe with a clean 60- to 80-grit emery cloth. Take care not to alter the contours of either the main or the saddle fitting. Wipe roughened surfaces with a clean dry non-synthetic cloth. 
(e)  Place application unit on the prepared surface area of the pipe according to manufacturer's instructions and secure. Where necessary, a bolster plate should be used for pipe 6" and smaller in diameter. 
(f)  Insert fitting in application unit and lower until fitting base rests on the pipe. Secure fitting tightly in unit. 
(g)  Verify that the heating tool is clean and the vents in the saddle fusion heater faces are open. A tempil stick, thermocouple probe, or equivalent may be used periodically to ensure that heating tool faces have reached the correct temperature (400-450°F&pm;10°). 
(h)  When the appropriate temperature has been reached, place the heating tool on the heating iron before placing the fitting onto the iron). Within approximately 3 seconds, lower fitting against heating tool. Apply and maintain continuous pressure accordingly during the heating cycle. Make sure the force is evenly distributed and square to the axis of the pipe during the heating cycle. The heating tool may be rocked slightly assure full contact with the pipe (approximately 2 degrees). Do not interrupt the heating cycle to inspect the melt pattern on the pipe. 
(i)  Heating cycle begins after fitting and pipe are firmly seated against heater faces. Heat for prescribed period of time or until the appropriate melt bead size is visible on crown of pipe (see Table Below). Heating cycle is complete when the appropriate time or bead size is reached. Heating time ranges in Table Below are normally for ideal conditions at temperatures ranging from 55°F - 85°F and no wind. When fusing in cold weather conditions, the time required to form the proper melt will vary as ambient temperatures and wind conditions change. The areas to be fused should be shielded with a wind break or cover to reduce these effects. Pipe end and fitting should be heated for the maximum time specified for the range in Table below. When fusing in ambient temperatures above 85°F,the lower heating time range should be used. 
(j)  When the heating cycle is complete, snap the fitting off the heating tool first, then snaps the heating tool off the pipe, making sure the heating tool corners do not dig into the pipe wall. 
(k)  Quickly inspect both melt patterns before fusing the fitting to the main. Heated surfaces on fitting and pipe should be 100% melted with no cold spots. If patterns are incomplete, continue the fusion process. However, after the appropriate cooling times have been allowed, abandon the fitting in place by cutting off the stack or outlet. Repeat process with a new fitting and a different area of pipe. 
Quickly (within approximately 3 seconds after removing the heater) lower the fitting on the pipe with firm pressure until the appropriate fusion bead (see Table below) appears around the entire base of the fitting. 
(l)  Constant pressure shall be applied to the fitting for the appropriate hold time listed in Table below. During the hold time the joint should be held firmly in place. 
(m)  After the appropriate cooling time (see Table below), remove the application tool and inspect the fusion bead around the entire base of the fitting. A three roll bead will be present on a good fusion - one on the pipe, one on the fitting and one between these two. 
(n)  If the fusion beads are not acceptable, allow for the appropriate cooling time for rough handling as indicated in Table Below. Cut off the top of the fitting to prevent future use. Relocate application tool and install a new fitting using proper procedure. 

 
Mechanical Joining Procedures. The fitting to be used should be checked to ensure that it is appropriate for the size and type pipe(s) to be joined. For additional information refer to the appropriate fitting manufacturer's installation instructions. 
Anchoring and blocking may be necessary where some mechanical fittings are used especially where little or no restraint is obtained from soil. 
Bolt Type Compression Couplings and Sleeves (See B31Q Procedures # 1011 Appendix E of O&M Manual). Bolt type compression couplings and sleeves such as Dresser Style Couplings or similar fittings shall be installed as follows: 
(a)  Before assembling joint, pipe ends must be clean, dry and cut square. Do not apply soap solution to plastic pipe or gaskets before installing coupling. Any defect such as a scratch or gouge in the joining area that would affect the sealing of the gasket should be eliminated. Where necessary, remove burrs from end of pipe using clean emery cloth. 
(b)  A "metal insert stiffener" must be inserted into the end of the plastic pipe and the compression fitting gasket must bear on the "metal insert stiffener". 
(c)  For the purpose of centering the fitting, each pipe shall be marked an equal distance back from pipe ends. Separation of pipe ends shall be no more than 1/2 inch. 
(d)  Tighten bolts evenly to a uniform tightness. See manufacturer's specifications for recommended torque. 
Stab Type Fittings (See B31Q Procedures # 0711 Appendix E of O&M Manual). Stab type fittings such as Permasert, Con-Stab, Tri-Fusion or similar fittings shall be installed as follows: 
(a)  Before assembling joint, pipe ends must be clean, dry and cut square. Any defect in the area to be covered by the fitting should be eliminated so as to eliminate possible leaks. Where necessary, remove burrs from end of pipe using clean emery cloth. 
(b)  Using a chamfering tool, chamfer the end of the pipe according to manufacturer's instructions. 
(c)  Using the fitting as a reference, mark the appropriate stab length on the pipe. 
(d)  Stab pipe into fitting until pipe bottoms out in the fitting. Verify stab depth of fitting to the previous mark made on the pipe. Repeat procedure to connect other pipe end. 
Nut Type Bottoming-Out Fitting: (See B31Q Procedures # 0691-0701 Appendix E of O&M Manual). 
(a)  Before assembling joint, the end of the pipe must be cut square, clean, dry and free of scratches or gouges that would affect the sealing of the gasket. Where necessary, remove burrs from end of pipe using clean emery cloth. 
(b)  Using the fitting as a reference, mark the appropriate stab length on the pipe. 
(c)  Loosen nut according to manufacturer's instructions and make sure gasket is free. Do not remove nut or lubricate gasket. 
(d)  Stab pipe into fitting through the nut and gasket and onto the internal stiffener until it bottoms on stiffener flange or base. Verify stab depth of fitting to the previous mark made on the pipe. 
(e)  Tighten nut until it is properly secure against the body of the fitting. Visual verification of proper application and installation is attained through bottom-out tightening of the nut against the body. Repeat procedure to connect other pipe end. 
Nut Type Non-bottoming-Out Fittings (See B31Q Procedures # 0691-0701 Appendix E of O&M Manual). Nut type non-bottoming-out fittings such as Dresser Style 90 or similar fittings shall be installed as follows: 
(a)  Fittings with separate or loose stiffener: 
(1)  Before assembling joint, pipe ends must be cut square, deburred, clean, dry and free of scratches or gouges that would affect the sealing of the gasket. Where necessary, remove burrs from end of pipe using clean emery cloth. 
(2)  Remove nut, retainer, gasket and metal insert stiffener from fitting. Also remove lock ring from fitting of that type. 
(3)  Assemble nut, retainer and gasket (also lock ring, if required) over end of plastic pipe before installing metal stiffener. 
(4)  Do not lubricate gasket. 
(5)  Install metal insert stiffener into plastic pipe until flange is against pipe end. Due to the amount of friction the insert may encounter, care shall be exercised not to bend the insert flange when using force. 
(6)  Stab plastic pipe into fitting until insert flange is against stop in fitting body or pipe ends are centered in coupling. The compression gasket must bear on metal insert stiffener. 
(7)  Tighten nut to achieve sufficient gasket pressure. See manufacturer's specifications for recommended torque and wrench size. 
[b]  Fittings with built-in stiffener: 
(1)  Before assembling joint, pipe ends must be cut square, clean, dry and free of scratches or gouges that would affect the sealing of the gasket. Where necessary, remove burrs from end of pipe using clean emery cloth. 
(2)  Using the fitting as a reference, mark the appropriate stab length on the pipe. 
(3)  Loosen nut about one-quarter turn and make sure gasket is free. 
(4)  Do not lubricate gasket. 
(5)  Stab pipe into fitting through nut and gasket and onto stiffener until it bottoms on stiffener flange or base. Verify stab depth of fitting to the previous mark made on the pipe. 
(6)  Tighten nut to achieve sufficient gasket pressure. See manufacturer's specifications for recommended torque and wrench size. 
Mechanical Saddle Tee. Plastic mechanical saddle tees for use on plastic pipe shall be installed as follows: 
(a)  Before assembling fitting, pipe surface must be clean, dry, round and free from gouges or scratches. 
(b)  Place the body of the fitting on the pipe and the bottom section underneath making sure all bolt holes line up before inserting bolt. 
(c)  Insert bolts and tighten evenly with appropriate wrench until top and bottom of saddle tap come together. See manufacturer's specifications for recommended torque and wrench size recommended torque and wrench size. 
(d)  Where necessary, install service pipe as appropriate in accordance with the procedure for the fitting being used. 
(e)  Remove O-ring cap and insert tapping wrench into tapping punch. Screw tapping punch clockwise until tap is made and continue turning to set the punch on the bottom of the tee body. Do not over-tighten. 
(f)  Turn wrench counterclockwise until punch head is level with, but not above, the edge of the tee molding. 
(g)  Replace O-ring cap. Tighten only manually so that the cap is hand tight. Do not over-tighten or use pipe wrench on cap. 
Other Mechanical Fittings. Where plastic pipe is to be joined using approved mechanical fittings not specifically covered by this section, the installation shall be in strict accordance with the manufacturer's written installation instructions. 
Electro-fusion. Electro-fusion procedures have been qualified for installing couplings and saddle fittings when connecting polyethylene mains and services. Electro-fusion is most beneficial when making fusion joints in emergency repair situations and for making tie-ins in confined areas where it is difficult to use other fusion equipment. 
Additionally, electro-fusion may be used to join polyethylene pipe manufactured from resins of different densities. Electro-fusion equipment, when properly used, will adjust its settings to make proper connections for the type of polyethylene being fused. These standard procedures describe the steps necessary to join similar or dissimilar polyethylene piping materials. 
Electro-fusion joints should not be made where the pipe surface has been in contact with grease, diesel fuel, oil, diesel soot, or other petroleum hydrocarbons. 
Safety Precautions. 
(a)  Electrical equipment used for electro-fusion are potential sources of ignition. Therefore, appropriate precautionary measures shall be taken in accordance with Hazard section, Division 4, Section 5 before using the equipment in areas where combustible mixtures may be present. 
(b)  When making electro-fusion joints, the power source, control box, and supply line junction shall be located out of the trench or bell hole 
(c)  For protection against electric shock, electro-fusion equipment shall be connected to properly grounded outlets only. 
(d)  Manufacturer's guidelines and safety precautions should be followed to ensure proper operation of electro-fusion equipment. 
Electro-fusion Couplings and Reducers (See B31Q Procedure # 0781 Appendix E of O&M Manual). The following steps shall be followed when joining polyethylene mains and services with electro-fusion couplings and reducers. 
(a)  The end of the pipe shall be cut squarely, being sure to remove any gouges from the fusion zone, using tubing cutters approved for cutting plastic pipe or equivalent. Pipe ends that are not square may result in over-heating and uncontrolled flow of molten plastic. Where necessary, a dry cloth should be placed in the pipe to keep polyethylene fragments out of the pipe. After cutting, burrs should be removed from inside the pipe wall using clean emery cloth or equivalent. 
(b)  The end of the pipe should be wiped with a clean dry non-synthetic cloth to remove moisture, dirt, or other foreign substances. The electro-fusion coupling should be protected in the plastic wrapper as long as possible until procedures require its assembly. Do not touch cleaned surface(s) with your hands. 
(c)  Using the electro-fusion coupling as a reference, mark the fusion zone on both pipe ends with an appropriate marker. Generally, for most couplings, it is the distance between the end and the middle of the coupling. This will measure the stab depth of the pipe into the coupling. 
(d)  Scrape the outside diameter of the pipe end(s) accordingly up to the marking(s) (area to be fused) with a tubing scraper, main scraper, hand scraper, or equivalent. Scraping should continue until the thin oxide layer, which forms on polyethylene during storage is removed. Do not scrape the inside of the electro-fusion fitting. 
(e)  After scraping, burrs should be removed from the inner and outer edges of the pipe wall using the scraper, emery cloth, or equivalent. Wipe off excess polyethylene with a clean dry non-synthetic cloth and protect the prepared surface(s) from dirt and contamination. Where necessary, a suitable cleaning agent (isopropyl alcohol base, where alcohol content is a minimum of 96% by volume) may be used with an absorbent lint free, non-dyed, non-synthetic disposable cloth to clean the prepared surface(s) and the inside of the electro- fusion fitting. The solvent on the pipe or fitting must be completely dry before proceeding. Do not touch the scraped pipe surface(s) or fusion area on electro- fusion fitting with your hands. 
(f)  Where necessary, mark the fusion zone on the pipe end(s) again to ensure the proper stab depth of the fitting (original mark may have been removed during scraping and cleaning). If necessary, use rounding clamps where the pipe may have lost its circular form. 
(g)  Remove the electro-fusion coupling from the package and slide over the prepared pipe end being careful not to contaminate the inside surface of the fitting. Where necessary, use an appropriate alignment clamp to secure the ends of the pipe to be joined. Center coupling over the joint using the stab depth marks as a guide. 
(h)  The coupling is now ready for the fusion process. Follow electro-fusion box manufacturer's operating procedures for connecting the control box output leads and fusing the coupling. Do not disturb the control box output leads during the fusion cycle. 
The control box will indicate when the fusion cycle is complete and a recommended cooling time will be displayed. Disconnect the control box output leads from the coupling and do not move or disturb the fused joint until the specified cooling time has elapsed. Remove alignment clamps where necessary. 
Electro-fusion Tapping Tees and Saddle Fittings. The following steps shall be followed when fusing electro-fusion tapping tees and saddle fittings to polyethylene pipe. 
(a)  Wipe the surface area of the main to be fused with a clean dry cloth to remove moisture, dirt, or other foreign substances. The entire circumference of the pipe should be cleaned. Care should be taken to select an area free of gouges in the fusion zone. The electro-fusion fitting should be protected in the plastic wrapper as long as possible until procedures require its assembly. 
(b)  Using the electro-fusion fitting as a reference, mark the fusion zone on the pipe with an appropriate marker. Scrape the appropriate surface area of the pipe to be fused accordingly with a main scraper, hand scraper, or equivalent. Scraping should continue until the thin oxide layer, which forms on polyethylene, is removed. Do not scrape the fusion area of the electro-fusion fitting. 
(c)  Wipe off excess polyethylene with a clean dry non-synthetic cloth and protect the prepared surface from dirt and contamination. Where necessary, a suitable cleaning agent (acetone or alcohol base, where alcohol content is a minimum of 90% by volume) may be used with an absorbent lint free, non-dyed, non-synthetic disposable cloth to clean the prepared surface and the inside of the electro-fusion fitting. The solvent on the pipe or fitting must be completely dry before proceeding. Do not touch the scraped pipe surface with your hands. 
(d)  Remove the electro-fusion fitting from the package and install on the properly prepared pipe surface according to the fitting manufacturer's instructions (some fittings may require the use of a clamp). Do not touch the fusion area on the electro-fusion fitting with your hands. The fitting must be located completely within the scraped area on the pipe. Evenly tighten fitting until it has bottomed out or is tight against the main according to manufacturer's instructions. 
(e)  The fitting is now ready for the fusion process. Follow electro-fusion box manufacturer's operating procedures for connecting the control box output leads and fusing the fitting. Do not disturb the control box output leads during the fusion cycle. 
(f)  The control box will indicate when the fusion cycle is complete and a recommended cooling time will be displayed. Disconnect the control box output leads from the coupling and do not move or disturb the fused joint until the specified cooling time has elapsed. Where necessary, tap the main as appropriate and remove alignment clamps. 
QUALIFYING PERSONS TO JOIN PLASTIC PIPE. Each city employee engaged in joining plastic pipe and fittings by externally applied heat fusion or mechanical fittings must make acceptable sample joints following approved joining procedures for the kind of plastic pipe and type of joints used. The sample joints must be inspected and tested in accordance with this section. 
Each city employee engaged in joining plastic pipe and fittings by electro-fusion shall demonstrate competence in following the required procedures. However, the fusion process does not have to be performed and the joint does not have to be destructively tested. 
Appropriate training or experience in the use of plastic joining procedures is required. 
Approved joining procedures are procedures which have been qualified by the manufacturer of the pipe and/or fittings or qualified by company tests in accordance with Paragraph 192.283 of the Minimum Federal Safety Standards. Refer to Joining Procedures for Plastic Pipe. 
Qualification Inspection. Sample joints must be visually inspected while being made and after completion to assure that the correct procedure is followed and that the completed joint has acceptable appearance. Electro-fusion procedures shall be visually inspected to ensure that the person qualifying for Electro-fusion has demonstrated competence in following the procedure for the type joint to be made. 
Inspection must be performed by a city representative who has been qualified by training or experience in evaluating the acceptability of plastic pipe joints made under the applicable joining procedure. 
Externally Applied Heat Fusion Qualification. A person shall qualify for externally applied heat fusion on plastic pipe and fittings by successfully completing, in the presence of the Gas Superintendent or his designee, a sample joint for each joining procedure being used and the joint passing the appropriate destructive test. 
Butt Fusion. 
(a)  Pipe nipples should be of the same material as those used in normal pipeline installations. 
(b)  Pipe ends must be prepared as specified in approved written procedures. 
(c)  Make butt fusion joint according to approved procedures. Since the tools used for butt fusing plastic pipe 2" IPS and greater differ from pipe sizes less than 2" IPS. A person making a butt fusion joint greater than 2" IPS shall be qualified for the size joint made during qualification down to 1" IPS. 
(d)  Test of Butt Fusion: 
(1)  Visually inspect joint for acceptable appearance. Bead shall have uniform appearance, and no incomplete fusion is allowed. 
(2)  Cut joint out with approximately 8" of pipe on each side of the joint. Split the pipe and joint by sawing in half lengthwise and inspect for complete fusion. Incomplete fusion or misalignment of pipe ends will disqualify test. 
(3)  Cut three approximately 1" wide by approximately 16" long test strips from the fusion joint. Bend test each sample toward inside of the pipe. Bend test each strip toward outside of the pipe. No separation shall appear in the fusion joint. 
Saddle Fusion. 
(a)  Pipe nipple and fitting should be of same material as those used in normal pipeline installations. 
(b)  Pipe surface and fitting should be prepared as specified in approved written procedures. 
(c)  Fuse a 2" x 5/8" saddle service tee to a 2" pipe nipple according to approved procedures. Saddle service tees without the tapping bit, cap, and protective sleeve are available in stock for plastic joining qualifications. 
(d)  Test of the Saddle Fusion Joint: 
(1)  Visually inspect the joint for complete fusion. Incomplete fusion will disqualify test. 
(2)  Cut fitting out leaving about 8" of pipe on either side. 
(3)  Saw saddle and pipe into three longitudinal strips approximately 1" wide with approximately 8" of pipe on each side of fitting. Bend, torque, or impact test each strip toward inside of pipe. No separation shall appear in the fusion joint. 
Mechanical Joining Qualification. 
A person shall qualify for joining plastic pipe with mechanical joints by successfully completing, in the presence of a qualified city representative, a sample joint for each type of mechanical fitting being used as follows: 
(a)  Pipe ends must be prepared as specified in approved written joining procedures. 
(b)  Assemble joint in accordance with approved procedures. 
(c)  A mechanical joint must be visually inspected during and after assembly to assure that the correct procedure is followed and that the completed joint has an acceptable appearance. 
Electro-fusion. A person shall qualify for electro-fusion on plastic pipe and fittings by successfully demonstrating, in the presence of a qualified city representative, competence in following the procedure for the type joint to be made. 
Electro-fusion Couplings and Reducers. 
(a)  Pipe surface and fitting shall be prepared as specified in approved written procedures. 
(b)  Install coupling and connect control box output leads according to approved procedures. The coupling does not have to be fused to the pipe, however the individual shall demonstrate competence in following the appropriate manufacturer's operating procedures. 
Electro-fusion Tapping Tees and Saddle Fittings. 
(a)  Pipe surface and fitting shall be prepared as specified in approved written procedures. 
(b)  Install fitting on pipe nipple and connect control box output leads according to approved procedures. The fitting does not have to be fused to the pipe however the individual shall demonstrate 
Requalification. A person who is qualified under externally applied plastic heat fusion, mechanical joining or Electro-fusion shall be re-qualified by performing the appropriate qualification test at least once every 12 months. 
The Gas Superintendent or his designee should visually inspect the initial set up for requalification and ensure that pre-fused joints are not used. The Gas Superintendent or his designee should also periodically inspect the sample joint(s) while being made to assure that the correct procedure is being followed. The completed joint shall be visually inspected for an acceptable appearance before performing the appropriate destructive test. 
A person qualifying or re-qualifying for electro-fusion should demonstrate, in the presence of Gas Superintendent or his designee, competence in following the procedure for the type joint to be made. 
A record shall be maintained of each person qualified to join plastic pipe including the dates of their qualification or requalification. Externally applied heat fusion and electro-fusion qualification/requalification tests shall be recorded. 
Mechanical joining qualification/requalification tests shall be recorded. 
Qualification Card. The Qualification Card shall be completed for each person successfully completing plastic joining qualification/requalification tests. Persons joining plastic shall have the Plastic Joining Qualification Card in their possession at all times while on the job. 
Approved Joining Procedures. A copy of each applicable joining procedure must be available locally to the persons making and inspecting joints on plastic pipe. Procedures in Appendix E of the O&M Manual. 
MECHANICAL JOINING PROCEDURES - STEEL. This section outlines the procedures that shall be used to mechanically join segments of steel pipe to other segments of steel pipe, as well as to fittings, valves and other pipeline components. 
Flanged Fittings. The following procedure should be used for assembling flanged joints at valves or other fittings: 
(a)  The flange shall be a standard unit manufactured in accordance with approved specifications, and of the proper design for the type of service and intended use. 
(b)  The flange faces shall be brushed clean of all rust, dirt or other foreign material which could interfere with the proper make-up of joint. 
(c)  Flange gaskets shall be clean, free of defects and selected for the pressure rating of the flanges with which they will be used. 
(d)  Bolt sizes and specifications will be as required for the fitting being joined. All bolts shall be placed in the bolt holes before any bolt is tightened. 
(e)  Flanges shall be checked for proper line-up before tightening the bolts. 
(f)  Four bolts, spaced 90 degrees apart shall be tightened so that a uniform pressure is exerted on the flanges and gasket initially. The opposite bolts shall be tightened uniformly in sequence until all bolts are tight. 
(g)  Only suitable wrenches, such as open end, box or socket wrenches shall be used. 
(h)  City or its designated agent shall inspect the completed joint for proper installation. 
Compression Type Fittings. The following procedures should be used when joining steel pipe with couplings, sleeves, or other fittings of the compressions type. The City of TIFTON will only use this type fitting as a temporary repair. 
Bolt Type Compression Couplings and Sleeves (See B31Q procedure # 1041 in Appendix E of the O&M Manual.). Bolt type compression couplings and sleeves should be installed as follows: 
(a)  Before assembling joint, pipe ends must be cleaned by removing oil, dirt, loose scale, and rust. Gaskets should seat on bare metal. 
(b)  For the purpose of centering the fitting, each pipe should be marked an equal distance back from pipe end. 
(c)  Gaskets and seating surfaces must be clean. Lubricate pipe, gaskets, and flares of middle ring with soap solution before making up joint. 
(d)  Tighten bolts evenly to a uniform tightness of about 80 lbs. pull on a 12- inch wrench. 
(e)  Where pipe movement out of a compression fitting might occur, reinforcement by strapping or weld-over sleeve, or suitable anchorage must be provided. 
(f)  The Gas Superintendent or its designee shall inspect the completed joint for correct installation. 
Style 90 Type Compression Fittings. 
(a)  Pipe ends and fitting must be clean before assembling joint. 
(b)  Loosen nuts to relieve gasket pressure. 
(c)  Apply soapy solution to gaskets. 
(d)  Push pipe ends into coupling or fitting. Center coupling over joint. 
(e)  Tighten each nut separately to a pull of about 75 pounds on the wrench.  (See Table below for required wrench size.) 
(f)  Where pipe movement out of compression fitting might occur, proper reinforcement or anchorage of the pipe must be provided. 
(g)  The Gas Superintendent or his designee shall inspect the completed joint for correct installation. 
Table: Wrench Sizes For Style 90 Fittings 

 
Other Compression Fittings. Joining of pipe by means of proprietary compression fittings, not specifically covered by this section shall be strictly in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
Threaded Joints (See B31Q procedure # 0721 in Appendix E of the O&M Manual.). Pipe shall be threaded with clean cut threads and shall be free of cutting burrs or other obstructions which would cause stoppage or restrict the flow of gas. 
Pipe shall be threaded in accordance with the following table. 

 
Pipe or fittings with threads which are stripped, chipped, corroded, or otherwise damaged shall not be used. 
Threaded joints should be made up using an approved joint compound (pipe dope or equivalent) which is applied sparingly only to the male thread of the joint, and the joint tightened with a wrench of an appropriate size. 
Tap Sleeves or Service Sleeves. 
(a)  Clean dirt and rust from surface of the pipe where gaskets will make contact. 
(b)  Separate sleeve body into halves by removing the nuts from the side bolts. Do not remove the bolts, gaskets or other parts. 
(c)  Lubricate the gaskets with soapy water and assemble sleeve on the pipe. Replace nuts on side bolts and tighten to a uniform tightness. For 3" through 8" sleeves, the side bolts should be tightened to a pull of 100 pounds on a 12-inch wrench. 
(d)  Next, tighten the follower screws a little at a time until all screws at each end of the sleeve are uniformly and securely tightened. Use the small wrench supplied, or a socket wrench having at least a 7-inch handle. Do not use an open-end wrench. 
(e)  The Gas Superintendent or his designee shall inspect the completed assembly for proper installation. 
Service Saddles. 
(a)  Remove straps from saddle. Do not disturb gasket as it is cemented in place. 
(b)  Clean dirt and rust from surface of pipe where the gasket will seat. 
(c)  Lubricate gasket and pipe surface with soapy water. 
(d)  Assemble saddle on pipe and tighten straps evenly until gasket starts to extrude from under saddle. 
(e)  The Gas Superintendent or his designee shall inspect the completed assembly for proper installation. 
Special Tap Fittings. 
The use of tap fittings not specifically covered by this section, shall be strictly in accordance with the manufacturer's written installation instructions. 
Sec. 5. - Corrosion. 
These instructions are intended to be carried out by, or under the direction of, persons qualified by experience and training in pipeline corrosion control methods. 
Minimum Requirements for External Corrosion Control. All new steel pipelines, mains and services including station piping and replacement sections shall be properly coated, and have cathodic protection installed within one year after installation. Normally, such cathodic protection should be installed at the time of construction. 
All bare or ineffectively coated distribution system piping, including station piping shall be cathodically protected where active corrosion is found. Active corrosion is defined as continuing corrosions which, unless controlled, could result in a condition that is detrimental to public safety. 
Determining Active Corrosion. Areas of active corrosion are to be determined by electrical survey, or where electrical survey is impractical, by the study of corrosion and leak history records, and records of exposed pipe examinations. 
In some cases, electrical surveys are considered impractical in urban areas because they present great difficulty in the application and interpretation of the data. In such areas, leak surveys and review of the records listed above will normally be the most effective and appropriate methods of determining areas of corrosion. 
Cathodic Protection of Existing Systems. Existing systems constructed with coated pipe should be isolated as necessary into practically-sized systems and completely cathodically protected rather than attempting to identify specific areas of "active corrosion" by electrical surveys. 
It has been demonstrated that cathodic protection of bare or ineffectively coated bare or ineffectively coated systems is by the installation of magnesium anodes at corrosion leak repairs or other known "hot spots." When such measures fail to control corrosion, replacement of the pipe should be considered. 
Periodic Re-evaluation. A re-evaluation shall be made of any remaining unprotected lines at intervals not exceeding three (3) years in areas in which active corrosion is found. Areas of active corrosion shall be determined by study of corrosion and leak history records, by inspection of underground facilities or by leak detection surveys. After each evaluation, piping found to have active corrosion should be cathodically protected (or replaced) in accordance with standard company practices. The City of TIFTON has no isolated services. All services have been inserted. 
THEORY OF CORROSION AND CATHODIC PROTECTION 
Corrosion. In nature, metallic systems seek the stable or balanced condition of equilibrium. 
Commercial iron being unstable takes advantage of the corrosion process to return to its original metal oxide state of equilibrium. 
Decomposition of a metal (corrosion) occurs when there is an anode (negatively charged area) and a cathode (positively charged area) bonded by a metallic path and in contact with an electrically conductive media (soil, water). 
The electrochemical process of the anode supplying electrons through the metallic path to the cathode and the corresponding ion migration through the electrolyte results in the decomposition of the metal at the anode only. 
Cathodic Protection. An unprotected pipeline will contain numerous local anodes and local cathodes. 
Corrosion will occur at the local anodes. By forcing the entire pipeline or segment of pipeline to act as a cathode, corrosion is significantly curtailed. This is known as cathodic protection and can be accomplished in basically two ways, galvanic anode and impressed current. 
Cathodic protection using galvanic anodes takes advantage of dissimilar metal corrosion to protect the pipeline. An electrochemical potential exists between the pipe and the magnesium anode significantly enough to cause a segment of pipe to act as a cathode. The driving voltage existing between the steel pipe and galvanic anode metals is limited to relatively low values, so if the anode is to discharge a useful amount of current, resistance of the current path between the anode and the pipe must be relatively low. For this reason, galvanic anodes are more effectively used in low resistivity soils. 
Cathodic protection using impressed current relies on a dc power source for the driving voltage. This allows for a wider variety of anode material since you are not dependent on dissimilar metals for the driving voltage. The materials most commonly used for impressed current anodes are a high silicon cast iron and graphite. 
An impressed current anode bed or ground bed is only as good as the contact resistance to earth; for that reason carbonaceous backfill material is used not only to give the lowest contact resistance possible but also, being carbonaceous in composition, this material acts as an anode itself, thus giving greater life and efficiency to the ground bed installation. 
SURVEYS. A survey utilizing pipe-to-soil potentials and current readings is to be conducted on each cathodically protected system to demonstrate that at least one of the criteria for cathodic protection found has been achieved initially and is being maintained annually as required. 
RECTIFIER INSTALLATION. New and existing piping are protected with rectifier (impressed current) systems on the Cities natural gas system. These systems may be utilized where current requirements are large, in areas of high soil resistivity, or where the use of galvanic anodes may be impractical. Rectifier installations should also be considered when more economical than galvanic anode systems. However, the use of a rectifier requires the availability of a suitable ground bed location. 
Rectifier systems should be designed with output voltages limited to the least amount of current needed to protect the system, therefore minimizing excessive ground potentials or interference with other foreign structures. 
Location. The primary consideration in determining a location for a rectifier is soil resistivity. The ground bed must be installed in an area with acceptable soil resistivity. Lower soil resistivity results in more efficient ground beds, and usually lower output voltage requirements. Other considerations should also be taken into account when selecting a rectifier location. These include the following: 
(1)  Other underground metallic structures within the area that may be affected by stray current interference. 
(2)  Right-of-way procurement. 
(3)  Availability of A.C. power. 
(4)  Accessibility for construction and maintenance. 
(5)  Future development plans for the area near the rectifier and ground bed location. 
Rectifier Specifications. Rectifier units for general use should be of the air cooled type, single phase, with silicon rectifying elements, such as the Goodall model CSAWSA, or Universal model ASAI. Lightning protection should be provided against lightning surges coming into the unit from either the A/C or D/C side. 
Rectifier Installation. For an effective impressed current system, rectifiers should be installed properly to eliminate future problems. For proper installation the following steps should be considered. 
(1)  Rectifier condition upon receipt - Check rectifier immediately for damage. Check all electrical connections to make sure that bolts have not vibrated loose during shipping. 
(2)  Rectifier location - Consider accessibility, vandalism, livestock, hunters, ventilation, high ambient temperatures and proper cooling. Install rectifiers away from other equipment that create heat. Do not coat rectifier cabinet with mastics or tar, or any insulating materials and, if possible, install rectifier in a shaded area. 
(3)  Rectifier Protection - Follow all local electrical and wiring codes. Most codes require fused disconnect switches ahead of all rectifiers even though the rectifiers are equipped with circuit breakers. Rectifiers are screened at the top and bottom to allow air flow which cools the components. 
Make sure air flow is not obstructed by clogged screens. Do not place the rectifier manual in the bottom of the rectifier as it may obstruct air flow. 
(4)  Personal Safety - All rectifier cabinets should be connected to a ground rod. Grounding lugs are placed on the rectifier for this purpose. 
Do not attempt any interior repairs or maintenance to a rectifier while the A.C. power supply is on. Always have power supply in the off position before work is started. 
Cabinets and disconnect boxes shall be locked to discourage vandalism and tampering. 
(5)  Proper Input Voltage - Before energizing the unit, read rectifier manual, and check the voltage available. It should be within 10% of that which is required by the rectifier. A.C. input leads should be long enough to allow for inspection of rectifiers equipped with slide-out racks. 
(6)  Correct Polarity of Output Connections - The negative (pipe) and positive (ground bed) leads should be permanently marked. Verify that the pipe potential shifts negatively when the rectifier is energized. 
Ground Bed Design. Only outside Consultants/Engineers will design ground beds for the City of TIFTON Natural gas system. Designs for ground beds may be prepared once their locations have been selected by considering information listed in Location. 
The following is a list of items which should be analyzed when designing a ground bed: 
(a)  Anode to electrolyte resistance: This often controls the entire circuit resistance, and therefore, the following factors must be carefully considered: 
(1)  Resistivity of the soil; 
(2)  Resistance between a single anode and the soil; 
(3)  Configuration of the anodes, particularly the spacing; 
(4)  Location of anodes with respect to the pipeline and foreign structure; and 
(5)  Anode position such as vertical or horizontal. 
(b)  Resistance of positive and negative cables. 
(c)  Vulnerability to physical damage: anodes, cables and connections must be carefully placed to minimize this possibility. Ground beds should be designed with a resistance which will permit the required current output with an impressed voltage to be within the rating of the D.C. power supply. However, due to the variables involved, it is recognized that the design figure for completed ground bed resistance may not be exact, necessitating some over sizing of the rectifier or sizing of the rectifier after the ground bed has been installed. 
Horizontal Anode Ground Bed. A horizontal anode ground bed should be considered when soil resistivity tests indicate low resistivity at the ground surface which increases with depth. This ground bed is probably the easiest to install since a continuous trench may be dug and the carbonaceous backfill and anodes are placed in the open trench. 
Deep Well Anode Ground Bed. Deep Well anode ground beds should be installed only when no other means of protection is economically feasible. This type of ground bed should be considered when surface level resistivities are extremely high and subsurface (50 feet - 100 feet) resistivities very low. 
Cable Specifications and Data. In most cases, single conductor stranded copper cables are used. The size usually attached to the anode is No. 6 stranded with header cables being larger such as No. 6 . 
Connections and Splices. The best type of connections is from the anode to the junction box but the following methods could be used as well. The design details in an impressed current system should keep connections and splices to a minimum. This is primarily because the wiring is most often buried or submerged in an electrolyte where even the smallest pinhole in insulation will mean rapid failure. Every connection should be inspected by a Crew Foreman before backfilling. Brazing, soldering or split bolt connection kits may be used. The header cable to anode connection is a critical point. Improper insulation could result in a loss of anodes. 
Anode Specifications: 
Graphite Anode. Graphite anodes are 3 inches in diameter by 60 inches long, Linseed oil impregnated, and center connected with 12 feet of No. 8 AWG stranded copper HMWPE insulated lead wire. The anodes are prepackaged in an 8 inch x 84 inch galvanized steel canister filled with 3/16-0 metallurgical grade coke breeze, with a rubber grommet to protect the lead wire exit from the canister. 
Initial surveys shall be completed for each rectifier system and recorded. 
Each pipeline that is under cathodic protection must be tested at least once each calendar year to determine whether the cathodic protection meets the requirements set forth in Part 192 Appendix D of the Pipeline Safety Regulations. The standard criterion used by the City of TIFTON is the negative 0.85 volt, with reference to a saturated copper sulphate electrode. These annual pipe-to-soil potentials and current readings must be recorded. 
Each cathodic protection rectifier or other impressed current power source must be inspected six times per year but with intervals not exceeding 2 1/2 month and recorded on appropriate City of TIFTON form or whenever possible, on the corrosion control mainframe computer systems. 
TEST STATIONS: Test stations enable the City to determine the effectiveness of cathodic protection installations while also providing a means of pinpointing trouble areas through potential and current monitoring. Each pipeline or distribution system under cathodic protection shall have a sufficient number of test stations or other contact points for electrical monitoring. 
Test Station Installation. Test stations shall consist of lead wires (size as specified) attached to the pipe by the thermite weld process and terminated in either a valve box type terminal box or above ground terminal box. The wire connection to the pipe shall be carefully coated with an approved coating material. Enough lead wire should be provided such that no stress is placed on the wire-pipe connection and sufficient slack is available for making connection in the terminal box. Extreme care should be used so as not to "nick" the copper conductor or damage the lead wire in any way. Test stations shall be installed so they will not present a hazard to pedestrian traffic, or be subject to damage by vehicles, mowing machines, etc. Above ground test stations may be installed adjacent to pipeline markers, fence posts, utility poles, etc., to provide the necessary protection. In addition, marking to denote City property should be made by a durable adhesive label affixed to the above ground terminal boxes. Each test station must be located precisely with respect to property lines or permanent land marks and the location information recorded where it will be available when tests are to be made. 
Test Station Location. Test stations should be installed at the following locations: 
(a)  All casing installations. 
(b)  All suspected foreign line interference locations. 
(c)  Selected insulated fitting locations. 
(d)  Locations where lowest protective potentials are expected. 
(e)  At sufficient intervals to determine the adequacy of cathodic protection. 
Service risers that are not electrically isolated from the main may be used as test points on distribution lines. 
Where such service risers are not available, potential test stations must be installed. In systems protected with galvanic anodes, test stations should be located at approximately 1,000 foot intervals. Generally, in rectifier protected systems, fewer test points are required to monitor cathodic protection. Where pipelines are installed on private R/W, test stations should be installed at road crossings so they are accessible for testing. 
Thermite Welding Procedure. Test leads, anode wires, bond wires, or other wire connections to a steel pipe surface shall be made by the thermite welding process (Cadweld or Thermo-weld) using the proper graphite mold and a powder cartridge. Wet or damp molds will produce porous welds. The mold should be dried out if it has become wet or has been out of use for a length of time sufficient to absorb moisture. This may be done by firing a powder cartridge in the mold before making the actual weld. 
Preparation of Steel Service. To obtain a good weld, surface must be bright-clean and dry. After removing pipe coating, the metal surface should be filed, using a coarse file or rasp, to remove all mill scale, rust, grease, and dirt. 
Welding Procedure. 
(1)  Strip insulation from wire and insert wire into mold. Wire should protrude 1/8" beyond end of sleeve. The sleeve may be crimped onto the wire in order to hold it in place. 
(2)  Insert steel disc in mold to hold powder. 
(3)  Dump cartridge into powder crucible being careful not to upset the steel disc. Tap bottom of cartridge to loosen all fine starting powder and spread evenly over the coarser welding powder. Place a small amount of starting powder on top edge of mold under cover opening for easy ignition. 
(4)  Cover opening should face away from operator for safety. Before firing, check for proper positioning of wire. 
(5)  Close cover, and holding welder firmly in place, ignite with flint gun at cover opening. Jerk gun away quickly to prevent fouling. Keep hands and face away from flash of ignition powder. 
(6)  Remove all slag from mold before making the next weld. Clean cover every 6 to 10 welds. 
(7)  After weld has cooled, remove slag with hammer, carefully coat the weld, and repair the pipe coating. 
CRITERIA FOR CATHODIC PROTECTION AND PIPE-TO-SOIL POTENTIAL MEASUREMENTS. Each cathodic protection installation must provide a level of cathodic protection that meets the requirements contained in Subpart I, Appendix D, of Minimum Federal Safety Standards. The criteria for cathodic protection that follow are applicable to steel systems. 
Potential. A cathodic potential of at least -0.85 volts as measured between the structure and a saturated copper-copper sulfate reference electrode in contact with the soil. Measurement of this potential shall be made with the protective current applied. 
This criterion will generally be used on the following installations: 
(a)  Effectively coated steel piping. 
(b)  Poorly coated or bare steel pipe where other listed criteria cannot be effectively used. 
Negative Potential Shift. A minimum cathodic potential shift (negative) of 300 millivolts, produced by the application of protective current. The potential shift from its "negative state" shall be measured between the structure and a saturated copper-copper sulfate reference electrode in contact with the soil. "Native state" shall be designed as the potential of the structure before cathodic protection is applied. 
This criterion will generally be used on poorly coated or bare piping systems that do not contain dissimilar metals (such as steel and copper). 
Polarization Potential Shift. A minimum cathodic polarization potential shift (negative) of 100 millivolt measured between the structure and a saturated copper-copper sulfate reference electrode in contact with the soil. The polarization voltage shift must be determined by interrupting the protective current and measuring the polarization decay. When the current is initially interrupted, an immediate voltage shift occurs. The voltage reading after the immediate shift must be used as the base reading from which to measure the 100 millivolt depolarization. This criterion will normally apply to piping systems where the source of protective current may be readily disconnected to establish the polarization potential shift. 
Protective Current Flow. A net protective current flow from the surrounding soil into the structure surface is measured by an earth current technique applied at points on the structure that were previously known to be current discharge points. This criterion will normally be used where cathodic protection is applied only at "hot spot" or anodic areas in a system coupled with high soil resistivity which make other criteria impractical. 
Pipe-to-Soil Potential Measurements. When making pipe-to-soil potential measurements, instruments of the following types should be used in order to minimize the effects of external circuit resistance upon the indicated potential readings: 
(a)  Potentiometer - voltmeters. 
(b)  Electronic voltmeters. 
Pipe-to-soil measurements to determine the level of protection will normally be made with the reference electrode (half cell) placed on the soil directly over the pipe or other structure in question. The porous plug of the half cell must be in form contact with moist earth. If necessary, moisten the soil to be contacted or dig the electrode into moist soil. 
Location of the half cell and voltage (IR) drops other than those across the structure-electrolyte boundary must be considered when interpreting indicated pipe-to-soil potentials. This is of particular importance on bare or poorly coated structures. 
Half cells shall be properly maintained. The copper rod should be routinely cleaned, water added when necessary, a saturated solution of copper sulfate maintained and the porosity of the plug checked periodically. 
Potential meters are delicate instruments and should be handled with care. Calibration of instruments should be checked periodically or whenever, because of abnormal readings, the calibration is suspected to have changed. 
Sec. 6. - Protective coating requirements. 
Below Ground Coatings. All steel gas piping including associated valves and fittings to be buried below ground or submerged shall have an external protective coating applied over a properly prepared surface so that all exposed areas are properly covered. 
Coatings used shall have the following characteristics: 
(a)  Low moisture absorption; 
(b)  High electrical resistance; 
(c)  Sufficient adhesion to effectively resist underfilm migration of moisture; 
(d)  Sufficient ductility to resist cracking; 
(e)  Resistance to damage from normal handling and soil stress; and 
(f)  Compatibility with cathodic protection. 
The City's standard coating for buried or submerged steel pipe is a minimum of 12 mils green factory-applied fusion bonded epoxy (FBE) with a yellow spiral band. Pipe ends are not coated to within 1-1/2 inches (+/- 1/2") from the ends of the pipe joint. 
External protective coating must be protected from damage that could result from adverse ditch conditions or supporting blocks. If sand or rock-free backfill is not available or economical, a rock shield or protective material should be used. The rock shield shall completely encircle and be securely fastened to the pipeline. 
Metallic valves and fittings used in plastic systems shall also be coated using coatings having the above characteristics. 
It is preferred that fittings of irregular shape that are difficult to coat in the field be factory coated where suitable factory-applied coatings are available. 
Coatings for Pipe to be Bored. An abrasive resistance overlay must be used on all coated pipe installed by boring, driving, or other similar method. The approved overlays are the Powercrete and Foster tough coat. The corrosion protection coating should be a minimum of 12 mils and the overlay a minimum of 35 mils. If the bore is more than 500 feet long, consideration should be given to the increasing of the abrasive resistance overlay thickness. Pipe coated with an abrasive resistance overlay should not exceed manufacturer's bend radius; it should be used only for straight line applications. 
Coatings on Risers. Pipe coating shall extend at least 6 inches above ground on pipe risers. 
Above Ground Coatings 
Bridge and End-Wall Piping Coating Specifications. Bridge piping and end-walls should be coated to prevent corrosion. The preferred coating for pipelines installed on bridges is fusion bonded epoxy covered with Powercrete, Naprock, 3M 6352 or equals. 
Other Above Ground Applications. All piping or pipeline components that are installed above-ground should be coated to prevent corrosion. It is preferred that all coatings be factory-applied if possible. In addition, a field-applied coating may be necessary to ensure that components scratched or nicked during transport to the site or during installation are adequately protected from atmospheric corrosion. 
Field Application of Coatings. All uncoated sections of pipe, welded joints, fittings, valves and damaged areas of factory applied coating to be installed underground shall be coated in the field. Approved field coatings should be applied over a properly cleaned and primed surface. 
Surface Preparation. The area to be coated should be cleaned until the area is free of dirt, grease, weld slag, and any loose coating. Visible oil and grease spots should be removed by approved safety solvents that do not leave a residue. For example, high pressure steam or detergent and warm water can thin the oil and move it around. An oxygenated cleaning agent or common dish soap will emulsify oil and make it water soluble so that it can be removed by a flood rinse of water. 
Weld spatter, slag, sharp edges, burrs and knurls on the pipe surface shall be removed. Grinding or filing may be used. An effort should be made to preserve the established anchor pattern by wire brushing or similarly effective methods. 
If pipe surface is sweating, the pipe surface shall be dried, heated and maintained above the dew point (dry) and must be above the minimum application temperature according to the manufacturer's specifications before the coating may be applied. 
Field Coatings: 
Tapes. Petrolatum tape, 70 mils thick, covered with a polyethylene backing or one of the approved cold-applied tapes, is also allowed. The coating should be applied in accordance with manufacturer's instructions to ensure that the coating is free of voids, wrinkles and entrapped air. 
Approved cold-applied tapes should be applied over a dry primer by removing the plastic separator, if used. The method of wrapping may be spiral. Tension on tape while wrapping should be enough to obtain conformability to the surface being coated. A minimum overlap of approximately 1/4 inch should be used. When wrapping a weld, the tape should overlap the pipe coating at least 2" on either side of the weld. 
Mastics (Royston Roskote Mastic R-28). Mastics should be used only on the visible areas of fittings or pipe without factory coating; for example, the coating on the top of a valve that has been damaged by excavation. 
Mastics should not be used to repair the underbody or non-visible areas of pipelines or pipeline fittings. 
Mastic should be applied liberally over a cleaned and primed surface by brush or glove. A generous amount of mastic should be kept on the brush or glove at all times. Mastic should never be brushed thin. Mastic must be allowed to dry completely before backfilling. 
Final Preparation. The field-coated piping should not be covered with backfill until the coating has completely set, dried or cured. The field-applied coating must extend over the existing coating and adhere to it, including an allowance for shrinkage where appropriate. 
Storage and Handling of Factory-Coated Pipe: 
Storage. Factory-coated pipe should be stored clear of the ground surface on three or four padded skids, approximately 12 inches wide, placed on solid ground not more than 20 feet apart. The skids should be approximately level so the weight of the pipe will be equally distributed. 
Pipe should be stacked on the skids in pyramid fashion and suitable stops provided to prevent the stack of pipe from avalanching. 
Coated pipe should be stacked according to the following table: 

 
Fusion bonded epoxy and Pritec coated pipe shall be shaded from direct ultraviolet light during storage. 
Finally, all coated pipe shall be stored out of the way of vehicular traffic at the maximum possible distance from adjacent roadways. Where a sufficient distance from a road cannot be achieved, consideration shall be given to installing physical barriers to prevent damage to the pipe by errant vehicles. 
Handling. When transporting coated pipe, sufficient padding must be used at points of support to prevent damage to the coating. The pipe shall be protected from binder chains by padding or by boards placed parallel to the pipe so that the chains cannot touch pipe coating. 
Pipe sizes 4 inch and larger should be loaded and unloaded with pipe slings or end hooks operated by a side-boom tractor, crane or hoist. Pipe 2 inch and smaller may be loaded or unloaded by hand. Pipe should never be permitted to roll or fall from the truck or trailer. Care shall be taken to avoid dropping pipe or hitting one joint of pipe with the end of another. 
Sec. 7. - Abandonment or deactivation of facilities. 
Abandonment of Pipelines and Distribution Facilities. These procedures apply to the abandonment in place of pipelines, mains, services, control lines, vaults or pits, and appurtenances for which there is no further planned use. Prior to any abandonment, pressure gauges must be used to monitor surrounding dwellings to ensure that existing pipelines maintain adequate pressure while depressurizing the proposed abandoned facilities. Also an adequate records search should be perform prior to any abandonment in order to reduce the possibility of outages to non-targeted facilities. 
Physical Abandonment of Distribution Mains. If a representative party requests the removal of gas facilities and it has been determined that it is necessary to physically disconnect the lines from the gas distribution system to prevent damages to the gas facilities and/or danger to the excavator, the following steps shall be taken: 
(a)  The line shall be physically disconnected from the piping system to eliminate all sources and supply of gas. Where necessary, the open ends shall be sealed with cement or other effective means. In the case of offshore pipelines, filled with water or inert materials; and sealed at the ends. 
(b)  The abandoned facility must be purged of gas to prevent the development of a potentially hazardous condition. However, the pipeline need not be purged when the volume of gas is so small that there is no potential hazard. 
A "representative party" includes, but is not limited to, the owner of a property, the owner's official representative, the property developer, and state, county or municipal public works departments. In addition: 
(a)  Service lines connected to an abandoned main shall be sealed at the customer end of the service. 
(b)  If the service line to be abandoned passes through a building foundation wall, a gap shall be cut out outside the wall and the remaining pipe ends sealed. 
(c)  Vaults and pits abandoned in place shall be filled with a suitable compacted material. 
Physical Termination of Service. Whenever service to a customer is discontinued, one of the following must be complied with: 
(a)  The valve that is closed to prevent the flow of gas to the customer must be provided with a locking device or other means designed to prevent the opening of the valve by persons other than those authorized by the City. 
(b)  A mechanical device or fitting (such as a blind disc) that will prevent the flow of gas must be installed in the service line or in the meter assembly. 
(c)  The customer's piping must be physically disconnected from the gas supply or main and the open pipe ends sealed. 
Discontinuance of service to the customer means that a service line is "not currently being used to provide gas service," and it does not mean "temporary closure for some purpose other than termination of service to the customer." Thus, "discontinuance" implies the customer will no longer be provided gas. A brief lapse in gas delivery, as during an outage, would not indicate an intent to "discontinue" service. 
Inactive Services. Gas service lines become inactive when: 
(a)  The customer has submitted a formal request for service to be terminated to a premise. 
(b)  The customer has been be shut off for non-payment of the gas bill. 
(c)  The premise has been abandoned. In this case, gas service may or may not be shut off. 
Procedure for Verifying Abandoned Pipelines. In the course of operations, it occasionally becomes necessary in the field to verify if a particular facility is abandoned. In these instances a small hole may be cut into a section of the pipe with a hacksaw to make that determination. However, before any action, a thorough records search of the drawings must be performed to verify the facility is shown as an abandoned facility. 
Where the pipeline is coated metallic steel, the crew foreman should check the pipeline with a volt meter to determine if the main is still indicating a level of protection as generated by rectifiers in the area, which may indicate that the pipe is not abandoned, before resorting to this procedure. If an adequate protection reading is indicated, then a more thorough investigation should be performed to identify why or if the pipe is still being protected. If the investigation concludes that the pipe is still active, then no further action is necessary. However, if the investigation is inconclusive, then the verification process should continue. 
A section of pipe long enough to install a band clamp of adequate size should first be cleaned and properly prepared should the band clamp be needed. To reduce the time necessary to stop a leak if the pipe is still active, the band clamp should be partially installed adjacent to the area after cleaning, but before cutting the pipe. Before cutting on the pipe, all persons in the excavation must have on all personal protective equipment and have taken the necessary precautions required for working in a gaseous atmosphere, i.e., fire proof coverall, respirator, fire extinguisher nearby, static eliminator device, etc. In addition, cutting equipment (hacksaw) should be properly grounded to reduce the possibility of arcing. 
Cut the pipeline in the center of the cleaned area with the hacksaw only deep enough to penetrate the pipe wall. If the pipeline is still under continuous pressure, slide the band clamp over the center of the hole and tighten. Take all the appropriate measurements to locate the clamp and record this information on Work Order. However, a band clamp should only be utilized on plastic pipe as temporary measure. The damaged section of pipe should then be replaced utilizing appropriate methods of replacement. 
If the pipeline is not under continuous pressure, remove the band clamp for future use. Where an investigation above indicated that an abandoned pipe is still protected by a rectifier, remedial measures shall be taken to disconnect this pipe from the system. 
If the maximum allowable operating pressure of the main is greater than 60 PSIG, a weld-over, or clamp of suitable design and pressure rating, must be installed. 
However, where conditions indicate that the use of a hacksaw may not be appropriate, a self-tapping tee may be used as an alternative. 
Sec. 8. - Repair and replacement. 
Hazardous leaks or other damage creating a hazardous condition must be repaired or otherwise made safe promptly upon discovery. If necessary, immediate temporary measures should be used to protect the property and the public. Any temporary repairs made must be followed up with permanent repairs as soon as feasible. 
Whenever it is determined by means such as inspections, failures, leak history, corrosion, substantial changes in cathodic protection requirements, and other unusual operating and maintenance conditions that a segment of pipeline or distribution facility is in unsatisfactory condition, but no immediate hazard exists, the unsatisfactory portion shall be scheduled for replacement or reconditioning within a reasonable length of time. Refer to Corrosion Section for required repair or replacement of facilities damaged by corrosion. If the segment cannot be reconditioned or retired, the maximum allowable operating pressure (MAOP) shall be reduced in accordance with this manual. 
Repair of Steel Pipe. A gouge, groove, arc burn, or dent may not be repaired by insert patching or by pounding out. Each gouge, groove, arc burn, or dent that is removed from a length of pipe must be removed by cutting out the damaged portion as a cylinder. 
Imperfections or Damages. Each imperfection or damage that impairs the serviceability of a length of pipeline of steel pipe must be repaired or removed. If a repair is made by grinding, the remaining wall thickness must a least be equal to either: 
(a)  The minimum thickness required by the tolerances in the specification to which the pipe was manufactured; or 
(b)  The nominal wall thickness required for the design pressure of the pipeline. 
Dents. Each of the following dents must be removed from steel pipe to be operated at a pressure that produces a hoop stress of 20 percent, or more, of SMYS, unless the dent is repaired by a method that reliable engineering tests and analyses show can permanently restore the serviceability of the pipe: 
(a)  A dent that contains a stress concentrator such as a scratch, gouge, groove, or arc burn. 
(b)  A dent that affects the longitudinal weld or a circumferential weld. 
(c)  In pipe to be operated at a pressure that produces a hoop stress of 40 percent or more of SMYS, a dent that has a depth of: 
(1)  More than 1/4 inch in pipe 123/4 inches (324 millimeters) or less in outer diameter; or 
(2)  More than 2 percent of the nominal pipe diameter in pipe over 12 3/4 inches. 
For the purpose of this section a "dent" is a depression that produces a gross disturbance in the curvature of the pipe wall without reducing the pipe-wall thickness. The depth of a dent is measured as the gap between the lowest point of the dent and a prolongation of the original contour of the pipe. 
Repair of Plastic Pipe. Each imperfection or damage that would impair the serviceability of plastic pipe must be repaired by a patching saddle or removed. 
Inspection and Testing of Pipeline Repairs. Replacement sections of pipe shall be tested to the pressure required for a new pipeline installed in the same location as required under (Pressure Testing) in the O/M Manual. The pressure test may be made on a pipe section before it is installed in the line. Additionally, this task can be accomplished by pretesting segments or pipe rolls. The pressure test record of the pretested pipe shall be maintained as appropriate and documented on the work order when the segment of pipe is installed. 
Protective Coating of Repairs and Replacements. All replacements and repaired areas of steel pipelines, mains and services must be coated and properly protected. 
A record(s) of all repair work and pressure test shall be made on the appropriate work order ( all in one form). Records shall be maintained. 
Sec. 9. - Hazard control. 
All appropriate employees shall be instructed when initially employed and cautioned periodically thereafter as to sources of ignition, theory of combustion explosive limits, hazardous atmospheres and use of fire extinguishers, combustible gas indicators, and other safety equipment. 
Prevention of Accidental Ignition: 
Sources of Ignition. Before working on any City facility used in transporting natural gas it is of utmost importance that all ignition sources be eliminated. The various sources may be represented by the classifications given below: 
(A)  Flames 
(1)  Open lights, such as pilot lights, blow torches and various smoking apparatuses (i.e., cigarettes, smoking pipes, cigars, etc.). 
(2)  Matches and cigarette lighters. 
(3)  Lanterns. 
(4)  Fire in boilers; water heaters. 
(5)  Burning materials; incinerators. 
(B)  Sparks and Arc 
(1)  Non-approved flashlights. 
(2)  Torch ignitors. 
(3)  Sparks from engines, stacks, etc. 
(4)  Static electricity. 
(5)  Electrical Shorts. 
(6)  Lightning. 
(7)  Electronic devices: mobile phones, pagers, personal digital assistants (a.k.a. Palm Pilot, Blackberry, Pocket PC), two- way radios. 
(8)  Sparks from tools; cutting or welding equipment. 
(9)  Solids traveling at high velocity within a pipe. 
(C)  Heated Materials 
(1)  Glowing metals, cinders and filaments. 
(2)  Electric lights. 
(D)  Materials that can ignite spontaneously in the presence of a gas-air mixture. 
Safety Precautions. All smoking, open flames, or other sources of ignition will be prohibited in or around regulator building or vaults, border stations, large volume metering installations, or other locations where volumes of gas may be vented to the atmosphere or combustible mixtures may be present. 
Only after suitable precautions have been taken to determine that combustible mixtures or a hazardous atmosphere are not present will routine maintenance, repairs or construction work begin. 
Welding or the use of a cutting torch will not be permitted on piping or piping components containing a combustible mixture of gas and air in the area of work. 
In no case shall active gas piping within a building or other enclosed location be opened unless the gas flow is controlled by a valve or other positive means, and all suitable precautions are taken to eliminate hazards from the release of gas. 
Accidental Electric Arcing: 
(A) Use of Equipment. Where a hazardous atmosphere exist, only approved flashlights, portable flood lights, extension cords and any other electrically powered tool or equipment should be used. Electrical connections and disconnections should be made outside the designated area. Also, internal combustion engines that power trucks, cars, compressors, pumps, generators, and other equipment should not be operated. 
(B) Bonding Cables or Grounding Cables on Metallic Pipe. Bonding to provide electrical continuity should be installed across the point of connection during tie-ins or cuts separating metallic pipes which have natural gas present. This bond should be installed prior to cutting and maintained until all reconnections are completed or a gas free environment exists. Bonding cables should be installed in such a manner to assure that they do not become dislodged during construction and that they provide minimal electrical resistance between pipe sections. 
(C) Static Electricity on Plastic Pipe. Individuals should ensure proper earth bonding or grounding of all metal parts of equipment and pipe so that hazardous quantities of charge cannot be accumulated where they are available for easy and rapid discharge. All instrumentation and portable equipment should be grounded before introduction into hazardous atmospheres. Where necessary, appropriate clothing and footwear should be worn to prevent charge buildup on personnel. 
The potential ignition of gas that can be caused by static electric charges induced on the outside surface of plastic piping should be eliminated during routine cutting operations. Acceptable methods that should be used to provide the necessary grounding include but are not limited to: 
(1)  A Static Electricity Eliminator Device, Static Spray or a cloth saturated with soapy water wrapped around the pipe and in contact with wet earth or a ground rod. 
(2)  Thoroughly spraying the exposed pipe with compatible electrically conductive liquid or soapy water. 
Static electric charges induced on the inside surfaces of plastic piping by gas flow cannot be eliminated by the methods outlined above. Appropriate steps, such as flow control from a location a safe distance from the location of the escaping gas, should be taken to minimize the escape of gas and to protect personnel from the potential hazards. When repairing plastic pipe under pressure that has been broken or damaged, squeeze off points should be located approximately 20 feet upstream of the point of rupture, where practical. Plastic piping shall be grounded as indicated above before installing squeeze off equipment. All squeeze units and metal fittings should also be grounded. 
Plastic vents or blow-downs should not be used due to the possibility of internal static electric charge causing ignition of the escaping gas. 
Fire Extinguishers. Fire extinguishers shall be selected by type and rating for each area based on the character of fires anticipated, and the construction and occupancy of the individual property/location or hazard to be protected. 
Fire extinguishers should be located at construction and maintenance work in such a manner that they will be easily accessible in the event they are needed. 
When a hazardous amount of gas is being vented into open air, each potential source of ignition must be removed from the area and a fire extinguisher must be provided. Fire extinguishers should be positioned and manned on the up-wind side of the leak or discharge at a distance that provides protection for the user and adequate coverage for repair personnel. 
Warning Signs and Barricades. Warning signs or barricades should be posted, where appropriate, if danger of ignition of escaping gas is present. The area should be cleared except for essential personnel and instruct everyone in the area not to perform any actions that would cause the gas to ignite. Some possible ignition sources are: operating mechanical equipment, electrical switches, open flames, static electricity, cell phones, cameras, pagers or other portable electronic and electrical equipment not approved for hazardous atmospheres. 
Working in Confined Spaces: 
Hazardous Atmosphere. An oxygen deficient or flammable atmosphere may exit in vaults, pits or excavations due to leakage from components within the space itself, or from seepage (natural gas, other gases, gasoline or other vapors) from outside the space. 
The hazards to be guarded against are fires, explosions, and suffocation. Therefore, it is vitally important that employees recognize these situations and exercise care when entering such confined spaces. 
Where a hazardous atmosphere exists, all employees working in the confined space shall wear proper respirator equipment designed to be used for the situation at hand, flame retardant clothing and hood, retrieval harness with lifeline, hard hat, gloves and any other personal protective equipment deemed necessary. Persons who have not been properly instructed and fit tested or approved for the respirator in use shall not be allowed in the designated area. 
This requirement extends to persons working in an area of a gas leak or a distribution operation where the uncontrolled release of gas has created a hazardous atmosphere. 
Life Protective Equipment. In conducting maintenance, repairs or construction work, every reasonable precaution shall be taken to protect employees and the general public. Work in potentially hazardous atmospheres may require the use of life protective equipment such as fire extinguishers, safety harnesses and/or hose masks or other breathing apparatus, flame retardant clothing, hood and glove inserts, ear protection devices, combustible gas detectors, oxygen deficiency indicators, and other such equipment. At least annually, affected employees should be shown what life protective equipment is available locally the procedure for getting it to the job site, and reminded of the circumstances in which it should be used. 
The employee in charge of the specific job site is responsible for ensuring that use of life protective equipment is adhered to where applicable. Only persons who have been properly instructed and approved for the respirator in use are allowed to use them. 
Where required, the appropriate respirator shall be used for the work place atmosphere at hand. 
Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA). SCBAs should be used as designated for respiratory protection against atmospheres that may be immediately dangerous to life and health, or for entering an atmosphere where the hazard is unknown. The necessity of this type of respirator will be determined on an individual need basis. 
SCBAs are bulky and heavy, making them unsuitable for strenuous work or use in confined areas. The quantity of air supply is limited to the amount in the compressed air cylinder/tank. Therefore, SCBAs cannot be used continuously for extended periods (typically over 30 minutes duration) without replacing the cylinder. 
If a SCBA is used in atmospheres immediately dangerous to life and health, at least one additional person shall stand by with suitable rescue equipment. Communications shall be maintained (voice, visual, or signal line) between all individuals present. 
Rescue. Should a person become unconscious in a pit, vault or other confined space from suffocation, he should be removed as soon as possible but not before the confined space is vented and made safe for entry by a rescuer or rescue team. As necessary, a combustible gas indicator (CGI) shall be used to check for the presence of gas. Maintaining the safety of the rescuer(s) shall be of upmost importance during the rescue operation. After removal from the confined space, the unconscious employee should be taken immediately to fresh air and given artificial respiration. The condition of the rescuer(s) should also be monitored and addressed as necessary. 
A rescuer shall not enter a vault having a manhole entrance to remove a victim without a safety harness. There should also be at least one other person above-ground to assist in raising both the victim and the rescuer through the opening. The victim should be left in the vault until a safe way to rescue him is available. This is the surest way to save the lives of both the victim and the rescuer. 
If an employee is overcome by gas in a sidewalk pit with full opening cover, a rescuer may not enter the pit without first making sure it is safe for entry by using a CGI. After verifying that an explosive atmosphere does not exist and that the level of oxygen is sufficient, the rescuer may enter the pit. A safety harness and stand-by employee is desirable, but not required. 
Sec. 10. - Regulator stations, pressure gauges and telemetering. 
Inspection of Station. Each pressure limiting station, relief device (except rupture discs), and pressure regulating station and its equipment must be subjected at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar year, to inspections and tests to determine that it is: 
(a)  In good mechanical condition; 
(b)  Adequate from the standpoint of capacity and reliability of operation for the service in which it is employed; 
(c)  Set to function at the correct pressure; and, 
(d)  Properly installed and protected from dirt, liquids, or other conditions that might prevent proper operation. 
Testing of Relief Devices. If feasible, pressure relief devices must be tested in place, at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar year, to determine that they have enough capacity to limit the pressure on the facilities to which they are connected to the desired maximum pressure. 
If a test is not feasible, review and calculation of the required capacity of the relieving device at each station must be made at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar year, and these required capacities compared with the rated or experimentally determined relieving capacity of the device for the operating conditions under which it operates. After the initial calculations, subsequent calculations are not required if the review documents that parameters have not changed in a manner which would cause the capacity to be less than required. 
If the relieving device is of insufficient capacity, a new or additional device must be installed to provide the additional capacity required. 
Annual Inspection: 
Inspection of Pressure Limiting or Regulating Stations not Equipped with Service Type Regulators. 
(a)  Station equipment will be inspected for leaks, particularly when gas was found in a vault or regulator house, and after performing maintenance. All leaks found will be repaired. 
(b)  Each station will be reviewed from the standpoint of capacity, reliability, proper installation, correct pressure settings, and protection from dirt, water, or other conditions that might prevent proper operation. 
(c)  When necessary, pressure regulating, monitoring, and relief valve equipment shall be overhauled, strainers, pilot filters, orifices, etc., cleaned, and all unserviceable parts replaced. 
(d)  An examination will be made to determine that the regulating equipment is operating properly and maintaining satisfactory pressure control. If there is evidence of unsatisfactory operation of balanced valve or other large regulators, or operating experience makes it advisable, the internal parts exposed to the flowing gas stream should be inspected for wear or deterioration. Mechanical linkage by which the main valve is actuated should be examined. 
(e)  Pressure recorders will be tested for accuracy using a pretested gauge and adjusted if necessary. Where pressures are not continuously recorded, a pressure recorder or gauge should be installed temporarily, when considered advisable, to determine that satisfactory pressures are being maintained. 
(f)  Each relief valve should be tested for correct pressure setting by applying gas pressure to the test connection. 
(g)  Each monitor regulator should be tested for proper operation and correct pressure setting by allowing it to take over the pressure control. 
(h)  Each standby regulator in parallel installations should be tested for proper operation by allowing it to supply the gas load. 
(i)  Valves should be inspected for proper operation and greased or packed as required. 
(j)  Regulator pits, vaults, and houses shall be inspected for good physical condition. Vault covers should be installed so that they will not present a hazard to public safety. Vaults having an internal volume of 200 cubic feet or more must be inspected to insure that the required ventilation equipment is adequate and functioning properly. 
(k)  Where necessary, station equipment will be cleaned of rust or corrosion and repainted. 
(l)  Relief valve isolation valves and, if applicable, control line valves on the relief will be locked open and bypass valves locked closed upon completion of the inspection. 
(m)  Inspect station for appropriate markers where necessary. Pipeline markers may be used to identify City facilities in addition to or instead of stickers. 
Telemetering, Recording Gauges and/or Pressure Charts. Telemetering, recording gauges, and pressure charts will be monitored regularly. If there are indications of abnormally high or low pressure, the regulator and the auxiliary equipment must be inspected and the necessary measures employed to correct any unsatisfactory operating conditions. 
Appropriate records should be kept to indicate that pressure limiting and regulating stations are inspected and relief capacities maintained accordingly. 
APPENDIX 4. - WATER DISTRIBUTION SPECIFICATIONS 
DIVISION I. - WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS 

Sec. I. - General. 
1.01 SCOPE . 
A.  The work covered by this Section includes furnishing all materials and equipment, providing all required labor and installing water service connections and all appurtenant work according to these Specifications and/or to the Water Connection Detail as shown schematically on the job drawings. 
B.  Water meters are not to be furnished. However, the water meter connection must be compatible with the water meters currently used by the City. 
1.02 LOCATIONS. Locations shall be directed by the City along the route of the water mains. 
1.03 SERVICE COMPATIBILITY. It is the intent of these Specifications that the water service connections shall duplicate those presently being provided by the City in order to be compatible with their service maintenance procedures. 
1.04 QUALITY CONTROL. All materials installed under this Section shall have the approval of the NSF for water services. 
Sec. II. - Products. 
2.01 MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION. 
A.  Pipe 
1.  Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe 
a.  All PVC pipe shall have integral belled ends for push-on type jointing and shall conform to ASTM D 2241. 
b.  Unless shown otherwise on the job drawings, pipe shall have a Standard Dimension Ratio (SDR) of 26 and shall be capable of withstanding a working pressure of 160 psi. 
c.  Pipe shall be supplied in minimum lengths of twenty (20) feet. 
2.  Polybutylene (PB) pressure pipe and tubing shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA C902, with a SDR of 11 or 11.5 for pipe and a SDR of 13.5 for tubing. 
3.  Acceptance will be on the basis of the City's inspection and the manufacturer's written certification that the pipe was manufactured and tested in accordance with the applicable standards, including the National Sanitation Foundation. Additionally, each piece of pipe shall be stamped "NSF Approved". 
B.  Meter Box 
1.  Meter boxes shall be plastic. Material shall meet or exceed the following specifications: 
a.  Tensile Strength ——————- 3,400 PSI (ASTM D 638) 
b.  Flexural Modulus —————- 191,000 PSI (ASTM D 790) 
c.  Impact Strength, Izod ——- 0.6 feet 16/inch (ASTM D 256) 
d.  Deflection Temperatures — 200 Degrees F (ASTM D 648) 
2.  Plastic meter boxes shall be equal to Ametek, Plymouth Products Division, or Brooks Products, Inc. 
3.  Meter box shall be fitted with cast iron cover. 
4.  Minimum dimensions shall be: 10-3/4 x 16 inches at the top; 18-1/2 x 13- 1/4 inches at the bottom and 18 inches deep. 
C.  Valves and Accessories 
1.  Valves: Gate valves shall be bronze, heavy duty, rising stem, wedge type with screwed or union bonnet. Valve ends shall be threaded or solder type as appropriate. Valves shall have a minimum 200 PSI working pressure for water (125 PSI working pressure for steam). Valves shall be made in the U.S.A. Gate valves shall be equal to Crane No. 428 (threaded) or Crane No. 1334 (solder end). 
2.  Corporation Cocks and Curb Stops 
a.  Corporation cocks and curb stops shall be ground key type, shall be made of bronze conforming to ASTM B 61 or B 62, and shall be suitable for the working pressure of the ends shall be suitable for grip type joint. Threaded ends for inlet and outlet of corporation cocks shall conform to AWWA C 800; coupling nut for connection to flared copper tubing shall conform to ANSI B 16.26. 
b.  Corporation cocks and curb stops shall be manufactured by Mueller or Ford. 
3.  Service Clamps 
a.  Clamp body shall be of epoxy coated ductile iron. 
b.  The strap shall have a minimum width of 3 - 1/4 inches and shall be made of epoxy coated stainless steel. 
c.  Service clamps shall be equal to Ford FC 202. 
4.  Backflow Preventers: The City shall furnish and install up to and including 1 -inch in size. Greater than 1 - inch shall be furnished and installed by the Contractor/Developer and be owned and maintained by the Customer. 
a.  Backflow preventers shall be rated for operation with inlet water pressures up to 175 PSI and water temperatures up to 140 degrees F. Backflow preventers shall be tested and certified in accordance with ASSE 1013 and AWWA C 506 and C 511. 
b.  Backflow preventers shall be provided with bronze body construction, rubber check valve and relief valve assemblies, and Clecon check seats. 
c.  Backflow preventers shall be provided with isolation valves on the inlet and outlet of each backflow preventer for maintenance. These valves shall be quarter turn, full port, resilient seated, bronze ball valves. 
d.  Bronze ball body valve test cocks shall be provided. 
e.  A bronze body strainer on the inlet of each backflow preventer shall be provided. Acceptable manufacturers: Watts Series 909, Wilkins, and Hersey. 
D.  Connections to Water Mains 
1.  Connections to ductile iron pipe water mains shall be by the direct tap method or service clamp, as detailed in full accordance with AWWA requirements. 
2.  Connections to polyvinyl chloride pipe water mains shall be made by using a full body service clamp. 
3.  Pressure ratings shall be as required for the installation. 
Sec. III. - Execution. 
3.01 INSTALLATION. 
A.  Water Service Connections 
1.  Water service connections shall be installed to the properties adjacent to the water transmission mains both to the same side of the roadway (Short Side Service) and to the opposite side of the roadway (Long Side Service) as directed by the City. 
2.  Water service connections installed under roadway shall be pulled through a bored hole approximately equal in diameter to the external diameter of the service line. No casing will be required. Minimum cover under roadway shall be four (4) feet. At other locations, minimum cover shall be two (2) feet. 
3.  Installation shall conform to the details for water service connections appearing schematically on all the job specific drawings. The Contractor shall provide any and all appurtenant work required to provide the intended water service connections. 
B.  Permanent Water Services 
1.  Each new service line shall be tapped into the main through a corporation stop, utilizing a service clamp per detailed drawings specific to the job. A new service line shall be provided to the meter per the detailed drawings specific to the job. 
2.  A corporation cock shall be provided in the water main fro each service line. 
3.  A curb stop shall be provided at each existing or future water meter location. 
4.  A service line, sized to match the existing line unless directed otherwise by the City, shall be provided between the corporation cock and the curb stop. 
C.  Transfer of Service: Immediately before connecting to the relocated or existing meter, all service lines shall be flushed to remove any foreign matter. Any special fittings required to reconnect the existing meter to the new copper service line, or the existing private service line, shall be provided by the Contractor. To minimize out of service time, the Contractor shall determine the connections to be made and have the required pipe and fittings on hand before shutting off the existing service. After completing the connection, the new corporation stop shall be opened and all visible leaks shall be repaired. 
D.  Backflow preventers shall be provided on all water services. 
3.02 PROTECTION and RESTORATION of WORK AREA. 
A.  General: It is the intent of these specifications to return all items and all areas disturbed, directly or indirectly by work under these specifications, to their original condition or better, as quickly as possible after work is started. 
B.  The Contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all permits with regards to Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Storm Water Run-off, and to comply with all requirements of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation plans for the related work. 
C.  Man-Made Improvements: The Contractor shall be responsible for protecting, removing, and replacing, with the Engineer's approval fences, piers, docks, walkways, mail boxes, pipe lines, drain culverts, power, and telephone lines and cables, and any other improvements that may be encountered in the work. 
D.  Cultivated Growth: Cultivated trees or shrubbery shall not be disturbed unless absolutely necessary, subject to the approval of the Engineer. Any such trees or shrubbery which must be removed shall be heeled in and replanted. Heeling in and replanting shall be done under the direction of an experienced nurseryman. 
E.  Cutting Trees: No trees shall be cut for the performance of the work 
DIVISION II. - WATER MAINS AND ACCESSORIES 

Sec. I. - General. 
1.01 SCOPE. 
A.  This Section describes products to be incorporated into the water mains and requirements for the installation and use of these items. The Contractor, unless otherwise noted by the City, shall furnish all products and perform all labor necessary to fulfill the requirements of these Specifications. 
B.  General: The Contractor, unless otherwise noted by the City, shall supply all products and perform all work in accordance with applicable American Society for Testing and Material (ASTM), American Water Works Association (AWWA) American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or other recognized standards. The latest revisions of all standards are applicable. 
1.02 QUALIFICATIONS. If requested by the City, the Contractor shall submit evidence that manufacturers have consistently produced products of satisfactory quality and performance for a period of at least two years. 
1.03 SUBMITTALS. Complete shop drawings, product data and engineering data for all products shall be submitted to the City. 
1.04 MINIMUM SIZE. All water mains shall have a minimum size of eight (8) inches. 
1.05 TRANSPORTATION and HANDLING. 
A.  Unloading: the Contractor shall furnish equipment and facilities for unloading, handling, distributing, and storing pipe, fittings, valves and accessories. The Contractor shall make equipment available at all times for use in unloading. Materials shall not be dropped or dumped. Any materials dropped or dumped will be subject to rejection without additional justification. Pipe handled on skids shall not be rolled or skidded against the pipe on the ground. 
B.  Handling: The Contractor shall handle pipe, fittings, valves and accessories carefully to prevent shock or damage. Pipe shall be handled by rolling on skids, forklift, or front end loader. Materials damaged in handling shall not be utilized. Slings, hooks or pipe tongs shall be padded and used in such a manner as to prevent damage to the exterior coatings or internal lining of the pipe. 
1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE. The manufacturer shall provide written certification to the City that all products furnished comply with all applicable requirements of these Specifications. 
Sec. II. - Products. 
2.01 PIPING MATERIALS and ACCESSORIES. 
A.  Ductile Iron Pipe (DIP) 
1.  Ductile iron pipe shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA C 151. All pipe, except specials, shall be furnished in nominal lengths of eighteen (18) to twenty (20) feet. Sizes shall be shown on the specific job drawings with the minimum not to be less than eight (8) inches for any water main. All pipe shall be Class 350 and have a corresponding minimum wall thickness, unless otherwise specified or shown on the job specific drawings. 
2.  Pipe and fittings shall be furnished with a bituminous outside coating. 
3.  Fittings shall be ductile iron and shall conform to AWWA C 110 or AWWA C 153 with a minimum rated working pressure of 250 PSI. 
4.  Joints: Unless shown or specified otherwise, joints shall be push-on or restrained joint type for pipe and standard mechanical, push-on or restrained joints for fittings. Push-on and mechanical joints shall conform to AWWA C 111. Restrained joints shall be American "FLEX-RING'' or :FAST-GRIP", or U.S. Pipe "TR FLEX" or ''FIELD LOK". No field welding of restrained joint pipe will be permitted. 
5.  Provide the appropriate gaskets for mechanical and flange joints. Gaskets for flange joints shall be made of 1/8 inch thick rubber; gaskets may be ring type or full face type. 
6.  Bolts and Nuts 
a.  Provide the necessary bolts for connections. All bolts and nuts shall be threaded in accordance with ANSI B1.1, Course Thread Series, Class 2A external and 2B internal fit. All bolts and nuts shall be made in the U.S.A. 
b.  Bolts and nuts for mechanical joints shall be Tee Head Bolts and nuts of high strength, low-alloy steel in accordance with ASTM A242 to the dimensions shown in AWWAC III / ANSI A21.1I 
c.  Bolts for exposed service shall be zinc plated, cold pressed, steel machine bolts conforming to ASTM A 307, Grade B. Nuts for exposed service shall be zinc plated, heavy hex conforming to ASTM A 563. Zinc plating shall conform to ASTM B 633, Type II. 
7.  Mechanical joint glands shall be ductile iron. 
8.  Thrust collars shall be welded-on ductile iron body type designed to withstand thrust due to 250 PSI internal pressure on dead end. 
9.  Acceptance will be on the basis of the City's inspection and the manufacturer's written certification that the pipe was manufactured and tested in accordance with the applicable standards. 
B.  Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe and Fittings 
1.  Pipe: 
a.  All PVC pipe shall have integral belled ends for push-on type jointing and shall conform to AWWA C 900. 
b.  Unless shown otherwise on the job specific drawings, pipe shall have a Standard Dimension Ration (SDR) of 21 and shall be capable of withstanding a working pressure of 200 PSI. 
c.  Pipe shall be supplied in minimum lengths of twenty (20) feet. 
2.  All fittings shall be of ductile iron meeting the requirements of AWWA CX II0 or AWWA C 53 with a minimum working pressure of 250 PSI. Fittings shall be furnished with a bituminous outside coating. Special adapters shall be provided as recommended by the manufacturer to adapt the PVC pipe to mechanical jointing with cast or ductile iron pipe, fittings, or valves. 
3.  Acceptance will be on the basis of the City's inspection and the manufacturer's written certification that the pipe was manufactured and tested in accordance with the applicable standards, including the National Sanitation Foundation. Additionally, each piece of pipe shall be stamped "NSF Approved". 
2.02 GATE VALVES (GV). 
A.  Three (3) Inches in Diameter and Smaller: Gate valves shall be bronze, heavy duty, rising stem, wedge type with screwed or union bonnet. Valve ends shall be threaded type. Valves shall have a minimum 200 PSI working pressure for water (125 PSI working pressure for steam). Valves shall be made in the U.S.A. Gate valves shall be equal to Crane No. 428 (threaded). 
B.  Four (4) Inches in Diameter or Larger: Gate valves four (4) inches or larger shall be resilient wedge type conforming to the requirements of AWWA C 509 rated for 200 PSI working pressure. 
1.  Valves shall be provided with two 0-ring stem seals with one 0-ring located above and one 0-ring located below the stem collar. The area between the 0-rings shall be filled with lubricant to provide lubrication to the thrust collar bearing surfaces each time the valve is operated. At least one anti-friction washer shall be utilized to further minimize operating torque. All seals between valve parts, such as body and bonnet, bonnet and bonnet cover, shall be flat gaskets or 0-rings. 
2.  The gate valve shall be made of cast iron having a vulcanized synthetic rubber coating, or a seat ring attached to the disc with retaining screws. Sliding of the rubber on the seating surfaces to compress the rubber will not be allowed. The design shall be such that the compression-set of the rubber shall not affect the ability of the valve to seal when pressure is applied to either side of the gate. The sealing mechanism shall provide zero leakage at the water working pressure when installed with the line flow in either direction. 
3.  All internal ferrous surfaces shall be coated with epoxy to a minimum thickness of four (4) mils. The epoxy shall be non-toxic, impart no taste to the water and shall conform to AWWA C 550, latest revision. 
4.  Gate valves four (4) inches and larger shall be manufactured by American-Darling, Mueller, or M & H Valve. 
2.03 FIRE HYDRANTS (FH). 
A.  All fire hydrants shall conform to the requirements of AWWA C 502 for 200 PSI working pressure. Hydrants shall be the compression type, closing with line pressure. The valve opening shall be 4-1/2 inches. 
B.  In the event of a traffic accident, the hydrant barrel shall break away from the standpipe at a point above grade and in a manner which will prevent damage to the barrel and stem, preclude opening of the valve, and permit rapid and inexpensive restoration without digging or cutting off the water. 
C.  The means for attaching the barrel to the standpipe shall permit facing the hydrant a minimum of eight (8) different directions. 
D.  Hydrants shall be fully bronze mounted with all working parts of bronze. Valve seat ring shall be bronze and shall screw into a bronze retainer. 
E.  All working parts, including the seat ring shall be removable through the top without disturbing the barrel of the hydrant. 
F.  The operating nut shall match those on the existing hydrants. The operating threads shall be totally enclosed in an operating chamber, separated from the hydrant barrel by a rubber 0-ring stem seal and lubricated by grease. 
G.  Hydrant shall be of a non-freezing design and be provided with a simple, positive, and automatic drain which shall be fully closed whenever the main valve is opened. 
H.  Hose and pumper connections shall be breech-locked, pinned, or threaded and pinned to seal them into the hydrant barrel. Each hydrant shall have two (2) two and one-half(2-1/2) inch hose connections and one (1) four and one-half (4-1/2) inch pumper connection, all with National Standard threads and each equipped with cap and non-kinking chain. 
I.  Hydrants shall be furnished with a mechanical joint connection to the spigot of the six (6) inch hydrant lead. 
J.  Minimum depth of bury shall be three and one-half (3-1/2) feet. Extension section(s) will be provided where necessary for proper vertical installation and in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
K.  All outside surfaces of the barrel above grade shall be painted white with enamel equal to KopCoat Glamortex 501. 
J.  Hydrants shall be traffic model and shall be American-Darling B-84-B, Mueller Super Centurion 250, or M&H Valve 129 or 929. 
APPENDIX 5. - WASTE WATER SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 1.01 - Sewers and accessories. 
1.01 SCOPE: This section of the Specifications describes material and equipment to be incorporated into the sewers and piping systems and the requirements for the installation and use of these systems. Where the term "Contractor" is used, this term shall refer to the City of Tifton forces as well as to Contractors and/or Subcontractors employed by the City. 
1.02 GENERAL: All materials shall be supplied and all work performed in accordance with applicable American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), American Water Works Association (AWWA), American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or other recognized standards. Latest revisions of all standards shall be applicable. Manufacturers of materials shall submit evidence, if requested by the Engineer, of having consistently produced materials of satisfactory quality and in service performance results for a period of at least over two years. 
1.03 PIPE and ACCESSORIES: Pipe, joint material, and made up joints shall be tested by an independent testing laboratory approved by the Engineer. Materials, absorption, crushing (where applicable), and hydrostatic leakage tests shall be conducted on pipe of each size and type in accordance with applicable specifications. Each length of concrete pipe shall be stamped by a regular employee of the approved testing laboratory. Independent of the laboratory test, all pipe shall be subject to the inspection of the Engineer at the pipe plant, trench, or other point of delivery for the purpose of culling and rejecting pipe which does not conform to the requirements of these specifications. Inspection items shall include but not be limited to; laboratory stamp, shape, cracks, uniformity, blisters and imperfect surfaces, harruner test, damaged ends and gasket grooves. Repaired pipe or patched pipe or repairs to or patching of gasket grooves or shoulders will not be permitted. 
(a)  Reinforced Concrete Pipe: Reinforced concrete pipe shall be supplied in lengths of at least six feet. 
(1)  Pipe: Pipe shall be reinforced concrete bell and spigot conforming to ASTM C 76, Wall B pipe. For pipe with a diameter of 30 inches or greater, acceptance shall be on the basis of material tests and inspection of manufactured pipe for defects and imperfections as defined in Paragraph 4.1.2 of ASTM C 76. Acceptance of smaller pipe shall be on the basis of plant load bearing tests, material tests, and inspection of manufactured pipe for visual defects and as described in Paragraph 4.1.1 of ASTM C 6. 
(2)  Joints: Pipe shall have rubber gasket type joints conforming to ASTM C 443. A rectangular groove shall be supplied in the spigot end to receive the rubber gasket, and it shall be so formed that when the joint is complete the gasket will be deformed to a rectangular shape and confined on all four sides. Bell and spigot surfaces shall be accurately formed and smooth to provide a close sliding fit with a nominal clearance of 1/16 of an inch. 
(b)  Vitrified Clay Pipe: Delete this section in its entirety. 
(c)  Ductile Iron Pipe: Ductile iron pipe may be utilized in force mains, stream crossings, highway and railroad crossings, and other applications (such as casings) as may be shown on any job specific drawings. All pipe shall be furnished in lengths of at least 18 feet. 
(1)  Pipe: Ductile iron pipe shall conform to AWWA C 151 and shall be class 50 unless otherwise specified or shown on job specific drawings. Pipe and fittings shall be cement lined in accordance with AWWA C 104. Fittings shall conform to AWWA C 110 with a rated working pressure of 150 PSI. Pipe and fittings shall be furnished with a bituminous outside coating. 
(2)  Joints: Joints shall be push-on type for pipe and standard mechanical joints for fittings. Joints shall conform to ASA 21.11. Restrained joint pipe shall be American "LOCK-FAST", U.S. Pipe "LOK-TYTE", "Clow SUPER-LOCK," or approved equal. 
(d)  Polyvinyl Chloride Gravity Sewer Pipe: PVC gravity sewer pipe shall be utilized in various diameters and shall be supplied in lengths not longer than 20 feet. When installed in a casing, the pipe shall be supported by wooden skids strapped to the pipe barrel (or some similar arrangement acceptable to the Engineer) to preclude contact between the pipe bell or coupling and the casing wall. All PVC gravity sewer pipe shall be laid with a minimum of Class "B" bedding. The installation- shall conform to the requirements of ASTM 2321. 
(1)  Pipe: PVC gravity sewer pipe shall be SDR 35 pipe, manufactured in accordance with ASTM D 3034. Acceptance shall be on the basis of certification by the manufacturer that the pipe supplied conforms to these requirements. 
(2)  Joints: Joints for pipe and fittings shall be of the bell and spigot type with a confined elastomeric gasket having the capability of absorbing expansion and contraction without leakage. The joint system shall be subject to the approval of the Engineer and shall be identical for pipe and fittings. Fittings for pipe eight inches and less in diameter shall be one piece with no solvent-welded joints. Fittings for pipe ten inches in diameter and larger may be fabricated using solvent welding; however, no field fabrication of fittings will be allowed. All such fabrication shall be performed at the factory and the fittings delivered ready for use. 
(e)  Polyvinyl Chloride Pressure Pipe: PVC pressure pipe shall be utilized in force mains and in certain other applications specifically shown on the job drawings, but shall not be substituted for cast or ductile iron pipe specified for stream crossings. When installed in a casing, the pipe shall be supported by wooden skids strapped to the pipe barrel (or some similar arrangement acceptable to the Engineer) to preclude contact between the pipe bell or coupling and the casing wall. 
(f)  Pipe: All PVC pressure pipe shall conform to ASTM D 2241. PVC used in the manufacture of the pipe shall be PVC 1120. The pipe shall have SDR of 21 and shall be capable of withstanding a working pressure of 200 PSI or greater. Pipe shall be supplied in lengths of at least eighteen (18) feet. 
(1)  Joints for pipe and fittings shall be of the bell and spigot-type with a confined elastomeric gasket having the capability of absorbing expansion and contraction without leakage. The joint system shall be subject to the approval of the Engineer and shall be identical for pipe and fittings. Fittings for pipe eight inches and less in diameter shall be one piece with no solvent-welded joints. Fittings for pipe ten inches in diameter and larger may be fabricated using solvent welding; however, no field fabrication of fittings will be allowed. All such fabrication shall be performed at the factory and the fittings delivered ready for use. Special adaptors shall be provided as recommended by the manufacturer to adapt the PVC pipe to mechanical jointing with cast iron pipe, fittings, or valves. 
(g)  Steel Pipe: Steel pipe shall be fabricated electrically welded steel water pipe manufactured in accordance with AWWA C 201. Steel plate used in the fabrication shall be ASTM A 283 Grade "B". Inside diameter and wall thickness are shown on the appropriate job drawings. Sections of steel pipe shall be joined with couplings equal to Dresser Style 38. Pipe shall be coated and wrapped in accordance with AWWA C 203. All joints, couplings, and abraded areas shall be touched-up before backfilling the trench. 
(h)  Materials and Manholes: Materials for construction of manholes should be as follows: 
(1)  Precast Concrete Sections: Manholes shall be constructed of precast concrete sections which meet the requirements of ASTM C 473. The minimum compressive strength of the concrete in precast sections shall be 4000 PSI. The minimum shell thickness shall be one twelfth of the inside diameter of the riser of the largest cone diameter. Joints between precast sections shall be sealed by means of rubber "O" ring gaskets or flexible plastic gaskets as manufactured by Ram-Nek or approved equal. 
(2)  Brick and Mortar: Brick shall be whole and hardburned conforming to ASTM C 32 Grade MS. Mortar shall be made of one part Portland cement and two parts clean sharp sand. Cement and sand shall conform to requirements of Paragraph 1.11. 
(3)  Iron Castings: Cast iron manhole frames, covers, and steps shall be gray iron, conforming to ASTM A 48 for Class 25B gray iron and all applicable local standards. All castings shall he tough, close grained, smooth and free from blow holes, blisters, shrinkage, strains, cold shots, and other imperfections. No casting will be accepted which weighs less than 95% of the design weight. Shop drawings shall indicate the design weight and provide sufficient dimensions to permit checking. All castings shall be thoroughly cleaned in the shop and given two coats of approved bituminous paint before rusting begins. Manhole frames and covers shall be equal to the following: Standard - 350# - Neenah R-1700 Traffic - 450# Neenah R-1712B Watertight - 370# - Neenah R-1915-H2 Watertight Traffic - 440# - Neenah R-1915-G. All frames and covers shall have machined horizontal bearing surfaces. Bolt-down covers shall be equipped with four 1/2 inch stainless steel bolts and a 1/8 inch red rubber or rubber "O" ring gasket. Covers shall be rotatable and interchangeable. Bolt holes shall be bored through so that debris entering the bolt hole will fall into the manhole. All manholes shall have standard frames and covers except where specifically shown otherwise on the job drawings. 
(4)  Manhole steps of polypropylene molded around a steel rod, manufactured by M.A. Industries or equal may be used. 
1.04 LOCATION and GRADE: The line and grade of the sewer and the position of the manholes and other appurtenances will be as shown on the job drawings. The grade line shown on the profile and/or called for in the specifications is the grade of the invert of the pipe. The Contractor shall cooperate with the Engineer in the following sequence of events relative to the location and grade of the sewer line: 
(a)  The Contractor will provide for the location and identify the centerline of the sewer in a manner which will allow the clearing of the construction area. 
(b)  After clearing is completed, the Contractor will provide for a temporary bench mark in the vicinity of each manhole or other major structure and a hub at the centerline of each manhole and at all other locations where the alignment of the sewer changes. 
(c)  Prior to beginning construction of any section of the sewer line, the Contractor shall prepare cut sheets and submit them to the Engineer for approval. 
(d)  During the construction, the Contractor shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  Protection of the bench marks and verifying their location if the surrounding area is disturbed. 
(2)  Preserving the location of the hubs in order to maintain accurate sewer alignment. 
(3)  Providing all other construction lines and grades. 
(e)  Recommended Minimum Slopes: 

 
(f)  High Velocity Protection: Where velocities greater than 15 feet per second are attained, due to high slopes, special provisions shall be made to protect displacement of solids. 
(g)  Steep Slope Protection: Sewers on 20% slopes or greater shall be anchored securely with concrete, or equal, with anchors spaced as follows: 
a.  Not over 36 feet center to center on grades 20% and up to 35%. 
b.  Not over 24 feet center to center on grades 35% and up to 50%; and 
c.  Not over 16 feet center to center on grades 50% and greater. 
1.05 EXISTING UNDERGROUND UTILITIES and OBSTRUCTIONS: Before beginning any construction work, the Contractor shall call the Georgia Utilities Location group (1-800-282-7411 or 811) a minimum of forty eight (48) working hours prior to beginning construction for locates on all utilities in the construction area. Certain existing water lines, sewer lines, gas lines, underground telephone lines, underground electric lines, underground fiber optic cables, culverts, and cross drains are shown on the Drawings, according to the best information available to the Owner. The Drawings indicate the pipe lines to be laid over, under, or around underground utilities or obstructions that are known to exist. Where these or unforeseen underground utilities are encountered, the location and alignment of the proposed sewer line may be changed, upon written approval of the Engineer, to avoid interference. 
(a)  Electronic Pipe and Cable Locator: The Contractor shall furnish and have available at all times an Electronic Pipe and Cable Locator in working order, for the purposes of locating existing pipe lines or other obstructions in the way of or along the route of the new work. 
(b)  Relocation of Services: Before the sewer line is laid, the Contractor shall locate water and other utility services to avoid interference with such services or to determine whether services should be relocated. The Contractor shall be responsible for and shall repair any damage done to utilities services or pipe lines resulting from the work of locating services or resulting from the construction operation. The Engineer shall have the right to determine the services which are to remain in place and the services which shall be relocated. Where the Engineer determines that the services shall be relocated, the Utility will make the necessary changes without cost to the Contractor. 
1.06 CONSTRUCTION ALONG HIGHWAYS, STREETS, and ROADWAYS: The Contractor shall install sewer lines and appurtenances along highways, streets, and roadways in accordance with applicable regulations and requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation, Tift County, and the City of Tifton with reference to construction operations, safety, traffic control, road maintenance, and repair. The Contractor shall provide required signs, barricades and lights for protection of traffic in locations where traffic may be endangered by construction operations. All highway signs removed for construction shall be replaced as soon as the condition which warranted their removal has been cleared. No highway, street or roadway shall be closed without first obtaining permission from the proper authorities. Any portion of the trench excavated shall be backfilled and tamped during the same work day and no portion shall be allowed to remain open overnight. Sufficient barricades and warning lights shall be provided and at least one traffic lane will remain unobstructed during construction. Flagmen shall be provided by the Contractor as required. 
1.07 EXCAVATION: All excavation shall be by open cut. The top portion of the trench may be excavated with vertical or sloping sides to any width within the construction easement which will not cause unnecessary damage to adjoining structures, roadways, pavements, utilities, trees, or private property. The slope of the sides of an un-shored trench and the size and spacing of members used to shore a trench excavated with vertical sides shall be in accordance with the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (PL 91596). The width of the lower portion of the trench to a height of two feet above the top of the pipe shall not exceed the outside diameter of the pipe plus eighteen (18) inches. If trenches are excavated to width in excess of the above limitations or collapse because of inadequate or improperly placed bracing or sheeting, pipe shall be laid in accordance with the requirements of at least the next better class of bedding at the expense of the Contractor. Excavation in excess of the depths required for manholes and other structures shall be corrected by pouring a sub foundation of concrete at the Contractor's expense. 
(a)  Bracing and Sheeting: The sides of all trenches and excavation for structures shall be securely held by stray bracing, or by skeleton or solid sheeting and bracing, as required by soil conditions encountered. 
(1)  Timber: Timber for shoring, sheeting, or bracing shall be sound and free of large or loose knots and in good serviceable condition. Size and spacing shall be in accordance with OSHA requirements as cited above. Bracing and sheeting may be removed in units when the level of the backfilling has reached the point necessary to protect the pipe and adjacent property. When in the opinion of the Engineer sheeting and bracing cannot be safely removed, it shall be left in place. Sheeting so left in place shall be cut off at least two feet below the surface. 
(2)  Steel Sheet Piling: Continuous lock joint steel sheet piling may be substituted for timber sheeting when approved by the Engineer. Steel piling may be removed, without cutting, provided the rate of removal is kept in pace with the tamping and backfilling operations to assure complete filling of the void created by the withdrawal of the piling. Complete withdrawal of the piling in advance of tamping and backfilling will not be permitted. Piling, where ordered to be left in place by the Engineer for reasons of safety, will be cut off where directed. 
(b)  Dewatering Trenches: All excavation shall be dewatered immediately prior to laying pipe. Where running sand is encountered, dewatering shall be done by well pointing wherever possible. Where soil conditions are not favorable for use of well point, french drains of crushed stone or gravel shall be constructed to suitably located sumps and the water removed by bailing or pumping. 
(c)  Crushed Stone Stabilization: Wherever the sub grade is by nature too soft or mucky, in the opinion of the Engineer, for the proper installation of the sewer, he may order the Contractor to undercut the trench and backfill with crushed stone or gravel (No. 57 or equal). The stone so placed shall be brought to the sub grade required by the class of bedding specified for the particular location and compacted. 
1.08 BEDDING OF SEWER: Stone or gravel bedding materials shall consist of crushed stone or gravel, (No. 57 or equal). Bedding material shall be placed on a flat bottom trench and thoroughly compacted by tamping or slicing with a flat bladed shovel. 
(a)  Classes of Pipe Bedding: All pipe shall be laid on foundations prepared in accordance with the various classes of bedding required by the trench width and depth for the size of the pipe to be laid. Bell holes shall be provided in all classes of bedding so as to relieve pipe bells of all load, but small enough to insure that support is provided throughout the length of the pipe barrel. All pipe shall be laid with minimum Class "C" bedding unless specified otherwise. 
(1)  Class "A": Bedding shall be concrete cradle. The trench shall excavated to a depth of one-fourth the nominal diameter of the pipe below grade and the pipe laid to line and grade on concrete blocking. Class "C" concrete shall then be poured to the full width of the trench to a height of one-fourth the outside diameter of the pipe above the invert. 
(2)  Class "B": Bedding shall be placed in the following manner. The bottom of the trench shall be excavated flat at a level a minimum distance, as shown on the job drawings, below the bottom of the pipe barrel. The pipe bed shall be brought to the proper grade and then to the bottom one-half of the outside pipe diameter with compacted crushed stone or gravel. 
(3)  Class "C": Bedding shall be placed in the following manner. The bottom of the trench shall be excavated flat at a level a minimum distance, as shown on the job drawings, below the bottom of the pipe barrel. The pipe bed shall be brought to the proper grade and then to the bottom one-fourth of the outside pipe -diameter with compacted crushed stone or gravel. 
(b)  Bedding of Manholes: Excavation for manholes shall extend a minimum of twelve (12) inches below the planned elevation of the base of the manhole. The bed shall then be brought to proper grade with crushed stone or gravel. 
1.09 MANHOLES: Manholes shall be constructed in accordance with the job specific detail drawings at locations shown on the plans and where directed by the Engineer. 
(a)  Precast Concrete: Riser sections shall be handled carefully to prevent cracking or chipping. Particular attention shall be paid to achieving a uniform seating of the bottom riser on the bedding to prevent the development of cracks as further riser sections are added. If preformed openings must be enlarged or altered, or if new openings must be made in the field, care shall be taken to minimize the amount of material removed in order to provide closely matched surfaces for grouting. Gaskets shall be utilized in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations when placing riser and cone sections to produce a watertight structure. 
(b)  Brick Manholes: The bottom of each manhole shall be constructed of concrete as depicted on the job drawings. Every brick shall be embedded in mortar on its bottom and sides, and the walls shall be thoroughly plastered on the outside with a smooth coat of mortar, 3/4-inches thick. Inverts shall be carefully constructed, with special care exercised in laying the channels and adjacent pipes to grade. Channels shall be properly formed and rounded and shall be troweled smooth. The connection of the sewer with the wall and channel of the manhole shall be tight and smooth. Where shown on the plans, the first length of pipe for future lateral sewers of such size as may be designated shall be laid to proper grade and alignment and shall be plugged with a suitable pipe stopper. The top of manholes outside of streets, roads, and highways shall be built 13 inches above ground unless otherwise shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer. Manholes in streets, roads, etc., shall be built to existing grades. Manholes requiring drop connections are to be shown on the job drawings. Drop connections shall be constructed of the same type and class of materials as the upstream sewer and in accordance with the details shown on the job specific drawings. 
1.10 LAYING PIPE: All sewer pipe shall be laid upgrade with the spigots pointing downgrade. The pipe shall be so laid that after the sewer is completed, the invert line shall conform accurately to the grades and alignment fixed or given by the Engineer. 
(a)  Handling: Tools and equipment suitable for the safe and convenient-handling and laying of pipe shall be used and great care shall be taken to prevent the pipe from being damaged. All pipe shall be carefully examined for cracks and other defects, and no pipe or fitting shall be laid which is known to be defective. If any pipe or fitting is discovered to be cracked, broken, or defective after being laid, it shall be removed and replaced with sound material without further charge. 
(b)  Placing and Jointing: The interior of all pipes shall be cleaned of dirt and other foreign material as pipe laying proceeds. Prior to jointing, the surfaces of the pipe to be jointed, as well as the molded surfaces of the joint, shall be wiped free of dust, dirt, gravel, and other foreign substances. After thorough cleaning, the mating surfaces of the joint shall be brushed with the proper type of lubricant sealer as supplied by and in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer. The spigot end shall then be centered on grade into the bell of the preceding pipe and shoved home and properly seated with the application of a moderate force by a pry or lever device. Joints shall be made no later than five minutes after the application of the sealer. In the event that there is a delay of longer than five minutes between sealing and jointing, the lubricant sealer shall be applied again. Immediately after jointing, the lubricant sealer shall be applied again. Immediately after jointing, the last pipe shall be brought-to final alignment and grade. Defective joints discovered after laying shall be repaired and made tight. 
(c)  Force Mains: Provisions of (a) and (b) are applicable to laying force mains. In addition, the following requirements apply: 
(1)  All mechanical joints shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(2)  The Contractor shall take special precautions to prevent damage to the cement lining of the pipe. 
(3)  The Contractor shall insure that the force main is installed at a flat or positive grade as shown on the Drawings. Pipe laid incorrectly at negative grade shall be removed and correctly placed at the Contractor's expense. 
(4)  Bedding for force mains shall be as shown on the job drawings. 
1.11 CONCRETE ENCASEMENT COLLARS AND BLOCKING: 
(a)  Placement of Concrete: Where called for on the plans, or where otherwise directed by the Engineer, the pipe shall be completely encased with concrete. The trench shall first be excavated not less than 6 inches below the bell of the pipe and the pipe laid to line and grade on concrete blocking. Concrete then shall be poured to the full width of the trench, but ill no case less than 6 inches from the pipe bell on either side of the trench, and to a height of not less than 6 inches above the top of the pipe bell. No backfill material shall be placed in the trench for a period of at least 24 hours after the concrete encasement has been poured. Where called for on the plans and where required by the Engineer, reaction blocking shall be placed in a manner similar to encasement but to the thicknesses shown on the job drawings or specified by the Engineer. Collars shall be constructed in accordance with and in locations shown on the job drawings. 
(b)  Materials: Materials for use in concrete shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Cement: All cement shall be on brand of Portland cement, shall be Type I, and shall meet the requirements of ASTM C 150. One bag shall be considered to weigh 94 lbs. Minimum cement content shall be 376 lbs. (4 bags)/cu. yd. 
(2)  Aggregates: Aggregates shall conform to requirements of ASTM C 33. 
(aa)  Fine Aggregate: Fine aggregate shall be clean natural sand free of Sulphate or other injurious substances. 
(bb)  Coarse Aggregate: Coarse aggregate shall be clean gravel or crushed stone. Sizes of coarse aggregate shall be the largest which are obtainable from the producer and which are readily workable. 
(3)  Water: Mixing water for concrete shall be fresh, clean and potable. 
(aa)  Mixing: The water cement ratio of the mix shall be established in the design and shall be based on the established relationship between the water cement ratio and the strength of the concrete, and shall be such as to produce the required strength of the concrete with the least amount of water consistent with the workability of the mix. Surface water contained in the aggregate shall be included as part of the mixing water in computing the water content. The design shall provide for a slump of 3" minimum, 5" maximum. 
1.12 BACKFILLING: Backfill underlying pavement and backfill under dirt and gravel roads shall be compacted to 95% of the maximum, dry density as determined by the Standard Proctor Compaction Test (ASTM D 698). 
(a)  Selected: Selected backfill material shall consist of finely selected earth, stone dust, sand or other approved material, carefully placed about the pipe in uniform 6-inch layers to a depth of at least 18 inches above the pipe bell. Each layer shall be thoroughly compacted with proper hand tools in such a manner as not to disturb or damage pipe. Backfilling shall be carried on simultaneously on both sides of the pipe so that damaging side pressures do not occur. If suitable select materials are not available from trench excavation, the Contractor will be required to obtain them elsewhere at his own expense. 
(b)  General: After selected backfill material has been placed and tamped, the remainder of the trench may be backfilled with general excavated -material, provided such material shall not contain more than-1/3 broken rock, of which no single stone or boulder shall weigh more than 50 pounds. Backfill material shall be placed in uniform layers thoroughly compacted with heavy duty power tamping tools of the "Wacker" type, to the full satisfaction of the Engineer. Whenever the trenches have not been properly filled or settlement occurs, they shall be refilled, smoothed off and finally made to conform to the surface of the ground. Backfilling shall be carefully performed and the original surface restored to the full satisfaction of the Engineer. Surplus material shall be disposed of as directed by the Engineer. 
1.13 SEQUENCE OF WORK: Excavation, cleaning, laying, jointing, and backfilling shall be performed as promptly as possible upon completion of the previous operation. In no case shall pipe be left in the trench over- night without completing jointing. Trenches shall be backfilled immediately after pipes are laid and joints inspected by the Engineer, unless other protection of the pipeline is directed. Normally, back- filling shall not follow jointing and final alignment of pipe by more than three lengths of pipe. The completed pipe line shall never be left exposed in the trench unnecessarily. Each day at the close of work, and at all times when laying is not in progress, the exposed end of the pipe line in the trench shall be closed by the use of an approved head or barrier of wood or metals. If at any time it becomes necessary to cover the end of an uncompleted pipe line with backfill, the end of the pipe shall be closed using a mechanical joint plug for ductile iron pipe or a suitable closure for concrete or clay pipe. 
1.14 REMOVING AND REPLACING PAVEMENT: 
(a)  Removing Pavement: The Contractor shall remove existing pavement as necessary for installing the new sewer lines and appurtenances. 
(1)  Marking: Before removing any pavement, the pavement shall be marked for cuts neatly paralleling pipe lines and existing street lines. The marks shall be spaced the width of the trench. 
(2)  Breaking: Asphalt pavement shall be broken along the marked lines 9Y use of jack hammers or other suitable tools. The concrete pavement within the limits of the trench may be broken along the marked cuts by use of jack hammers or by scoring to a depth of approximately 1-1/2 inches with a rotary saw and breaking below the score by the use of jack hammers or other suitable tools. 
(3)  Machine Pulling: No pavement shall be machine pulled until completely broken and separated along the marked Cuts. 
(4)  Damage to Adjacent Pavement: The pavement adjacent to pipe line trenches must not be disturbed or damaged. If the adjacent pavement is disturbed or damaged, due to any cause such a caving ditch banks, indiscriminate use of construction machinery, etc., the Contractor shall remove the damaged pavement and shall replace it at his own expense. 
(5)  Sidewalk: Sidewalks shall be removed and replaced for their full width. 
(6)  Curbs: The Contractor shall remove and replace or tunnel under any curb encountered. 
(b)  Replacing Pavement: Upon completion of backfilling and consolidation of backfill, the Contractor shall promptly replace all pavements, sidewalks and curbs removed for construction of the pipe lines and appurtenances, and restore all pavements adjacent to pipe trenches which may have been disturbed or damaged as the result of construction operations. 
(1)  Supervision and Approval: State Highway pavement restoration shall be under the supervision of the Highway Division of the Department of Transportation. It shall be the Contractor's responsibility to obtain from the Highway Division approval of pavement restorations, before final payment is made under this Contract. County road pavement restoration shall be under the supervision of the County Engineer. It shall be the Contractor's responsibility to obtain from the County Engineer approval of pavement restorations before final payment is made under this Contract. County road pavement restoration shall be under the supervision of the County Engineer. It shall be the Contractor's responsibility to obtain from the County Engineer approval of pavement restorations before final payment is made under this Contract. All other pavement restoration shall be under supervision of and meet the approval of the Owner and Engineers. Pavement restoration shall follow the backfilling operation as closely as is practicable. If, in the opinion of the Engineers, the repaving program is allowed to lag, the Engineers shall order work stopped on other sections of the Contract until the repaving operation shows adequate progress. 
(2)  Replacement: Prior to replacing pavement, the Contractor shall make a final cut in concrete pavement nine inches back from the edge of damaged pavement. The cut shall be made using a rotary saw. Asphalt pavement shall be removed similarly using jack hammers or other suitable tools. This pavement shall be removed to provide a firm bench for placement of the new pavement. All street and roadway replacement shall be as detailed on the Drawings. Driveways, sidewalks, and curbs shall be replaced with the same material and to the same dimensions as existing. 
(3)  Failure of Pavement: Should any pavement restoration or repairs fail or settle during the life of the contract, including the bonded period, the Contractor shall promptly restore or repair such pavement to the satisfaction of the Engineers. 
1.15 ROADWAY CROSSING: The Contractor shall furnish and install tunnel liner and pipe casing and install the sewer line therein in accordance with the drawings and the following specifications: 
(a)  Tunnel: The Contractor shall install the tunnel liner in strict accordance with The Department of Transportation (DOT) and/or Railroad Company requirement. The Contractor shall submit evidence of his experience with shop drawings for review by the Engineer. Tunnel excavation shall be by full face, heading and bench, or multiple drift procedures. Any procedure utilizing a full or partial shield, a tunneling machine or other equipment which exerts a force on the liner plates for the purpose of propelling, steering or stabilizing the equipment will not be allowed. Prior to any work involving explosives, the Contractor shall make application to DOT for a special permit which will be in addition to any tunneling permit not involving explosives. The Contractor shall comply with all requirements and conditions of the permit and shall be responsible for submission of all required data. The Contractor shall schedule his work so as not to interfere with or in any way endanger traffic flow on the highway or railway. The Contractor shall also provide all required safety measures as specified in the Georgia Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(1)  Materials: Tunnel liner plates shall be manufactured from steel conforming to ASTM A 569 with the following mechanical properties before cold forming: Minimum tensile strength= 42,000 psi, Minimum yield strength = 28,000 psi, Elongation, 2 inches= 30 % Liner plates shall be 10 gauge with the neutral axis diameter shown on the Drawings for each crossing. All plates shall be formed to provide circumferential flanged joints. Longitudinal joints may be flanged or offset lap seam type. All plates shall be punched for bolting on both longitudinal and circumferential seams and joints. Bolt spacing in circumferential flanges shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's standard spacing and shall be a multiple of the plate length so that plates having the same curvature shall be interchangeable and will permit staggering of the longitudinal seams. Bolt spacing at flanged longitudinal seams shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's standard_ spacing. For lapped longitudinal seams, bolt size and spacing shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's standard but not less than that required meeting the longitudinal seam strength requirements of Section 13 of AASHO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges. All liner plates in one tunnel shall be the same type. Liner plates shall be hot-dip galvanized in accordance with ASTM A 123 abd bituminous coated. Bolts shall conform to ASTM A 307 Grade A, and shall be hot-dip galvanized in accordance with ASTM A 153. Grout nipples shall be 2-inch minimum diameter tapped couplings welded into place over holes cut in the liner plate. Grout shall consist of 1 part Portland cement, 1 parts masonry lime, 4 parts mortar sand, 2% of an approved admixture, i.e. Bentonite, Septamine Stearex, or Hydrocide Liquid, and where required, a retardant. The quantity of mixing water used shall be that which will produce a workable mixture of grout capable of being pumped into the voids created by the tunneling. Brick and mortar shall meet the requirements for Manhole Materials. 
(2)  Construction of Tunnel: Tunnel construction shall be accomplished so that no settlement of the over passing roadway or railway section will occur. In order to prevent such settlement, the use of poling plates, [breast] boards, shields, and soil solidification or a combination of these methods may be necessary. Steel liner plates shall be installed as soon as possible, but no more than 5 feet of tunnel shall remain unlined while tunneling operations are in progress. Not more than 1 foot of tunnel shall be left unlined at the end of the day's operation. Liner plates shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and shall be self-supporting. The tunnel excavation shall have a diameter essentially the same as the outside diameter of the liner plates. Liner plates with grout couplings shall be located at the top of the tunnel at intervals not to exceed 10 feet. Additional plates with grout coupling shall be installed on each side of the tunnel between the top couplings. All voids in the area outside the plates shall be pressure grouted every 10 feet; at the end of the work shift; or more frequently if soil conditions dictate. Before grouting any segment of tunnel liner, that segment shall be sealed sufficiently between the liner plates and the surrounding soil to retain the grouting pressure. These seals shall be located as follows: at the entrance of the tunnel; between grout couplings, and within one foot of the end of the tunnel at the end of the work shift. Pumping equipment shall be provided 'for grouting operations. Pump horsepower and the resulting pressure in the grouting line shall be sufficient to completely fill the voids without buckling or shifting the liner plates or damaging the roadway. The Contractor shall operate well points or drainage systems in the vicinity of the tunnel construction to prevent the accumulation of flood water in the tunnel-and to maintain the ground water table below the tunnel invert. Damaged spelter coating shall be repaired in accordance with DOT Specifications Section 645. Any plates having damaged spelter or bituminous coatings which, in the opinion of the Engineer cannot be satisfactorily repaired shall be replaced at no additional cost. 
(3)  Installation of Sewer: Upon completion of tunnel, the sewer line shall be installed by a method which has received prior approval of the Engineer. Tie-downs shall be installed as shown on the Drawings. The ends of the tunnel shall be closed with 3 course Brick walls, plastered with Portland Cement mortar and waterproofed with asphaltic roofing cement. The lowest closure shall have a 4" x 8" opening left at the bottom for drainage. 
(4)  Safety: The tunneling operation is to begin in a pit, sheeted and shored as necessary and begins at and proceeds from one end. All applicable requirements of DOT and Railroad regulations shall be observed. The Contractor shall conduct his operations in such a manner that all work will be performed below the level of the roadbed. The Contractor shall be responsible for coordinating and scheduling all work with the DOT. All tunneling work at one particular location shall be completed before work is started at another location. If, in the opinion of the Engineer, the tunnel installation work is being conducted in a manner detrimental to the over passing roadway or to the safety of the traveling public, all operations of tunneling shall cease until the necessary corrections have been made. In the event that distress occurs to-the roadway due to the tunneling, the Contractor shall be required to submit plan to repair the roadway. The plan must be acceptable to both DOT and the Engineer. A temporary bulkhead against the face of the excavation shall be provided and well braced during each cessation of work while the heading is within 20 feet of railroad tracks of highway pavement. 
(b)  Pipe Casing: The Contractor shall furnish all material and equipment and perform all labor required to install steel pipe casing at locations indicated on the Drawings and as specified. 
(1)  Boring: The steel casing pipe shall be Schedule 30 steel pipe manufactured from steel conforming to ASTM Designation A 139, Grade B. Size and thickness shall be as required by the Regulatory Agency in control of the right-of-way in which the casing is to be installed but in no case shall the wall thickness be less than 0.25 inch or the casing size less than the outside diameter of the carrier pipe plus two inches. The outside of the casing pipe shall be primed and coated with hot coal tar enamel a minimum of 3/32- inches thick. Only new primed and coated pipe shall be used. The steel pipe casing shall be installed by the dry boring method. The hole shall be bored and cased through the soil by a cutting head on a continuous auger mounted inside the casing pipe. The boring of the hole and installation of the casing pipe shall be simultaneous. Lengths of casing pipe shall be fully welded to the preceding section in accordance with AWS recommended procedures. After the boring and installation of the casing is complete, a cleaning plug shall be installed on the rig and the casing cleaned. 
(2)  Installation of Sewer: After installation of the casing is complete the sewer line shall be installed by a method which has received prior approval of the Engineer. The ends of the casing shall be closed with 4-inch brick walls, plastered with Portland Cement mortar and water proofed with asphaltic roofing cement. The lowest closure shall have 4" x 8" opening left at the bottom for drainage. 
(3)  Safety: The Contractor shall provide all necessary bracing bulk- heads, and shields to ensure complete safety to all traffic at all times during the work, and he shall perform the work in such a manner as to not permanently damage the roadbed or interfere with normal traffic over it. If in the opinion of the Engineer the installation is being conducted in an unsafe manner, the Contractor will be required to stop work and bulkhead the heading until suitable agreements are reached between the Contractor and the Engineer. The Owner will not be responsible and shall be saved harmless in the event of delays to the Contractor's work resulting from any cause whatsoever. 
1.16 STREAM AND DITCH CROSSING: 
(a)  Rip Rap: At all points where banks of streams or drainage ditches are disturbed by excavation or where natural vegetation is removed, the Contractor shall carefully compact backfill and place rip rap to prevent subsequent settlement and erosion. This requirement applies equally to construction alongside a stream or drainage ditch as well as crossing stream or drainage ditch. Rip rap shall be placed a distance of not less than 10 feet upstream and 10 feet downstream from any disturbed area. Rip rap shall extend from 1 foot below streambed to top of bank and shall be placed to conform to the natural slope of the stream bank. The Contractor shall have the option as to using Method (1) or (2). Only one method shall be used throughout the job. 
(1)  Stone Rip Rap: All stone for rip rap shall be sound, tough, durable pieces, resistant to the action of air and water. Slabby or shaley pieces will not be acceptable. Specific gravity shall be 2.0 or higher. Minimum weight of individual stones shall be 50 pounds; dimensions of the smaller pieces having the least dimension a maximum size need not exceed 24n and 1211 for the two larger and a minimum of 6u. At least 50% of the pieces shall have a minimum dimension of 12". Stone rip rap shall be imbedded into place by hand so as to form a compact layer at least 12" thick. It shall be placed in such a way that the smaller stones are not segregated but evenly distributed. Chinking stones shall be placed in the crevices between the larger stones so that a dense, well graded ma s is produced. 
(2)  Sand-Cement Bag Rip Rap: The bags shall be cement sacks or burlap bags having a capacity of from 1 to 2 cubic feet. Bags previously used for sugar or chemicals shall not be used. The bags shall be filled with a mixture of one part Portland Cement to five parts sand. The bags shall be imbedded into place so as to form a compact layer at least 12' thick. The bags shall be placed by hand, laid with over lapping joints. The finished surface shall not deviate from that specified by more than 3 inches at any point. 
(b)  Concrete Piers: Piers shall be constructed as shown on the Drawings and in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Material: Concrete used in the piers shall be 3000 psi concrete, containing not less than 5.5 bags/ cu. yd. Concrete shall meet or exceed applicable requirements of Paragraph 1.11. Reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A 615 for Grade 40 deformed billet steel reinforcing bars. 
(2)  Bearing: 
(aa)  Earth: Where excavation reveals undisturbed earth subsurface, footings shall be constructed in accordance with the job drawings. 
(bb)  Rock: Where excavation reveals or benched rock having a minimum safe bearing value of 20,000 Psi, piers shall bear directly on rock. No less than four dowels shall be grouted into holes drilled into rock under each pier. Dowels shall be Number 4 reinforcing bars and shall extend a minimum of 4 feet into holes a minimum of 6 inches in diameter. Holes shall be grouted from the bottom up using a grout pump. Extreme care shall be taken to insure that the entire hole is filled with grout prior to insertion of the dowel. 
(3)  Installation: Concrete form work shall be constructed by experienced form work carpenters and shall be sufficiently strong to resist movement or distortion during pouring and to protect the pier from caving in or lateral movement. Before placing concrete, the bottom of the hole shall be dewatered and cleaned of mud, loose earth and extraneous matter. Pier forms shall be filled with concrete as soon as possible after the forms have been approved. Excavation shall not be left open for prolonged periods of time and shall be adequately protected during rain. Water shall not be allowed to accumulate in the excavation or in surrounding areas. The Contractor shall take all necessary precautions to protect the work and personnel on the site. Open holes shall be kept covered while not in the actual process of construction. The Contractor shall examine all surrounding excavations and embankments and shall not commit his personnel into a situation that he considers dangerous. Concrete shall not be placed in a hole while personnel are in holes less than forty feet away. 
(4)  Inspection: A consulting soil and foundation engineer will be selected by the Contractor, subject to approval by the Engineer, and paid by the Contractor, subject to approval by the Engineer, and paid by the Contractor from the "soils testing" cash allowance. The duties of the foundation engineer shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(aa)  Inspection of the bearing material and evaluation of its suitability. 
(bb)  Inspection of pneumatically drilled grout holes where applicable. 
(cc)  Checking dimensions and plumbness of forms to insure conformity with Drawings and specifications. 
(dd)  Evaluation of material penetrated by excavation with regard to lateral stability and uplift resistance. 
(ee)  Recommending remedial measures should insufficient lateral stability or uplift resistance exist. 
1.17 INSPECTION AND TESTING: Before acceptance of any sewer or system of sewers, the lines shall be cleaned and tested to the satisfaction of the Engineer. Where any obstruction is met, the Contractor will be required to clean the sewers by means of rods, swabs, or other instruments. Lines and manholes shall be flushed and washed down before final inspection at the request of the Engineer. 
(a)  Gravity Sewers: Pipe lines shall be straight and show a uniform grade between manholes. The Contractor will be required to correct any discrepancies which may be disclosed during inspection. The Contractor shall install suitable weirs in manholes selected by the Engineer to determine the leakage of ground water into the sewer. Leakage shall be measured only when all visible leaks have been repaired and the ground water is above the top of the pipe. If leakage in any section of the sewer line exceeds acceptable standards as defined by the Engineer, the Contractor shall locate and repair leaks by a method approved by the Engineer until a satisfactory leakage rate can be achieved. The Contractor shall furnish, install, and remove the necessary weirs, plugs, and bulkheads required to perform the leakage test. Where continuous monitoring of flow level is required, the Owner will provide and operate monitoring equipment. PVC gravity sewer shall be tested for excessive deflection by passing a "pig" through the line with a diameter equal to 95% of the inside diameter of the pipe. Any section of pipe not passing this test shall be excavated, reinstalled properly, and retested until it passes. Video camering of the mains will be required as designated by the Engineer. 
(b)  Force Mains: Force mains shall be pressure tested at 150 psi. Leakage shall not exceed 0.12 gph/in. dia./1000 ft. Minimum test period shall be two hours. However, if in the opinion of the Engineer additional testing -is required, such additional testing shall be performed by the Contractor at no additional expense to the Owner. The Contractor shall furnish, install, and remove all temporary bulkheads; flanges or plugs required to perform the pressure tests and shall furnish all equipment and labor to carry out the tests. If joints or materials are found to be defective, they shall be remade and replaced until the line passes the specified test. 
1.18 PROTECTION AND RESTORATION OF WORK AREA: 
(a)  General: It is the intent of these Specifications to return all items and all areas disturbed, directly or indirectly by work under these Specifications, to their original condition or better, as quickly as possible after work is started. 
(b)  The Contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all permits with regards to Soil Erosion and Sedimentation and Storm Water Run-off and to comply with all requirements of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation plans for the related work. 
(c)  Man-Made Improvements: The Contractor shall be responsible for protecting, removing and replacing, with the Engineer's approval, all fences, piers, docks, walkways, mail boxes, pipe lines, drain culverts, power and telephone lines and cables, and other improvements that may be encountered in the work. 
(d)  Cultivated Growth: Cultivated trees or shrubbery shall not be disturbed unless absolutely necessary, subject to the approval of the Engineer. Any such trees or shrubbery which must be removed shall be heeled in and replanted. Heeling in and replanting shall be done under the direction of an experienced nurseryman. 
(e)  Cutting Trees: No trees shall be cut for the performance of the work except as absolutely necessary. Trees that remain in the vicinity of the work shall be protected from damage from equipment and shall not have spoil from excavation stored against the trunks. Where excavated material is stored over the root system of trees, it shall be removed within 30 days to allow proper natural watering of the root system. Any tree over 3-inches in diameter, not to be removed, that is damaged in the work will be repaired under the direction of an experienced nurseryman. All trees and brush that require removal shall be promptly and completely removed from the work area and disposed of by the Contractor. No stumps, wood piles, or trash piles will be permitted on the work site. 
(f)  Grassing: Grass removed or damaged in residential areas shall be replanted using the same variety of grass and at the first appropriate season. Outside of residential areas, the entire area disturbed by the work shall be planted in rye, fescue, bermuda, clover or other suitable ground cover on completion of work in any area. In all areas, the Contractor shall be responsible for promptly establishing successful stands of grass. Contractor is required to install all required erosion and sedimentation control measures prior to initiation of any construction or clearing. 
(g)  Erosion Control: The Contractor shall so plan his excavation work to prevent erosion and the washing of soil into adjacent streams. This shall be accomplished by limiting the amount of open excavation at any one time, by placing spoil in the proper place and by keeping natural water routes open. 
(h)  Disposal of Rubbish: All materials cleaned and grubbed during the construction of the project will be disposed of by the Contractor in accordance with the applicable codes and rules of the appropriate regulatory agencies, county, state and federal. 
1.19 ACCEPTANCE OF WORK: Piping and appurtenances will not be considered ready for acceptance until all provisions of these Specifications have been complied with, until all tests have been satisfactorily completed, and until final inspection of the work has been made. Flow shall not be diverted into piping until after final inspection of the lines has been made by the Engineer and permission granted therefore. 
APPENDIX B SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND IN THE CITY OF TIFTON, GEORGIA; REQUIRING AND REGULATING THE PREPARATION AND PRESENTATION OF PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS FOR SUCH PURPOSE; ESTABLISHING MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS; REQUIRING IMPROVEMENTS TO BE MADE BY THE SUBDIVIDER; SETTING FORTH THE PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION IN APPLYING THESE RULES, REGULATIONS, AND STANDARDS; AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF ITS PROVISIONS. 
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Tifton: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's subdivision ordinance, as adopted by the mayor and council on May 1, 2000. Amendments to the subdivisions ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-6(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 42; planning and zoning, ch. 54; sewers, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE, AND JURISDICTION 

1-1 - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Tifton, Georgia." 
1-2 - Purpose. 
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in the Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended for the following purposes: 
a.  To encourage economically sound and stable land development. 
b.  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land developments. 
c.  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments. 
d.  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes. 
e.  To assure that land is developed in conformity with the 2010 Greater Tift County Comprehensive Plan. 
1-3 - Jurisdiction. 
This Ordinance shall govern the subdivision of land within the incorporated area of the City of Tifton, Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

2-1 - General. 
When used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. The term "shall" is always mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural, and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The mayor and council's interpretation shall be final as to the meaning of any definition, statement, requirement, symbol, and/or abbreviation used in connection with these regulations and/or their application. 
Abutting property. Any property that is immediately adjacent or contiguous to property proposed to be subdivided or that is located immediately across any road or public right-of-way. 
Alleys. A public right-of-way, not intended to be a vehicular arterial or to provide the primary means of access to abutting property, but used for service access to the rear or side properties otherwise abutting a public street. 
Applicant. Any person who submits subdivision plans to the city for the purpose of obtaining approval thereof. 
Architect. A qualified person registered and currently licensed or otherwise authorized to practice architecture in the State of Georgia. 
Building line. A line beyond which no foundation wall or part of the structure of any building shall project, with the exception of roof overhang, walkways, and the subsurface projection of footings; provided, however, that such overhang does not exceed six feet and does not encroach upon the adjacent property or right-of-way. 
Chairman. The Chairman of the Greater Tift County Planning and Zoning Commission. 
City. City of Tifton, Georgia. 
City engineer. A public official appointed by the city manager who has specialized training in engineering and state certification. 
Comprehensive Plan. The 2010 Greater Tift County Comprehensive Plan, as duly amended, reviewed by the planning commission and/or the Tifton Mayor and Council, which may consist of the Major Thoroughfare Plan, General Land Use Plan, Street and Road Classification Plan, and other maps, data, and descriptive matter for the physical development of the city or any portions thereof, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto as adopted by the planning commission and/or the mayor and council. 
Consultant. The licensed design or engineering professional or firm hired by the subdivider to oversee all aspects of the subdivision and design process. 
Crosswalk. A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use for pedestrian use only and so designed as to provide access to adjacent streets or lots. 
Cul-de-sac. A street having only one end open for access to another street, the other end being terminated by a turnaround as specified in this Ordinance. 
Developer. Same as subdivider. 
Development. The act or process of erecting buildings, structures, or of making improvements to property, or laying out and dividing land. 
Easement. A grant by the owner of land for the use of such land by others, including public usage, for a specific purpose or purposes. 
Exempt subdivision. Any subdivision that has approved zoning and has had a plat submitted for approval by the Tifton City Engineer, the Greater Tift County Planning and Zoning Commission and the mayor and council of the City of Tifton prior to the adoption of this Ordinance shall be declared an exempt subdivision and acted upon under the conditions of the ordinances that were in place at the time such plat was submitted. 
Floodprone areas. An area identified as having a potential flood hazard pursuant to the City of Tifton Floodplain Management Ordinance, as amended. 
Guarantee. A maintenance bond, in the amount of 15 percent, required by this Ordinance, which guarantees to the City of Tifton all materials and workmanship of any minimum improvements installed in a subdivision. 
Hardship. A situation arising as the result of extraneous or unique circumstances which deprives the developer of the reasonable use of his land if the strict application of the various provisions of this Ordinance are applied. (See Variance.) 
Improvement plan. The second stage of plat or subdivision plan review, as described in section 4-2 of this Ordinance. For the purpose of the enforcement of this Ordinance, the improvement plan must include the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan and Land Disturbance Permit Application. 
Landscape architect. A design professional registered and currently licensed or otherwise authorized to practice landscape architecture in the State of Georgia, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-23-1, providing the services therein defined. 
Lot. A portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description. As on a subdivision plat or record of survey map or as described by metes and bounds and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
Lot, corner . A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two or more streets. 
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court, or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of this Ordinance. 
Lot width. The distance measured straight between the side lot lines, measured at the intersection of the building line, which shall be paralleled to the street right-of-way line. 
M.S.L. Mean sea level. 
Planning commission. The Greater Tift County Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Performance bond. A legal instrument made payable to the City of Tifton which a developer may post with the City of Tifton to permit recording of a final plat prior to completion of the required minimum improvements. 
Plat. A map, generally of a subdivision, showing the location, boundaries and ownership of individual properties. 
1.  Plat, preliminary. The first stage of plat or subdivision plan review, as described [in] section 4-1 of this Ordinance. 
2.  Plat, final. The final stage of plat or subdivision plan review, as described in section 4-3 of this Ordinance. 
Private right-of-way. A portion of land being used or to be used as a street, road, thoroughfare, crosswalk, pipeway, drainage canal, and/or other similar uses and designated by means of right-of-way but not deeded to the governing authority. 
Protective covenant. A private contract existing between the land subdivider or developer and subsequent property owners of a particular defined area limiting design and usage of similarly situated properties. These instruments are generally publicly recorded with a particular land subdivision, and maintenance and enforcement of the contract is between the private parties. 
Public right-of-way. A portion of land being used or to be used as a public street, road, thoroughfare, crosswalk, pipeway, drainage canal, and/or other similar uses and designated by means of right-of-way deed to the governing authority. 
Public water and sewage systems. A system owned and operated by the City of Tifton or Tift County. 
Secretary. The respective secretaries of the Greater Tift County Planning and Zoning Commission, as duly appointed by their respective local governments. 
Staff development review committee. A committee of public employees with specific technical expertise who are officially responsible to the city manager for various public management functions. Under this Ordinance, the staff development review committee shall assist the planning commission and mayor and council in the review of the numerous technical functions associated with the land subdivision process. This committee shall be appointed by the city manager. 
Streets and/or roads. Streets and/or roads may be designated as public or private. A street is considered public when the county, city, state or federal government owns the right-of-way and is responsible for maintenance; a street or road is designated private when the right-of-way is owned by the developer, a homeowners' association or other nongovernmental body and such owner is responsible for liability, improvement and maintenance. 
Private streets or roads shall conform to all specifications included in this Ordinance. 
It is understood that the city will accept no substandard, unpaved streets. 
1.  Arterial street. A street which is designated as such on the Major Thoroughfare Plan and which is intended to provide swift and safe movement of traffic through the city. 
2.  Collector street. A street which is designated as such on the Major Thoroughfare Plan and which is intended to collect traffic from local streets and direct it safely to arterial streets. 
3.  Dead-end street. A street having only one end open for access to another street and the other end being abruptly terminated with no turnaround. 
4.  Marginal access street. A street generally parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street providing access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
5.  Local street. A street used for local circulation in areas providing access to abutting property. 
Subdivider. Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership or any agent thereof who undertakes or proposes to undertake the subdivision of land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined. 
Subdivider's engineer/surveyor. Any professional engineer or land surveyor as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-15-02 providing the services therein defined. 
Subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for sale, legacy, or building development including all division of land involving a new street or a change of width or alignment in existing street(s), and including resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relating to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
a.  Where located on an existing public road or street, the combination or recombination of previously platted lots, where the total number of lots is not increased, and the resultant lots are equal to the current standards of the city. 
b.  The public acquisition of land. 
c.  The sale of public land. 
d.  The subdivision of land into parcels of ten acres or more where located on an existing public (city-maintained) road. Each ten-acre or larger parcel must abut a public road a minimum of 80 feet. 
e.  A division or sale of land among heirs by judicial decree, provided that all lots created by the subdivision must front existing state or city roads or an approved private road, and lot size, frontage, and access requirements dictated in the Zoning Ordinance have been met. 
Subdivision plans. Subdivision plans are interpreted to be all plans required for delineation of rights-of-way, easements, lots, preservation areas, etc., and all construction plans required for the development of all physical facilities pertaining thereto. 
Tax assessor. The Tift County Board of Tax Assessors. 
Tift County Health Department. The Tift County Board of Health, the Tift County Health Department and/or the State of Georgia Department of Human Resources. The words "Tilt County Health Department" and/or "Tilt County Environmental Officer" are used in this Ordinance to denote the fact that all matters pertaining to health regulations shall be directed to that official or his staff. 
Tract. A portion of land with definite and ascertainable limits or boundaries. (See definition of Lot.) 
Utility. Any community service available to the public by means of an overhead or underground distribution or collection system such as electricity, telecommunications, water, gas, and sewage disposal. 
Variance. The relaxation of a dimensional requirement or design standard described within this Ordinance as it applies to the development of a particular tract or parcel of land reviewed by the Greater Tift County Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the mayor and council of the City of Tifton on an individual basis, after proper public hearing. 
Zoning administrator. The person or persons appointed by the city manager of the City of Tifton to coordinate among various agencies involved in review and approval of subdivision plans and ensuring compliance of subdividers to administrative requirements of this Ordinance. 
Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance enacted by the mayor and council of the City of Tifton, Georgia as duly amended. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL [PROVISIONS] 

3-1 - Platting authority. 
From and after the passage of this Ordinance, the planning commission shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of a land subdivision shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Tift County unless it has the approval of the planning commission inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the appropriate reviewing agencies and/or authorities as required by this Ordinance is declared to be a violation of this Ordinance. 
3-2 - Use of plat. 
The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to, exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Tift County is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in such an instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from prescribed penalties. 
3-3 - Opening and improving public streets. 
The mayor and council of the City of Tifton shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street, or lay any utility lines in any street which has not attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, unless such street corresponds to the street location shown on an approved subdivision plat or the Major Thoroughfare Plan; provided, that the mayor and council of the City of Tifton may accept, lay out, open, and improve any street not so platted if it first submits such proposed action to the planning commission for its review and comment and approves the same as an amendment to the Major Thoroughfare Plan. Developers of subdivisions will be solely responsible for acquiring all rights-of-ways so that in the event that the City of Tifton needs to perform maintenance rights-of-ways will be in place. 
3-4 - Issuance of building permits. 
The City of Tifton will not issue building permits for a parcel of land, lot, tract, or building site subject to this Ordinance that has not been designated and recorded as required by this Ordinance. Lots of record are not subject to this requirement. (See [section] 4-7.) 
3-5 - Zoning Ordinance compliance. 
No final plat of a subdivision shall be accepted for review which does not conform with the City of Tifton Zoning Ordinance. Proposed subdivisions must conform with the zoning district classification requirements applicable to the land for which it is proposed. 
3-6 - Official interpretation. 
The requirement(s) of this Ordinance, as they may apply to a proposed land subdivision, shall be officially interpreted by the staff development review committee. In cases where the subdivider disagrees with the official interpretation of these regulations, the developer may appeal to the planning commission and the mayor and council of the City of Tifton pursuant to the guidelines established in section 9-4. 
3-7 - Nonconforming lots. 
Any lot for which a plat or legal description (i.e., metes and bounds) has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Tift County which was recorded prior to the adoption of the City of Tifton Zoning Ordinance shall be recognized as a nonconforming lot of record and may be utilized for any of the uses permitted by the City of Tifton Zoning Ordinance in its respective zoning district, subject to current zoning ordinance limitations. 
3-8 - Variances. 
All variances shall be recommended by the planning commission on a case-by-case basis. Any request for variance shall be based on circumstances unique to the subject property and proposed alternate design or improvements must follow accepted engineering practices and principles. Final decisions on variances are made by the mayor and council pursuant to section 9-4. 
3-9 - Appeal to the mayor and council. 
Any party aggrieved because of alleged error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator, planning commission, or any other party in enforcement of this Ordinance may appeal in writing to the city clerk of the City of Tifton for an interpretation of the pertinent ordinance provision. The appeals procedure shall be the same as used [in] appeals from the planning commission to the city council on zoning cases. In exercising this power of interpretation, the mayor and council may, in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator, planning commission, or any other party. (See [section] 9-4.) 
3-10 - Appeal from the mayor and council. 
Any party aggrieved by any decision of the mayor and council may seek review of such decision by a court of record, as provided by law. 
ARTICLE IV. - APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISIONS 
Preapplication procedure. The subdivider may visit with the City of Tifton Staff Development Review Committee and discuss the effect of the Major Thoroughfare Plan, the 2010 Greater Tift County Comprehensive Plan, and other official plans on the subdivision, as well as general design standards, zoning, and related matters. The subdivider may submit preapplication plans and data for review, advice, and assistance by the staff development review committee. Professional assistance at this early stage may save time and effort during later stages. 
Preapplication plans and data should include: 
a.  Location sketch map, showing site in relation to the section of the city in which it is located. 
b.  A simple sketch plan on a topographic survey (ten-foot intervals; i.e., quad sheets) showing general layout of lots, streets, major drainageways, and other features, including streams, creeks, wetlands or potential wetlands, in relation to existing conditions on the site and the surrounding street system. 
c.  General subdivision information including data on proposed or existing covenants, wooded areas, available and proposed community facilities, and utilities, typical lot size, etc. 
The staff development review committee and other affected city agencies will review all data submitted and advise the subdivider/developer of significant items which should be considered prior to submittal of the preliminary plat or the Master Development Plan. 
Subdivisions shall be officially reviewed and approved in three stages as follows in this article. 

4-1 - Preliminary plat. 
[The following provisions shall apply to preliminary plats:] 
4-1.1  Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary plat is to safeguard the subdivider from unnecessary loss of time and expense in preparation of a subdivision plat which does not conform with the specifications of this Subdivision Ordinance. The preliminary plat requires only approximate accuracy of scale and dimension. Public agencies having jurisdiction will review preliminary plats regarding matters within their jurisdiction. During the review process, the subdivider or his agent may be called upon for consultation. 
4-1.2  Subdivisions requiring no new street, water, or sewer facilities. All subdivisions which do not involve the platting, construction, or opening of new streets, water or sewer facilities may be accepted by the City of Tifton Zoning Administrator in the form of a final plat, provided that essential data required by the reviewing agencies to insure compliance with the intent of this Ordinance is submitted. 
4-1.3  Filing. Any person desiring to subdivide land shall file with the City of Tifton Zoning Administrator five copies of the preliminary plat accompanied by a letter of application. The letter of application will describe the proposed subdivision at length and will also state for what purposes easements may be utilized for such as water, streets, power or telecommunications maintenance. There will not be any restrictions on the use of easements. The letter of application shall contain the name and address of the developer(s) and his agent(s), the zoning of the property to be subdivided, whether or not the subdivision will be developed in phases, plans for annexation, and plans for serving the proposed subdivision with sewer and water facilities. The plat shall be prepared in accordance with this Ordinance and with applicable city specifications by a registered land surveyor, who is licensed under the laws of the State of Georgia. The preliminary plat shall be deemed filed with the planning commission when it is filed with the City of Tifton Zoning Administrator. At the time of filing, a certificate of filing shall be provided to the subdivider and shall include the time and date of filing. The zoning administrator shall have authority to reject the preliminary plat if he or she finds it does not comply with this Ordinance. If rejected, the zoning administrator shall provide the subdivider with a written statement specifying all the respects in which the plat fails to comply. The subdivider may appeal to the planning commission from such rejection. Filing of the preliminary plat shall be accomplished at least 30 days prior to the regular planning commission meeting at which it is to be considered. The preliminary plat shall include: 
a.  Title block and north arrow. The plat will show the name of the proposed subdivision, its location, the name, address and registration number of the surveyor preparing the plat and the date of the plat. A north arrow shall be included with a notation referencing the bearings to magnetic north, astronomical north or grid north. 
b.  General layout. The plat shall show information as to the proposed street layout and widths, layout of lots with a notation as to the minimum size and width of lots and proposed open space if any. Any lands to be dedicated will be clearly identified. Plat scale shall be one inch equals 100 feet. Scale, total acreage of the site and total number of lots created shall be indicated. Lot and block identification and building setback lines shall also be indicated. 
c.  Topography. The plat shall show existing contour lines dashed and any proposed contour lines solid, both set of lines to be at ten-foot intervals (quad sheets), mean sea level (M.S.L.). Prominent drainage features such as lakes, depressions, streams, etc., which could affect the design of the subdivision shall be shown. Engineering data showing the high water elevation and how it was established shall be submitted with the plat. 
d.  Existing features. The plat shall show the locations and names of existing and platted property lines, streets (and their rights-of-way), railroads (and their rights-of-way), public and private rights-of-ways, sanitary sewer (and size), water mains (and size), bridges, culverts, storm drainage (and size), easements, parks and other public open spaces, land lot and land district lines, city limits lines, and names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. Groups of trees and wetland areas shall also be indicated. 
e.  Location map. The plat shall include a small scale map of sufficient clarity so that the location of the proposed subdivision can be readily determined. 
f.  Water and sewer. A statement from the subdivider shall be submitted with the preliminary plat which will describe the method by which sanitary sewer and water facilities will be provided. 
g.  Future tract plan. In cases where a subdivision is to be developed in stages with additional plats being filed with the planning commission at a later date(s), the filing of the initial plat will be accompanied by [a] future tract plan, a reasonably accurate plat in sketch form of the entire tract which will show the future street system and topography (quad sheets) for the entire tract. Once the required tract plan has been given approval by the planning commission, five copies of the approved future tract plan must be provided for distribution to the various reviewing agencies and the inspections office. 
h.  Wetlands. Approximate location of wetlands boundaries shall be delineated on the preliminary plat. All preliminary plats delineating wetlands shall have on the face of said preliminary plat the note "No fill or work shall be permitted within jurisdictional wetlands without a prior permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers." All minimum lot areas per designated zoning classification requirements shall be calculated upland of any wetlands boundaries within or contiguous to the project 
4-1.4  Completeness. If any of the above-required information is omitted or misrepresented on the plat, the City of Tifton Zoning Administrator may refuse to review the plat and shall return the plat to the subdivider to be completed or revised. 
4-1.5  Approval by individual agencies. No preliminary plat shall be approved by the planning commission unless it is approved by the staff development review committee. Said agencies shall, with or without modification, approve or disapprove the preliminary plat to the extent that each has jurisdiction. If the plat is rejected, the respective reviewing agency shall provide the planning commission with a written statement specifying all aspects where the plat fails to comply. 
4-1.6  Staff development review committee. Upon receipt of the filing of the preliminary plat, the zoning administrator shall prepare those materials for presentation to the staff development review committee. The staff development review committee shall review the preliminary plat for technical compliance with the City of Tifton Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, and other city ordinances that might impact the proposed land subdivision. The staff development review committee shall recommend in writing approval, conditional approval, postponement or disapproval within 30 days of submission. 
4-1.7  Coordination. It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator to insure that the respective reviews of the staff development review committee are brought together in a timely fashion for proper presentation to the planning commission. 
4-1.8  Review by planning commission. The planning commission shall review the preliminary plat, giving due consideration to the review of the staff development review committee. The director of pubic works, the planning commission, and staff development review committee shall then recommend to the mayor and council of the City of Tifton for preliminary approval, conditional approval, postponement or disapproval within 30 days of submission. The subdivider may waive in writing this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. 
a.  Preliminary approval. The developer is now authorized to proceed with the preparation of the required improvement plans, outlined in detail under section 4-2. No developer shall proceed with any construction or any other work in the proposed subdivision before obtaining preliminary approval of these improvement plans in writing. Lots shall not be sold nor shall building construction begin at this time. Preliminary approval grants the developer a maximum time of 18 months within which he shall submit his improvements plan and final plat for approval unless a time extension is granted by the planning commission before the expiration of the 18-month period. If such time extension is granted, it shall be for not more than 12 additional months. Failure to submit improvement plans and final plat within this time period, including extension if any, shall invalidate preliminary plat approval and require resubmission of preliminary plat. Additionally, if, in the opinion of the staff development review committee, substantial changes have been made to the approved preliminary plat, the revised plat shall be resubmitted as a new preliminary plat. 
b.  Conditional approval. The developer may proceed after written notice from the zoning administrator, as outlined under "preliminary approval," but only after he has submitted at least five copies of the corrected preliminary plan to the zoning administrator, noting thereon the condition or changes required by the approval of the planning commission. 
c.  Postponement. Action is delayed for specific reasons which shall be noted and transmitted in writing to the developer by the zoning administrator. Postponed preliminary plans may be reconsidered by the planning commission without resubmittal to the staff development review committee and the Tift County Health Department. 
d.  Disapproval. Denial of the application for subdivision because the developer's plans are not in compliance with this Ordinance. For further consideration, the developer must rework and resubmit his plans as though they were a completely new preliminary plan. The specific reasons for disapproval shall be stated to allow for correction. 
4-2 - Improvement plans. 
[The following provisions shall apply to improvement plans:] 
4-2.1  General requirements. Subdivision plats receive their second official consideration as "improvement plans." These plans shall be approved by the city engineer who shall certify that the improvement plans are in conformance with this Ordinance, official city specifications, and with the requirements of the approved preliminary plan. No developer shall proceed with any construction work in the proposed subdivision before obtaining this approval. This process of improvement plans approval is between the city engineer and the developer and is not subject to planning commission review and approval. 
4-2.2  Professional engineer or consultant (if applicable) required. Should certain design calculations be required to resolve flow problems, possible erosion or drainage problems, or other detailed design problems which might be encountered in the process of preparing the required improvement plan, the city engineer shall be authorized to require the services of a professional engineer or consultant in the improvement plan design process. Should such services be required, such plans shall reflect the engineer or consultant's state registration. All professional surveying, engineering or consultant service costs shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
4-2.3  Filing. To secure formal review of his improvement plans, the developer shall file with the zoning administrator three certified white background prints of the improvement plans signed and sealed by the developer's registered consultant. The zoning administrator will then distribute the improvements plan to the staff development review committee which shall jointly review the proposed improvement plans and shall approve or deny the proposed improvement plans. The zoning administrator shall notify the planning commission of the committee's action, in writing. 
a.  Approval. The developer is now authorized to proceed with the physical improvements in the subdivision, after securing any required construction permits, and may proceed with the preparation of the final subdivision plat. 
b.  Conditional approval. The developer may proceed as outlined in the preceding paragraph, but only after he submits three certified copies of the corrected improvement plans to the city engineer for his review and approval. 
c.  Denial. Disapproval of the improvement plans. For further consideration, the developer must rework his plans to conform to the requirements of this Ordinance, and then submit the reworked plans to the zoning administrator as though they were a completely new set of plans. 
4-2.4  Plans and data required for improvement plan submission. The plans for the required public improvements shall be prepared for the approval by the staff development review committee prior to the construction and only after approval of the preliminary plat. Such improvement plans shall show the proposed locations, sizes, types, grades and general design features of each facility and shall be based on reliable field data. Improvement plan approvals are good for 24 months. If the subdivision is sold prior to completion and final platting, a mandatory review by the staff development review committee shall be required. Failure to comply may result in revocation of construction permit after notice and hearing before the planning commission. The developer shall receive a minimum of ten days' written notice of said hearing. 
The improvement construction drawing shall be submitted on white background prints. The sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches unless another size is approved by the city engineer. The drawing shall be include the following information: 
a.  Construction plans. The developer shall provide the plan and profile of each proposed street (indicating the existing ground surface elevation and proposed street grade surface elevation including extensions, except where street runs into an existing street, for a distance of 100 feet to 300 feet beyond the tract boundary) as required by the city engineer. Design shall be in accordance with good engineering practices. 
b.  Street-typical sections. A typical section of each proposed street shall be submitted, showing the width of pavement and the rights-of-way. 
c.  Water supply, sanitation systems, and stormwater drainage. The plan and profile of proposed water and sanitation, storm drainage or other drainage systems, with grade and sizes indicated are required. Stormwater drainage shall be consistent with applicable city ordinances and other applicable governmental agencies. Water and sewer systems shall be approved by the staff development review committee and all relevant state agencies. The plat shall not be recorded until the developer submits to the zoning administrator all final permits required for the construction of all improvements from other state, local or federal agencies. 
d.  Utility service agreement. A developer's agreement for utilities service shall be required before final improvement plan approval is granted. 
e.  Other public improvements. A plan shall be prepared for parks, recreation or other public use areas and improvements if included in the approved preliminary plat. 
f.  "As built drawings." The designing surveyor or engineer shall submit to the city engineer two sets of white background prints of certified "as built" drawings prior to recording of the final plat. 
4-3 - Final plat. 
[The following provisions shall apply to final plats:] 
4-3.1  Conformance. The final plat shall conform with the approved preliminary plat. If desired by the subdivider, he may submit only that portion of the preliminary plat he proposes to record and develop at that time, provided that such portion conforms with all requirements of this Ordinance. The record plat (final plat) is to be prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia. No plat of a land subdivision shall be recorded unless the plat conforms to City of Tifton Zoning Ordinance requirements and the city's Land Subdivision Ordinance, and the mayor and council have formally accepted dedication of any proposed streets and encroachments. 
4-3.2  Filing. Filing the final plat with the zoning administrator shall include the following: 
a.  A letter of application shall contain: 
1)  The name and address of the persons developing the subdivision and his agent(s). 
2)  Zoning of the property to be subdivided. 
3)  Whether or not the subdivision will be developed in phases. 
4)  Plans for serving the proposed subdivision with sewer and water facilities. 
b.  A complete list of deviations, if any, from the approved preliminary plat. 
c.  A copy of the agreement for providing the necessary water and sewer facilities. 
d.  A fee to cover the cost of investigation and review of the preliminary plan, construction plans, the final plat, and final recording costs will be charged at time of application. The fees are as set by the mayor and council. 
e.  The original reproducible on plastic or linen and five blueline prints of the final plat, which will include the following: 
1)  Sheet design. The final plat shall conform to the items listed under the preliminary plat (4-1.3a, 4-1.3b, 4-1.3d, 4-1.3e, 4-1.3g) and the requirements thereof, as set forth in this Ordinance and shall be drawn in black India ink on one or more sheets of linen tracing cloth or mylar film measuring 18 inches by 22 inches. When two or more sheets are used, a key map shall be shown on each sheet. There shall be a two-inch margin on the left end of the plat and a one-half-inch margin on the remaining three sides. A revision to a recorded plat shall be drawn in black India ink on the same type cloth or film as mentioned above. 
The final plat shall be drawn on the scale (stated and graphical) of 1;inch; = 100;ft;. If necessary, more than one sheet may be used as long as a key map is provided to relate each sheet to the entire platted area. 
_____ 
2)  Surveyor certificate. The following certificate shall be entered on the face of the plat as shown in Figure 1. Placement of this certificate may vary as necessary: 
I certify that all measurements are correct and were prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision; the field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of 1 (one) foot in ____________ feet and an angular error of per ____________ angle point, and was adjusted using ____________ rule; the plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within 1 (one) foot in ____________ feet; monument and pin locations are correctly shown by the symbols ____________ and the pins are ____________ (type of metallic material and length). 
Signed _____ (Seal) (Date) _____ Surveyor, Georgia Registration No. _____ 
a)  The surveyor must certify whether or not the property is located in a special flood hazard zone and indicate the informational source and zone of the property. If the property is located within a flood hazard zone, then the limits of the zone must be shown. 
b)  Proposed lots located in any flood zone will require certification of elevation to insure future construction meets applicable city ordinances regarding the floodplain. 
c)  Any identified wetlands must be indicated on the final plat, and proof of compliance with any U.S. Army Corp of Engineers requirements for wetlands must be submitted prior to recording of the final plat. 
3)  Owner certificate. The following certificate shall be entered on the face of the plat as shown in Figure 1. Placement of this certificate may vary as necessary: 
We, the undersigned owner(s) and/or mortgagee(s) of the subdivision, hereby offer to dedicate and/or reserve for public use the rights-of-way, easements and other public areas as designated on this plat. 

 
4)  Approvals. The following spaces shall be provided (as shown in Figure 1) in the form listed below for approval by all agencies having jurisdiction. 
Placement on plat may vary: 
Approved by the Tift County Health Department, Tift County, Georgia. 

 
Approved by City Engineer, City of Tifton, Georgia. 

 
Approved by the Greater Tift County Planning and Zoning Commission. 

 
Approved by the Mayor and Council, City of Tifton. 

 
5)  Surveying data. The final plat shall contain the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line and boundary line whether curved or straight. A note will be made on the plat as to whether curved or straight. A note will be made on the plat as to whether curved dimensions are arc or chord distances. Easement lines (and width), land lot and land district lines will be shown. 
The final plat shall also identify each tract within the proposed subdivision by block and lot number. 
All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals to the nearest 1/100 of a foot, and all angles shall be shown to the nearest second. The error of closure shall not exceed one in 10,000, or as defined by the technical standards required by O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, of the Law Governing the Practice of Professional Engineering and Surveying, as amended. The final plat shall have a note listing the following: 
Total Acres ____________ 
Total Lots ____________ 
6)  Monuments. The final plat shall show the accurate location, material and description of all monuments. A permanent master bench mark shall be established (subject to the approval of the city engineer) within or adjacent to the site by transfer of levels, not less than third order accuracy, from the nearest approved bench mark of known mean sea level (M.S.L.) elevation showing its location on the final plat and recording its elevation on the final plat to the nearest 1/100 of a foot. 
7)  Easements. In addition to the requirements for the preliminary plat as set forth in section 4-1.3 d. of this Ordinance, the final plat shall show the location and width of all public utility easements and drainage easements where required. 
_____ 
4-3.3  Filing certificate. The final plat shall be deemed filed with the planning commission when it is filed with the zoning administrator. At the time of filing, a certificate of filing shall be furnished to the applicant which will include the time and date of filing. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with this Ordinance and applicable city requirements by a registered land surveyor, who is licensed under the laws of the State of Georgia. The zoning administrator and city engineer shall have authority to reject the final plat if they find that it does not conform with the approved preliminary plat or this Ordinance. If the plat is rejected, the zoning administrator shall provide the subdivider with a written statement specifying all the respects in which it does not conform. Filing the final plat shall be accomplished at least 30 days prior to the regular planning commission meeting at which it is to be considered. 
4-3.4  Approval by individual agencies. No final plat shall be approved unless the planning commission first obtains approval of the Tift County Health Department and the city engineer. Said agencies shall approve, with or without modification, or disapprove the final plat to the extent to which each has jurisdiction. Within ten days of time of submittal, the developer will be notified of approval or disapproval. If disapproved, reasons for denial shall be noted. 
4-3.5  Staff development review committee. Upon receipt of the filing of the final plat, the zoning administrator shall prepare those materials for presentation to the staff development review committee. The staff development review committee shall review the final plan for technical compliance with the City of Tifton Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, and other city ordinances that might have an impact on the proposed land subdivision. The staff development review committee shall recommend in writing, approval, conditional approval, postponement or disapproval. 
4-3.6  Coordination. It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator to insure that the respective reviews of the city engineer, Tift County Health Department and staff development review committee are brought together in a timely fashion for proper presentation to the planning commission. 
4-3.7  Review by planning commission. The planning commission shall review and approve the final plat, giving due consideration to the reviews of the staff development review committee and the Tift County Health Department. The planning commission shall vote for final approval, conditional approval, postponement or disapproval. No plat shall be acted upon by the planning commission without a hearing, and due notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be provided to the applicant. 
4-3.8  Recording a plat. Upon satisfactory compliance with this Ordinance, and after acceptance by the mayor and council of any proposed streets and improvements, and the required guarantee has been posted, the city manager shall release the plat to the zoning administrator for recording. After a subdivision has been recorded, the subdivider may petition the mayor and council for permission to remove the subdivision plat from the land records of Tift County. The mayor and council may permit such removal providing that no lot in the subdivision has been sold. 
4-3.9  Revision to a recorded plat. Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which do not affect platted rights-of-way may be submitted for administrative approval in accord with the provisions of section 4-3.12. In addition, a revision to a recorded plat shall show the name, phase (if any), date of the recorded subdivision plat being revised, and the exact citation with regard to the county land records and the book and page number wherein said plat is recorded. Revisions to a recorded plat which involve platted rights-of-way or other major changes shall be submitted as a preliminary plat. 
4-3.10  Distribution. The zoning administrator shall make the following distribution of prints and reproducibles: 

 
4-3.11  Administrative approval of small subdivisions and resubdivisions. Where located on an existing road or street, the combination of previously platted lots, where the total number of lots does not increase and the resultant lots are equal to the current standards of the city as determined by the staff development review committee, shall be subject to administrative approval. Such plats shall conform fully to the requirements of this Ordinance. It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator to coordinate said administrative review responsibilities. 
4-3.12  Exempt plat process. Any plat submitted for recording to the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Tift County that is not subject to this Ordinance shall comply with O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d), as amended. All plats exempt from the standard review process must be assigned a map and parcel number by the Tift County Board of Tax Assessors if a new lot is being created. All exempt plats must be submitted on a mylar plus five prints. The mylar will be retained by the zoning administrator. Resurveys of existing parcels which do not involve a map and parcel change must be verified by the zoning administrator and the tax assessor's office. 
All exempt plats, which include resurveys of lots of record, exempt resubdivisions and exemptions by definition must be stamped as exempt prior to recording. All plats submitted for exemption must be submitted on a mylar plus five black line or blue line copies. The mylar will be retained by the zoning administrator. The copies will be stamped, signed and dated to allow recording. 
ARTICLE V. - MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS 

5-1 - Blocks. 
[The following shall apply to the design of blocks:] 
5-1.1  Nonresidential. Blocks for other than residential use shall be of such length and width as may be suitable for their prospective use including adequate provisions for off street parking and maneuvering space. 
5-1.2  Residential. The length of residential blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet nor be less than 400 feet. Blocks of more than 1,200 feet will be permitted if natural or manmade barriers such as streams and railroads require blocks of greater size. The depth of residential blocks shall be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots, unless prohibited by natural or manmade barriers or unless one tier backs onto a line of another person's property, except as provided for in section 5-3.4. The foregoing shall not prevent the inclusion of blocks of greater width and length, when public use areas such as parks and playgrounds are included in the project design. These areas shall be covered by adequate maintenance agreements if not dedicated and accepted for public maintenance. 
5-1.3  Crosswalks. Rights-of-way for pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided when in the opinion of the planning commission crosswalks are necessary for direct pedestrian access to schools, shopping centers, and parks. A crosswalk right-of-way shall not be less than 20 feet wide. 
5-2 - Easements. 
[The following provisions shall apply to easements:] 
5-2.1  Utility. Utility locations, where feasible, shall be located within the platted street right-of-way; if easements are required, they shall be a minimum width of 20 feet. Where possible (as determined by the city engineer), water and gas lines shall be located on the same side of the street and sewer lines shall be on the other side. Telecommunications and electric lines may be located on the same side or opposite sides of the streets. Wherever public utility easements are planned adjacent to the subdivision tract boundary or phase, they shall be platted within said subdivision or phase thereof. 
5-2.2  Drainage. No subdivision plat shall be accepted or approved unless it includes a hydrology plan and a sedimentation and soil erosion control plan certified by a professional engineer or registered land surveyor. The plan shall provide a means of detaining storm and surface water runoff on-site, up to and including a 25-year flood event, with such runoff to be released from the property at the same rate of flow that existed prior to the development of property. The engineer or surveyor shall certify that the designed stormwater detention system for the development will fully satisfy these provisions. The city engineer will verify the accuracy of the drainage plans and may call upon the services of other design professionals for review at the expense of the developer should on-site conditions warrant more detailed review. The developer is solely responsible for the accuracy of all the submitted plans. 
5-3 - Lots. 
[The following shall be the minimum design standards for lots:] 
5-3.1  Minimum lot elevation. The lot area contained within and contiguous to the building walls and for minimum distance of ten feet measured from all sides of said building shall have a minimum elevation of three feet above the 100-year flood stage of streams or canals in the particular area being developed based on acceptable engineering procedure and approved by the city engineer. Said minimum elevation shall be subject to approval by the Tift County Health Department. A change in elevation necessary to meet this requirement will be permitted by filling within a designated flood hazard zone, only if all other applicable permits are obtained prior to any fill work being done. 
(a)  Floodprone areas. All preliminary and final plats shall clearly delineate identified floodplain areas in conformance with the City of Tifton Floodplain Management Ordinance. 
(b)  Wetlands. All final and preliminary plats shall clearly delineate any identified wetlands in conformance with the Georgia Department of Environmental Protection's Part V, Environmental Planning Standards (Georgia Planning Act of 1989, as amended). See section 9-A of the City of Tifton Zoning Ordinance. 
5-3.2  Lot width and lot area requirements. Lots hereafter established within a subdivision shall conform to the lot area and lot width requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Tifton or in other sections of this Ordinance. 
5-3.3  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be of such size and dimensions that will permit the location of buildings so as to conform with the building setback lines as prescribed in the Zoning Ordinance. Corner property lines at street intersections shall have a minimum of a 30-foot deeded radius or a 30-foot permanent miter easement. 
5-3.4  Double and reverse frontage. Lots having street frontage both to the front and rear shall be prohibited (unless allowed by variance) except to provide for separation of residential development from railroad right-of-way or arterial or collector street rights-of-way. Where the aforementioned abuts or runs through any portion of the subdivision, the subdivision plan shall provide for lots backing on said railroad or right-of-way or arterial or collector street right-of-way. All lots shall have a minimum depth adequate to provide for the rear yard setback required by the respective zoning district, plus an additional 30 feet, ten feet of which shall be a planted, nonencroachable buffer strip separating the lots from the right-of-way. The buffer zone shall be landscaped with hedges or closely planted small trees to provide a visual screen and shall be planted at the time of development. Said planted, nonencroachable buffer strip shall be clearly indicated on the final plat. 
5-4 - Building lines. 
All building setback lines shall be as specified in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Tifton. 
5-5 - Commercial and industrial use buffer zones. 
When a portion of the subdivision is to be devoted to commercial and/or industrial purposes and when the commercial and/or industrial area adjoins residential lots or when a portion of a proposed subdivision adjoins an area zoned for commercial or industrial use, a buffer zone not less than 20 feet in width shall be provided. Said buffer strip shall be landscaped with hedges or closely planted small trees so as to provide visual screening. No building or portion thereof may be constructed in said buffer zone. Said buffer zone shall be labeled as such on the subdivision plat and shall be planted at the time of development and screening installed at the time of the installation of the required minimum improvements. 
5-6 - Streets. 
The street and road system of any subdivision shall give due consideration to the Major Thoroughfare Plan. A right-of-way will not be accepted that is determined to be limiting the growth or traffic flow of an area. 
5-6.1  Access. Every lot of every subdivision shall abut a public or an approved private street a minimum of 60 feet which is or shall be maintained by the appropriate governing body. Where the subdivision does not immediately adjoin a public street, the subdivider shall provide a public street from the subdivision to a public or private street. 
5-6.2  Alignment and continuation. Streets within the subdivision shall be so arranged as to provide for the alignment and continuation of or projection of existing public or private streets. 
5-6.3  Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a right-of-way of not less than 160 feet in diameter. Paving within the turnaround shall have an outside radius of not less than 70 feet. Temporary cul-de-sacs, approved by the planning commission, may be surfaced with gravel. 
5-6.4  Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets and dead-end alleys shall be prohibited unless terminated with a cul-de-sac. 
5-6.5  Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited. Half streets are streets and alleys with substandard rights-of-way. 
5-6.6  Intersections. The centerline of no more than two streets shall intersect at any one point. No street shall intersect another street at less than 80 degrees and shall as nearly as possible intersect at 90 degrees 
5-6.7  Right-of-way radius. The right-of-way radius at street intersections shall be not less than 30 feet except where Georgia Department of Transportation standards shall prevail. 
5-6.8  Curved streets. The centerline radius shall not be less than 350 feet for arterial streets and 120 feet for collector and local streets. Centerline tangents between reverse curves shall be not less than 200 feet for arterial streets and 100 feet for collector streets and local streets. 
5-6.9  Right-of-way extension. Where the proposed subdivision abuts undeveloped properties, it is essential that appropriate extensions of streets be left available to provide for future growth and development. Such street rights-of-way to facilitate future development shall be extended by dedication and improved to the boundary of the proposed subdivision. 
5-6.10  Street jogs. Street jogs at intersections shall be not less than 120 feet between rights-of-way. This provision shall not negate the design intent of section 5-6.2. 
5-6.11  Street names. The subdivider shall indicate on the subdivision plat the proposed name of all streets within the subdivision. Streets and roads that are obviously in alignment with and are extensions of existing previously named or numbered streets shall bear that name. The names of all new streets within the subdivision shall be subject to the review and approval of the mayor and council. New street names shall not duplicate or closely resemble the names of streets already in existence within Tift County or any incorporated city within Tift County. 
5-6.12  Alleys. Public alleys shall not be allowed in single-family residential subdivisions. 
5-6.13  Street right-of-way and pavement width. Street rights-of-way shall be measured between lot lines and shall be prescribed in this section. The pavement width shall be as prescribed below: 

 
**As appropriate for the proposed development, with approval required by the city engineer. 
5-6.14  Additional rights-of-way. If the subdivision boundary line lies adjacent to the right-of-way line of an existing street of less than minimum right-of-way width, the required extra right-of-way to bring the street to current standards shall be dedicated, except in those cases wherein the existing street was constructed to then-current standards, all reasonable efforts shall be made to acquire such additional rights-of-way. 
5-6.15  Provisions for public use. In subdividing land, due consideration should be given to suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other common areas for public use. Such land should be located in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. The acquisition of such land shall rest with the appropriate public authority. 
ARTICLE VI. - MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS 

6-1 - General [provisions]. 
The subdivider shall provide all public improvements as required by this Ordinance and by applicable city specifications and requirements. 
6-1.1 The design of all minimum improvements shall be under the direction of a registered consultant registered in the State of Georgia and all plans shall bear his seal. (See section 4-2.2.) 
6-1.2 A letter of approval from the city engineer shall accompany all water and sewer plans. 
6-2 - Paving and drainage. 
Within the incorporated area of the City of Tifton, the subdivider shall install paving with centerline striping and proper drainage, which includes ditch slopes and grassing requirements. 
Proper drainage control structures which may include paved ditches and canals, canals, and retention areas. The city also requires established grass cover on road shoulders, front and back slopes of ditches and erosion control devices at outfall locations are required in subdivisions within the incorporated areas of City of Tifton. 
All streets and roads shall be paved according to standards set by the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges. The city engineer will determine the type of base material to be used on each and all subdivisions based on conditions and sound engineering judgment prior to beginning any grading work. These materials shall be applied according to established construction methods and shall be subject to inspection by and final approval by the city engineer prior to acceptance for public maintenance. 
6-3 - Curbs and gutter. 
Editor's note— This section has been reserved. 
6-4 - Monuments/pins. 
The subdivider shall provide, through the licensed surveyor, the setting of all reinforced concrete monuments and pins. The reinforced concrete monuments shall be four inches in diameter or square, 30 inches long with a flat top. The top of each monument shall be set flush with the ground. Said monuments shall be set within each block of the subdivision and shall be located along the longest interior straight away; a minimum of four per block shall be installed as shown on the plat. Pins, a minimum of 15 inches long and one-half inch in diameter (metallic material type to be listed on plat) shall be placed along the exterior boundary and interior lot intersection except where the concrete monuments are to be located, on each street corner, points of curvature in each street at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundary of the subdivision, and where such corners lie within a stream meander (in which case, reference pins shall be placed on the bank of the stream). The pin shall be set a minimum of two inches under the ground. The top of the concrete monument shall contain a metal plate or metal rod which shall be scored in such a manner that will properly and accurately identify the location. 
6-5 - Water supply and sanitary sewerage. 
[The following shall apply to water supply and sanitary sewerage:] 
6-5.1 The subdivider shall [provide] every lot of a proposed subdivision with adequate public water and public sanitary facilities in accordance with City of Tifton specifications. Where existing water and sewer mains are in the street but no services to the proposed lots, the subdivider shall have the services installed. Said facilities are to be dedicated to the City of Tifton for public maintenance and operations prior to recording of the final plat. 
6-5.2 Minimum improvements. Standard fire hydrants of a type specified by the city utilities director and the fire chief in the construction specifications shall be installed as a part of the water distribution system within a subdivision for single-family dwellings. Each proposed lot shall have individual tap and meter. A fire hydrant shall be located at each intersection and additional hydrant or hydrants installed where the distance between intersections exceed 500 feet. In no case shall hydrants be spaced greater than 500 feet and shall be sized to have a flow of 750 g.p.m. (gallons per minute) when adequate flow and pressure is available to the point of connection for the subdivision to the city system. 
In multifamily and residential professional districts, fire hydrants shall be installed so that the distance from fire hydrants to the driveway entrance nearest the front of the building shall not exceed 250 feet, with a total distance not to exceed 500 feet to the extreme back of the building by way of driveways. [As] an option, provided automatic sprinklers are installed according to N.F.P.A. regulations, the spacing of hydrants may be increased to 350 feet to the driveway entrance nearest the front of the building, provided the total distance does not exceed 700 feet to the extreme back of the building by way of driveways. 
In light industrial, heavy industrial, and general business districts and any facility which handles or uses flammable or hazardous materials, hydrants shall be installed within 300 feet to the mid-point of the structure and equally spaced thereafter, not to exceed 300 feet between hydrants and the extreme rear of the building. The distance shall be measured along the line traveled by the fire truck. In the following zoning districts, hydrants shall be sized to have a flow capacity of not less than 1,000 g.p.m. (gallons per minute) when adequate flow and pressure is available to the point of connection for the subdivision to the city system: WLI, H-I, G-B and C-C. As an option, provided automatic sprinklers are installed according to N.F.P.A. requirements, the spacing of hydrants may be increased from 300 feet to 500 feet. 
Distance between fire hydrants shall be as specified unless fire department operations would otherwise allow increased spacing. Actual location of fire hydrants shall be the responsibility of the fire chief or his representative. 
6-5.3 The entire cost of extending water and sewer lines and their associated services within the subdivision shall be borne by the developer. 
Cross reference— Sewers, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 82. 
6-6 - Street and traffic control signs. 
The developer shall pay for all street and traffic control signs required for his subdivision at cost of per sign. These fees shall be paid to the city prior to release of the plat for recording. The city shall install all street and traffic signs for any subdivision in accordance with the city's sign specification and at no cost to the city. 
6-7 - Street paving. 
The subdivider shall provide paved streets in accordance with this Ordinance and applicable city specifications. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
6-8 - Stormwater drainage. 
The subdivider shall provide adequate stormwater drainage in accordance with these regulations and applicable city specifications. Where drainage conditions dictate, open ditches shall be paved. The subdivider shall also provide for adequate drainage of springs or other groundwater drainage. 
The drainage system for a subdivision, commercial or industrial development shall be designed in accordance with sound engineering principles and procedures such that all salable parcels included in the final plat are positively drained. 
The drainage system shall be designed to accommodate drainage from adjacent lands which naturally drain to or through the lands being subdivided. The drainage system shall be designed to not significantly affect the natural drainage onto adjacent lands unless appropriate easements are obtained by the developer from the owner of such adjacent lands concurring with the proposed drainage design. Evidence of such concurrence shall be submitted to the city engineer along with the improvement plans and specifications. 
Drainage facilities that are designed to handle flowing water (e.g., culverts, weirs, etc.) shall be hydraulically designed to function when subjected to the maximum flow rate that can be expected to occur no more often than once in 25 years. 
Drainage facilities that are designed to handle water accumulations (e.g., detention ponds with overflow provisions) shall be designed to accommodate the maximum water level that can be expected to occur no more often than once in 25 years. Necessary drainage facilities including, but not limited to, culverts, rights-of-way, and easements may be dedicated to the City of Tifton at no expense to the city and at the option of the city. Areas required for maintenance shall be cleared of all trees and underbrush which would interfere with maintenance of the facility. 
All drainage systems discharging into any creek, stream, or natural body of water including, but not limited to, wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shall pass through an approved sedimentation or detention pond prior to such discharge. 
A Master Drainage Plan shall be submitted to the city engineer simultaneous with preliminary plat submittal at which time technical design criteria will be established. 
6.8.1  Soil erosion control. A Soil Erosion Control Plan, prepared in accordance with City of Tifton Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance's latest revisions, shall be submitted to the city engineer simultaneous with preliminary plat. 
6-8.2  Wetlands. Wetlands shall be addressed per the Part V, Environmental Planning Standards. Location of wetlands boundaries shall be delineated on the preliminary and final plats. All preliminary plats delineating wetlands shall have on the face of said preliminary plat the note "No fill or work shall be permitted within jurisdictional wetlands without a prior permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers." 
6-8.2.1 All minimum lot areas per designated zoning classification requirements shall be calculated upland of any wetlands boundaries within or contiguous to the project. 
Cross reference— Sewers, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 82. 
6-9 - Utilities. 
The installation of utilities shall be as follows: 
6-9.1  Telecommunication distribution systems. All communication distribution systems installed solely for the purpose of extending communications service within a development and within the property limits of such development shall be placed as directed by the staff development review committee. 
6-9.2  Electric power distribution systems. All electric distribution systems installed solely for the purpose of extending electric service to a development and within the property limits of such development shall be placed as directed by the staff development review committee. 
6-9.3  Easements. Developers shall allocate necessary easements with future maintenance access. 
6-9.4  Location of underground installations. The plans submitted to the City of Tifton will set forth the anticipated location of all underground installations. Location approval or acknowledgment by the owners of the underground installations shall be submitted. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82. 
6-10 - Street lighting. 
Street lighting shall be installed by developer as required by the City of Tifton. 
6-11 - Buffer strips. 
The subdivider shall provide adequate buffer strips which consist of plantings and/or visual blinds as detailed in this Ordinance. 
6-12 - Street signs. 
The developer shall pay for all street signs required for his subdivision at actual cost, including materials and labor, to the city for providing said street signs. These fees shall be paid to the city prior to release of the plat for recording. 
6-13 - Installation of improvements. 
No grading, paving, or construction of any required improvements shall be permitted until the preliminary plat and improvements plan of the subdivision has been approved by the planning commission. 
6-13.1 Said developer can begin installation of the minimum improvements, including grading, paving, installation of utilities, etc., upon approval of the construction drawings. In all cases, sedimentation control devices, retention, detention or sedimentation ponds shall be first in order of construction. 
6-13.2 Final plat approval by the planning commission and acceptance by the mayor and council can be requested during or following the installation of minimum improvements. 
6-13.3 Improvements required and/or regulated by this Ordinance shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans and specifications, the standards, requirements and regulations set forth in these regulations, and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
6-13.4 Construction of improvements required or regulated by these regulations shall not commence until the city engineer has approved in writing the plans and specifications for said improvements. 
6-13.5 The subdivider or subdivider's engineer, surveyor or consultant shall notify the city engineer of the commencement, suspension, or resumption of work at least one day prior to the commencement, suspension or resumption of such work. This requirement shall not apply to work suspended due to adverse weather conditions. In the event that the subdivider or subdivider's engineer, surveyor or consultant fails to comply with this requirement, the city engineer is hereby authorized to take whatever steps may be necessary to insure that work performed complies with the approved plans and specifications, the standards set forth in these regulations, and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
6-13.6 If, in the course of construction, the subdivider wishes to modify the size, type, quality, quantity and/or location of any or all of the improvements required or regulated by these regulations, the subdivider's engineer, surveyor or consultant shall submit a written change request to the city engineer for review and written approval prior to proceeding with installation of the modified improvement. 
6-13.7 Tests required by these regulations shall be performed solely by independent testing laboratories, the subdivider's engineer, surveyor or consultant or qualified personnel employed by the subdivider's engineer, surveyor or consultant and shall be performed at the subdivider's expense. The subdivider's engineer, surveyor or consultant shall direct that the results of required tests be mailed or delivered to the city engineer immediately on completion. All test results must be clearly indicated as to the project and the exact location of the sample and that no test results be withheld from the city engineer. 
ARTICLE VII. - ACCEPTANCE AND GUARANTEE OF COMPLETED MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS 

7-1 - Completion of improvements. 
Before the plat is signed by the Tifton City Manager, all developers shall be required to complete, in accordance with this Ordinance and to the satisfaction of the city engineer, all minimum improvements as required by article VI of this Ordinance, specified on the final plat, and as approved by the planning commission, and to dedicate same to the City of Tifton. 
7-1.1 In lieu of completion of the minimum improvements as required under this Ordinance prior to recording of the final plat, the developer may post an irrevocable letter of credit or a performance bond. This instrument shall be made payable upon demand to the City of Tifton to insure the completion of the required minimum improvements and shall be in an amount of not less than 110 percent of the estimated cost of all required minimum improvements. Cost estimates shall be prepared by the subdivider's registered engineer or consultant and shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager and city engineer. 
7-1.2 Bonds and/or cash posted pursuant to this alternative shall be released after formal acceptance of improvements by the mayor and council. 
7-2 - Acceptance. 
Upon written notification of completion of minimum improvements, the Tifton City Manager, within 30 days after such notice, accept or reject, in writing, the completed improvements stating the deficiencies, if any. 
7-2.1 The required minimum improvements shall not be accepted unless they conform to this Ordinance and officially adopted city specifications. 
7-2.2 a.  Upon completion of construction of improvements required and/or regulated by this Ordinance, the subdivider's engineer, surveyor or consultant shall deliver to the city engineer: 
1.  All required test data not previously forwarded to the city engineer. 
2.  Two complete sets of as built plans, each sheet of which is clearly marked as built in the lower right corner. As built plans shall depict actual construction on the date of submittal of said plats. One set shall be reproducible and one set shall be prints. For the purpose of this Ordinance "set" does not imply one sheet. 
b.  The city engineer is authorized to reject any construction which fails to conform to the approved plans and specifications and this chapter. 
c.  The city shall bill the subdivider the city's cost for any subsequent inspections necessitated by the subdivider's failure to construct improvements in accordance with approved plans and specifications of this chapter. Said costs shall be based on a schedule of fees established as 2½ times the inspector's hourly rate. 
7-3 - Guarantee. 
The subdivider shall guarantee for one year after acceptance by the City of Tifton all materials and workmanship in the form of a bond which shall be a 15 percent of the total improvement cost. 
7-4 - Recording of plat. 
Upon acceptance of all improvements installed by the developer and posting of the required guarantee as provided in section 7-3, the office of the city manager shall release the final plat for recording. Said plat shall be returned to the zoning administrator, who shall record said plat in a timely manner and distribute appropriate copies thereof in accordance with the directives of section 4-3.11. 
7-5 - Release of guarantee. 
Release of guarantee shall be made by the city manager one year after completion of all required improvements. At the end of one year, the city manager shall arrange for a maintenance/warranty inspection by the city engineer with said inspection expenses to be solely the responsibility of the subdivider. Any bonded maintenance of the minimum improvements shall be determined by the city engineer, and said work shall be required of the developer or his contractor prior to release of any guaranteed funds by the city manager. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VIOLATION AND PENALTIES 

8-1 - Violations. 
[The following shall apply to the violation of provisions hereof:] 
8-1.1  [Conveyance or improvement of property not approved and recorded prohibited.] It shall be unlawful to convey or improve property by the construction of buildings on lots of any land subdivision which has not been approved and recorded as provided in this Ordinance, except those parcels recorded prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
8-1.2  [Recording or altering subdivision plats without prior approval of planning commission prohibited.] It shall be unlawful to record a subdivision plat which has not been approved by the Greater Tift County Planning and Zoning Commission and signed by the chairman of that commission. It shall be unlawful to alter recorded subdivision plats without prior approval of the planning commission, unless the purpose of such alteration is to combine or increase the size of existing lots. 
8-1.3  Each day's violation a separate offense. After due notice has been given, each and every day's violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
8-2 - Violation and penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this Subdivision Ordinance shall, upon conviction in municipal court, be penalized by the imposition of a fine not exceeding $500.00 per day and/or imprisonment for a period not greater than 60 days. 
ARTICLE IX. - LEGAL STATUS 

9-1 - Effect of invalidity of part of resolution. 
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be decided by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any other part thereof. 
9-2 - Conflict with other laws. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
9-3 - Amendment. 
This Ordinance may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council of the City of Tifton, and all amendments shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and recommendation. Prior to enacting an amendment to this Ordinance, the city shall hold a public hearing thereon at least 15 days but not more than 45 days. Notice of the time and place of hearing shall be published in the official legal organ of the City of Tifton. 
9-4 - Variances. 
In cases of undue hardship under this Ordinance, or on questions of official interpretation (see section 3-6), any property owner may petition the planning commission for a variance, and where the planning commission concurs, it will prepare and send to the mayor and council a recommendation for a variance when considered necessary and equitable. In case the planning commission fails to concur, the property owner may appeal to the mayor and council for relief. All variance requests will require a public hearing in the same manner as an amendment. None of the items listed in article VI, Minimum Improvements, of this Ordinance shall be subject to variance. 
9-5 - Effective date. 
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of adoption. 
ARTICLE X. - SCHEDULE OF FEES 

10-1 - Plat review fee schedule. 
All plats to be reviewed, including phases, shall adhere to a fee schedule as approved from time to time by the mayor and council of the City of Tifton. 
10-2 - Variance requests. 
All variance requests shall be accompanied by an application fee and costs to cover all publications of required public notices and staff review costs as approved from time to time by the mayor and council of the City of Tifton. 
Date of Adoption: May 1, 2000 

ATTEST: 

(SEAL) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1974 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1974 Code, as updated through October 1998, which are included herein. Sections of the 1974 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1974 Code, as updated through October 1998, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1974 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede October 1998, but which were never included in the 1974 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since October 1998, and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 